2019
APR
WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Growth Slowdown, 
Precarious Recovery
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
©2019 International Monetary Fund
 
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and 
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some 
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional 
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial 
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. | 
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
 
HC10.80	
ISBN 978-1-48439-748-0 (English Paper)
	
978-1-49830-610-2 (English ePub)
	
978-1-49830-611-9 (English Mobi)
	
978-1-49830-611-9 (English PDF)
The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a 
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited 
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of 
the report on March 21, 2019. The views expressed in this publication are those of the 
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors 
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2018. World Economic Outlook: 
Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery. Washington, DC, April.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail: 
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services 
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
iii
CONTENTS
Assumptions and Conventions	
ix
Further Information	
x
Data	
xi
Preface	
xii
Foreword	
xiii
Executive Summary	
xv
Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies	
1
Recent Developments: Global Expansion Loses Steam	
1
The Forecast	
7
Risks: Skewed to the Downside	
19
Policy Priorities: Enhance Resilience, Raise Medium-Term Growth Prospects	
21
Scenario Box 1. A No-Deal Brexit	
28
Box 1.1. Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies	
32
Box 1.2. Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and  
Commodity Prices	
34
Box 1.3. Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities	
35
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
37
References	
53
Online Annexes
Special Feature Online Annex	
Chapter 2. The Rise of Corporate Market Power and its Macroeconomic Effects	
55
Introduction	
55
The Rise of Corporate Market Power	
58
Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Market Power	
62
Summary and Policy Implications 	
67
Box 2.1. The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving	
70
Box 2.2. Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power	
72
References	
74
Online Annexes
Annex 2.1. Data Sources and Sample
Annex 2.2. Assessing Corporate Market Power: Methodologies and Further Stylized Facts
Annex 2.3. Assessing the Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Market Power: Methodological  
Details and Results
Chapter 3. The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?	
77
Introduction	
77
The Price of Capital Goods: Key Patterns	
80
The Relative Price of Capital Goods: A Simple Framework 	
83
Drivers of Relative Investment Prices	
83
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
iv	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Macroeconomic Implications of Shocks to the Price of Capital Goods	
88
Summary and Policy Implications	
91
Box 3.1. The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies	
93
Box 3.2. Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries	
95
Box 3.3. On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis	
96
Box 3.4. Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia	
98
References	
100
Online Annexes
Annex 3.1. Data Sources and Country Groupings
Annex 3.2. Supplementary Stylized Facts
Annex 3.3. Using Trade Data to Uncover Differences in Capital Goods Prices across Countries
Annex 3.4. Drivers of Relative Investment Prices: Across Countries
Annex 3.5. Drivers of Relative Investment Prices: Over Time
Annex 3.6. Empirical Evidence on the Impact of Relative Investment Prices on Investment Rates  
at the Country Level
Annex 3.7. Empirical Evidence on the Impact of Relative Investment Prices on Investment Rates  
at the Sector Level
Chapter 4. The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs	
103
Introduction	
103
Stylized Facts	
105
Determinants of Bilateral Trade Balances	
109
The Role of Macroeconomic Factors	
113
A Closer Look at Tariffs and Their Spillovers	
115
Conclusion	
119
Box 4.1. Gross versus Value-Added Trade	
120
Box 4.2. Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
122
Box 4.3. Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?	
123
Box 4.4. The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a US–China Trade Dispute: Insights from  
Three Models	
124
References	
128
Online Annexes
Annex 4.1. Gravity Model, Data, and Estimation
Annex 4.2. Derivation of Relation between Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances
Annex 4.3. Tariff Spillovers: Technical and Data Appendices
Statistical Appendix	
131
Assumptions	
131
What’s New	
132
Data and Conventions	
132
Country Notes	
133
Classification of Countries	
133
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification	
134
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP,  
Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2018	
135
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup	
136
Table C. European Union	
136
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of  
Export Earnings	
137
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
contents
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
v
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and  
Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries	
138
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods	
140
Table G. Key Data Documentation	
141
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies	
151
List of Tables 
Output (Tables A1–A4)	
156
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)	
163
Financial Policies (Table A8)	
168
Foreign Trade (Table A9)	
169
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)	
171
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)	
178
Flow of Funds (Table A14)	
182
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)	
185
World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics	
187
IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, April 2019	
197
Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections	
8
Scenario Table 1. Trade Assumptions in the Baseline, Scenario A, and Scenario B	
28
Table 1.SF.1. Commodity Price Cycle Descriptive Statistics	
41
Table 1.SF.2. Global Industrial Production Nowcast	
44
Table 1.SF.3. Global GDP Nowcast	
44
Table 1.SF.4. Forecasting Global Industrial Production and GDP	
45
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance,  
and Unemployment	
46
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account  
Balance, and Unemployment	
47
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account  
Balance, and Unemployment	
48
Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
49
Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP,  
Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
50
Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account 
Balance, and Unemployment	
51
Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output	
52
Table 3.1. Sectoral Producer Prices	
87
Table 3.2. Real Investment Rate and the Relative Price of Machinery and Equipment	
89
Table 4.1. Sign and Significance of Tariff Effects on Economic Variables	
117
Table 4.4.1. Macro Effects from a 25 Percent Increase in Tariffs Affecting All US–China Trade:  
Bilateral Trade Flows with Third Countries	
126
Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita	
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP	
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in  
Manufacturing	
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices	
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
vi	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators	
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing and  
General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes	
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances	
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net  
Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance	
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net  
Lending/Borrowing	
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates	
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates	
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in  
Goods and Services	
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods	
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings: Total  
Trade in Goods	
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions	
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt  
Service	
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity	
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria: External Debt by  
Maturity	
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP	
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios	
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario: 	
 
Selected Economic Indicators	
Figures
Figure 1. Half-Yearly Growth Rates	
xv
Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators	
2
Figure 1.2. Trade Indicators	
2
Figure 1.3. Commodity Prices	
3
Figure 1.4. Global Inflation	
4
Figure 1.5. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions	
4
Figure 1.6. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates and Spreads	
5
Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and Credit	
6
Figure 1.8. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, September 2018–March 2019	
6
Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows	
7
Figure 1.10. Half-Yearly Growth Forecasts	
7
Figure 1.11. Forecast Assumptions: Fiscal Indicators	
10
Figure 1.12. Commodity Price Assumptions and Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses	
10
Figure 1.13. Growth Rate: Emerging Markets and Developing Economies	
12
Figure 1.14. Contributions to GDP Growth	
14
Figure 1.15. Per Capita Real GDP Growth	
15
Figure 1.16. Global Current Account Balance	
17
Figure 1.17. Current Account Balances in Relation to Economic Fundamentals	
17
Figure 1.18. Net International Investment Position	
18
Figure 1.19. Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions	
20
Figure 1.20. Geopolitical Risk Index	
20
Figure 1.21. Risks to the Global Outlook	
21
Scenario Figure 1. Real GDP in Brexit Scenario	
30
Scenario Figure 2. Brexit Long-Term Real GDP Effects	
31
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
contents
Figure 1.1.1. Labor Market Dynamics in Selected Advanced Economies	
33
Figure 1.3.1. Regional Disparities in GDP per Capita  	
35
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments	
38
Figure 1.SF.2. Commodity Cycles and Economic Activity	
40
Figure 1.SF.3. Synchronization with Economic Activity	
42
Figure 1.SF.4. Commodity-Wide Synchronization	
42
Figure 1.SF.5. Latent Factors and Economic Activity	
43
Figure 1.SF.6. Global Real GDP Growth Nowcast: Actual versus Fitted Value	
45
Figure 2.1. Worrisome Macroeconomic Trends	
56
Figure 2.2. Evolution of Market Power	
59
Figure 2.3. Markup Increases, by Country Income Group	
60
Figure 2.4. Decomposition of Markup Increases	
60
Figure 2.5. Disconnect between Firms in the Top Decile and the Rest	
61
Figure 2.6. Patents and Markups: A Hump-Shaped Relationship	
63
Figure 2.7. Implied Relationship between Higher Markups and Patents	
63
Figure 2.8. Markups and Physical Capital Investment	
64
Figure 2.9. Markup Increases, Investment, and the Natural Interest Rate	
66
Figure 2.10. Markups and Labor Income Shares	
67
Figure 2.1.1. Comovement between Average Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving in  
Group of Seven Countries	
70
Figure 2.1.2. Change in Industry Concentration and Change in Saving Rates	
71
Figure 2.2.1. Total Number of Deals and Share of Horizontal Deals	
72
Figure 2.2.2. Impact of Mergers and Acquisitions on Acquirer Firm’s Markups, by Deal Type	
73
Figure 3.1. Capital Stock, Investment, and the Relative Price of Capital Goods	
78
Figure 3.2. Dynamics of Relative Prices across Types of Capital Goods and Broad Country Groups	
81
Figure 3.3. Absolute and Relative Prices of Machinery and Equipment across Countries in 2011	
82
Figure 3.4. Unit Values of Tradable Capital Goods across Countries	
84
Figure 3.5. Trade Costs in 2011	
85
Figure 3.6. Trade Costs, Relative Productivity, and the Price of Capital Goods in 2011	
85
Figure 3.7. Contributions to Changes in Relative Producer Prices of Capital Goods: 2000–11	
87
Figure 3.8. Elasticity of Real Investment-to-GDP Ratio to Relative Price of Capital Goods: Model 
Simulations versus Empirical Evidence	
90
Figure 3.9. Contributions of Relative Prices to Increases in Real Investment in Machinery and  
Equipment, 1990–94 to 2010–14	
90
Figure 3.1.1. Levelized Cost of Electricity of Low-Carbon Energy Sources	
93
Figure 3.1.2. Annual Additions to Global Electricity Capacity	
93
Figure 3.2.1. Price of Apple Products and Income	
95
Figure 3.3.1. Model Simulations	
96
Figure 3.4.1. Distribution of Tariff Changes between 2010 and 2011	
98
Figure 3.4.2. Effect on Investment from Cuts in Tariffs on Capital Goods Inputs, Other Inputs,  
and Output	
98
Figure 4.1. Bilateral Trade Balances, by Major Partners	
106
Figure 4.2. Global Trade Imbalances	
106
Figure 4.3. Trade Intensity and Barriers to Trade	
107
Figure 4.4. Revealed Comparative Advantage	
107
Figure 4.5. Largest Trade Flows, 1995 versus 2015	
108
Figure 4.6. The Role of Global Value Chains	
109
Figure 4.7. Contributions to Changes in Bilateral Trade Balances, 1995–2015	
111
Figure 4.8. Effect of a Deterioration of Germany’s Aggregate Trade Balance on Selected  
Bilateral Balances	
114
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
vii
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
Figure 4.9. Contributions of Macroeconomic Drivers to Aggregate Trade Balances, 
	 Average 2010–17	
114
Figure 4.10. Bilateral Trade Deficit Reversal Episodes	
115	
Figure 4.11. Tariffs and Global Value Chain Participation	
116
Figure 4.12. Illustration of the Effect of Tariff Changes on Real Value Added	
118
Figure 4.13. Sectoral Effects from a 25 Percent Increase in Tariffs Affecting All US–China Trade:  
World Real Value Added	
119
Figure 4.1.1. Gross versus Value-Added Trade Balance	
120
Figure 4.2.1. US–China Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
122
Figure 4.3.1. Improvement in Bilateral Trade Deficits during Overall Trade Deficit
	 Reversal Episodes	
123
Figure 4.4.1. Macro Effects from a 25 Percent Increase in Tariffs Affecting All US–China Trade:  
Real GDP	
125
Figure 4.4.2. Macro Effects from a 25 Percent Increase in Tariffs Affecting All US–China Trade:  
Real Exports	
125
Figure 4.4.3. US Imports of Electronics and Machinery before and after Tariffs	
127
Figure 4.4.4. Mexico’s Imports of Intermediate Inputs for the Electronics and 
	 Manufacturing Sectors	
127
viii	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
EDITOR'S NOTE
On June 18, 2019 in the PDF version of this report, the data for Myanmar was corrected subsequent to 
publication for Statistical Appendix Tables A4, A7, and A12 as well as in the online-only Statistical Appendix 
Table B9. 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
ix
ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook 
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during 
January 14 to February 11, 2019, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate 
mechanism II (ERM II), which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that 
established policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary 
policies for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $59.16 
a barrel in 2019 and $59.02 a barrel in 2020 and will remain unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that 
the six-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on US dollar deposits will average 3.2 percent in 2019 and 
3.8 percent in 2020; that the three-month euro deposit rate will average –0.3 percent in 2019 and –0.2 in 2020; 
and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will yield, on average, 0.0 percent in 2019 and 2020, respectively. 
These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties surrounding them add to the 
margin of error that would, in any event, be involved in the projections. The estimates and projections are based 
on statistical information available through March 29, 2019.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
. . .	
to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
– 	
between years or months (for example, 2018-19 or January–June) to indicate the years or months 
covered, including the beginning and ending years or months; and
/	
between years or months (for example, 2018/19) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
“Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
“Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of  
1 percentage point).
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in 
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and 
government finance data for each country. 
For some countries, the figures for 2018 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please 
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national 
accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country.  
What is new in this publication:
•	 FYR Macedonia is now called North Macedonia.
•	 In February 2019, Zimbabwe adopted a new local currency unit, the RTGS dollar, which has become the official 
unit of account. Efforts are underway to revise and update all national accounts series to the new RTGS dollar. 
Current data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US (and RTGS) 
dollars. Staff estimates of US dollar values may differ from authorities’ estimates.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
•	 If no source is listed on tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.
•	 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
•	 Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is 
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities 
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or 
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of 
the weighted group data.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the part 
of the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
x	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
FURTHER INFORMATION
Corrections and Revisions 
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the 
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are 
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and 
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.
Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/25771.
Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, Mobi, and HTML, are available on the 
IMF eLibrary at www.elibrary.imf.org/APR19WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at  
www.imf.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the World Economic Outlook web page directly:
 
Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
xi
This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compila-
tion of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most 
frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histori-
cal data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context 
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each 
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural 
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF 
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a 
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International 
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their 
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a 
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are 
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF 
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and 
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum 
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Fax: (202) 623-6343
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum
DATA
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
xii	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s 
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international 
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a 
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information 
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out in 
particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, European 
Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—together with the 
Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and the Fiscal Affairs 
Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Gita 
Gopinath, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 
Deputy Director, Research Department and Oya Celasun, Division Chief, Research Department; and Helge Berger,  
Assistant Director, Research Department and Head of the IMF’s Spillover Task Force.
The primary contributors to this report were Christian Bogmans, Wenjie Chen, Federico Diez, Allan Dizioli, 
Romain Duval, Johannes Eugster, Benjamin Hunt, Florence Jaumotte, Callum Jones, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian, 
Margaux MacDonald, Akito Matsumoto, Malhar Nabar, Natalija Novta, Andrea Pescatori, Roberto Piazza,  
Rafael Portillo, Evgenia Pugacheva, Carolina Villegas-Sánchez, Yannick Timmer, and Petia Topalova.
Other contributors include Michal Andrle, Gavin Asdorian, Carlos Caceres, Luisa Calixto, Diego Cerdeiro, Kyun 
Suk Chang, Mai Chi Dao, Pankhuri Dutt, Angela Espiritu, Rebecca Eyassu, Jiayue Fan, Chanpheng Fizzarotti, 
Swarnali Ahmed Hannan, Mandy Hemmati, Ava Yeabin Hong, Christopher Johns, Lama Kiyasseh, Zsóka Kóczán, 
Jungjin Lee, Nan Li, Rui Mano, Sergii Meleshchuk, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, Ilse Peirtsegaele, 
Adrian Robles Villamil, Marika Santoro, Susie Xiaohui Sun, Ariana Tayebi, Nicholas Tong, Menexenia Tsaroucha, 
Shan Wang, Julia Xueliang Wang, Jilun Xing, Yuan Zeng, Qiaoqiao Zhang, Huiyuan Zhao, Caroline Chenqi Zhou, 
and Jillian Zirnhelt.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production 
and editorial support from Christine Ebrahimzadeh, and editorial assistance from James Unwin, Lucy Scott Morales, 
and Vector Talent Resources.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, 
as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on March 21, 2019. However, both 
projections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive 
Directors or to their national authorities.  
PREFACE
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
O
ne year ago economic activity was accel-
erating in almost all regions of the world 
and the global economy was projected to 
grow at 3.9 percent in 2018 and 2019. 
One year later, much has changed: the escalation of 
US–China trade tensions, macroeconomic stress in 
Argentina and Turkey, disruptions to the auto sector 
in Germany, tighter credit policies in China, and 
financial tightening alongside the normalization of 
monetary policy in the larger advanced economies 
have all contributed to a significantly weakened 
global expansion, especially in the second half of 
2018. With this weakness expected to persist into 
the first half of 2019, the World Economic Outlook 
(WEO) projects a decline in growth in 2019 for 70 
percent of the global economy. Global growth, which 
peaked at close to 4 percent in 2017, softened to 3.6 
percent in 2018, and is projected to decline further 
to 3.3 percent in 2019. Although a 3.3 percent 
global expansion is still reasonable, the outlook for 
many countries is very challenging, with considerable 
uncertainties in the short term, especially as advanced 
economy growth rates converge toward their modest 
long-term potential.
While 2019 started out on a weak footing, a pickup 
is expected in the second half of the year. This pickup 
is supported by significant policy accommodation by 
major economies, made possible by the absence of 
inflationary pressures despite closing output gaps. The 
US Federal Reserve, in response to rising global risks, 
paused interest rate increases and signaled no increases 
for the rest of the year. The European Central Bank, 
the Bank of Japan, and the Bank of England have all 
shifted to a more accommodative stance. China has 
ramped up its fiscal and monetary stimulus to counter 
the negative effect of trade tariffs. Furthermore, the 
outlook for US–China trade tensions has improved as 
the prospects of a trade agreement take shape. 
These policy responses have helped reverse the 
tightening of financial conditions to varying degrees 
across countries. Emerging markets have experienced 
a resumption in portfolio flows, a decline in sovereign 
borrowing costs, and a strengthening of their cur-
rencies relative to the dollar. While the improvement 
in financial markets has been rapid, those in the real 
economy have yet to materialize. Measures of indus-
trial production and investment remain weak for most 
advanced and emerging economies, and global trade 
has yet to recover.
With improvements expected in the second half of 
2019, global economic growth in 2020 is projected to 
return to 3.6 percent. This return is predicated on a 
rebound in Argentina and Turkey and some improve-
ment in a set of other stressed emerging market and 
developing economies, and therefore subject to con-
siderable uncertainty. Beyond 2020 growth will stabi-
lize at around 3½ percent, bolstered mainly by growth 
in China and India and their increasing weights in 
world income. Growth in advanced economies will 
continue to slow gradually as the impact of US fiscal 
stimulus fades and growth tends toward the modest 
potential for the group, given ageing trends and low 
productivity growth. Growth in emerging market 
and developing economies will stabilize at around 5 
percent, though with considerable variance between 
countries as subdued commodity prices and civil strife 
weaken prospects for some. 
While the overall outlook remains benign, there 
are many downside risks. There is an uneasy truce on 
trade policy, as tensions could flare up again and play 
out in other areas (such as the auto industry) with 
large disruptions to global supply chains. Growth in 
China may surprise on the downside, and the risks 
surrounding Brexit remain heightened. In the face 
of significant financial vulnerabilities associated with 
large private and public sector debt in several coun-
tries, including sovereign-bank doom loop risks (for 
example, in Italy), there could be a rapid change in 
financial conditions owing to, for example, a risk-off 
episode or a no-deal Brexit. 
With weak expansion projected for important 
parts of the world, a realization of these downside 
risks could dramatically worsen the outlook. This 
would take place at a time when conventional mon-
etary and fiscal space is limited as a policy response. 
It is therefore imperative that costly policy mistakes 
are avoided. Policymakers need to work cooperatively 
to help ensure that policy uncertainty doesn’t weaken 
FOREWORD 
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
xiii
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
investment. Fiscal policy will need to manage 
trade-offs between supporting demand and ensur-
ing that public debt remains on a sustainable path, 
and the optimal mix will depend on country-specific 
circumstances. Financial sector policies must address 
vulnerabilities proactively by deploying macropru-
dential tools. Low-income commodity exporters 
should diversify away from commodities given the 
subdued outlook for commodity prices. Monetary 
policy should remain data dependent, be well com-
municated, and ensure that inflation expectations 
remain anchored. 
Across all economies, the imperative is to take 
actions that boost potential output, improve inclu-
siveness, and strengthen resilience. A social dialogue 
across all stakeholders to address inequality and 
political discontent will benefit economies. There is 
a need for greater multilateral cooperation to resolve 
trade conflicts, to address climate change and risks 
from cybersecurity, and to improve the effectiveness of 
international taxation. 
This issue of the WEO also tackles three major 
developments that need to be addressed to enhance 
long-term growth. The first is rising inequality, the 
second is weak investment, and the third is rising 
protectionism in trade. Chapter 2 investigates the 
evolution of corporate market power (as measured 
by markups) and its ability to explain several macro 
phenomena, including weak investment and the 
declining labor shares that help fuel inequality. The 
finding is that the aggregate increase in markups 
since 2000 has been modest and, consequently, the 
implications for the macroeconomy relatively modest. 
There is, however, significant heterogeneity, with the 
aggregate increase driven mainly by a more substantial 
increase in markups by a small number of firms that 
are the more productive and innovative firms. The 
increase in aggregate market power therefore appears 
to be, as of now, less a phenomenon of poor competi-
tion and more one of winner-takes-most dynamics, 
where markups compensate in part for investment 
in intangible assets. However, going forward this 
market dominance could lead to unfair advantages 
that weaken market entry and competition and, more 
significantly, dampen investment and innovation. It 
is therefore important to cut barriers to market entry 
and reform and strengthen competition law to better 
align with the new economy.
Chapter 3 highlights the benefits for investment of 
reducing trade barriers. Over the past three decades, 
the relative price of machinery and equipment has 
fallen in all countries, driven both by higher pro-
ductivity in the capital-goods-producing sector and 
increased trade integration. This decline has supported 
the rise in real investment rates in machinery and 
equipment, benefiting developing countries. Rising 
trade tensions could reverse these price declines and 
damage investment at a time when investment is 
already weak, which only further emphasizes the need 
to quickly resolve trade disagreements. 
The final chapter of the WEO examines the link 
between bilateral trade tariffs and trade imbalances. 
US–China trade frictions have brought a focus on the 
question of whether bilateral trade imbalances can (or 
should) be addressed using bilateral trade measures. 
This chapter demonstrates that the link between the 
two is precarious. Bilateral trade balances since the 
mid-1990s have reflected mostly aggregate macro-
economic forces known to determine aggregate trade 
balances at the country level and have had much less 
to do with bilateral tariffs. Targeting bilateral trade 
balances will likely only lead to trade diversion, with 
limited impact on country-level balances. The findings 
of this chapter help explain why, despite the tariff 
measures, the US trade deficit is the largest it has been 
since 2008. The chapter also establishes that the nega-
tive impact of tariffs on output is significantly higher 
today than in 1995 owing to the bigger role of global 
supply chains in world trade.
This is a delicate year for the global economy. If the 
downside risks do not materialize and the policy sup-
port put in place is effective, then global growth will 
return to 3.6 percent in 2020. If, however, any of the 
major risks materialize, then the expected recoveries 
in stressed economies, export-dependent economies, 
and highly indebted economies may not occur. In 
that case, policymakers will need to adjust. Depend-
ing on circumstances, this may require synchronized, 
country-specific policy stimulus across economies, 
complemented by accommodative monetary policy. 
Synchronization can make fiscal stimulus more effec-
tive through signaling effects that raise household and 
business confidence, and through the mitigation of 
leakages via imports. Finally, adequate resources for 
multilateral institutions remain essential to retain an 
effective global safety net, which would help stabilize 
the global economy. 
Gita Gopinath
Economic Counsellor
xiv	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
A Weakening Expansion
After strong growth in 2017 and early 2018, global 
economic activity slowed notably in the second half 
of last year, reflecting a confluence of factors affecting 
major economies. China’s growth declined following 
a combination of needed regulatory tightening to rein 
in shadow banking and an increase in trade tensions 
with the United States. The euro area economy lost 
more momentum than expected as consumer and 
business confidence weakened and car production in 
Germany was disrupted by the introduction of new 
emission standards; investment dropped in Italy as 
sovereign spreads widened; and external demand, 
especially from emerging Asia, softened. Elsewhere, 
natural disasters hurt activity in Japan. Trade tensions 
increasingly took a toll on business confidence and, so, 
financial market sentiment worsened, with financial 
conditions tightening for vulnerable emerging markets 
in the spring of 2018 and then in advanced economies 
later in the year, weighing on global demand. Condi-
tions have eased in 2019 as the US Federal Reserve 
signaled a more accommodative monetary policy 
stance and markets became more optimistic about a 
US–China trade deal, but they remain slightly more 
restrictive than in the fall. 
Global Growth Is Set to Moderate in the  
Near Term, Then Pick Up Modestly 
As a result of these developments, global growth is 
now projected to slow from 3.6 percent in 2018 to 
3.3 percent in 2019, before returning to 3.6 percent 
in 2020. Growth for 2018 was revised down by 0.1 
percentage point relative to the October 2018 World 
Economic Outlook (WEO), reflecting weakness in the 
second half of the year, and the forecasts for 2019 and 
2020 are now marked down by 0.4 percentage point 
and 0.1 percentage point, respectively. The current 
forecast envisages that global growth will level off in 
the first half of 2019 and firm up after that (Figure 
1). The projected pickup in the second half of 2019 is 
predicated on an ongoing buildup of policy stimulus 
in China, recent improvements in global financial mar-
ket sentiment, the waning of some temporary drags 
on growth in the euro area, and a gradual stabilization 
of conditions in stressed emerging market economies, 
including Argentina and Turkey. Improved momen-
tum for emerging market and developing economies is 
projected to continue into 2020, primarily reflecting 
developments in economies currently experiencing 
macroeconomic distress—a forecast subject to notable 
uncertainty. By contrast, activity in advanced econo-
mies is projected to continue to slow gradually as the 
impact of US fiscal stimulus fades and growth tends 
toward the modest potential for the group. 
 Beyond 2020, global growth is set to plateau at 
about 3.6 percent over the medium term, sustained 
by the increase in the relative size of economies, such 
as those of China and India, which are projected to 
have robust growth by comparison to slower-growing 
advanced and emerging market economies (even 
though Chinese growth will eventually moderate). As 
noted in previous WEO reports, tepid labor produc-
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing
economies
World
Figure 1.  Half-Yearly Growth Rates
(Annualized semiannual percent change)
Global growth is expected to level off in the ﬁrst half of 2019 and ﬁrm up after that.
2016:H1
17:H1
18:H1
19:H1
20:H2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Source: IMF staff estimates.
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
xv
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
tivity growth and slowing expansion of the labor force 
amid population aging will drag advanced economy 
growth lower over the projection horizon. 
Growth across emerging market and developing 
economies is projected to stabilize slightly below 5 
percent, though with variations by region and coun-
try. The baseline outlook for emerging Asia remains 
favorable, with China’s growth projected to slow 
gradually toward sustainable levels and convergence in 
frontier economies toward higher income levels. For 
other regions, the outlook is complicated by a com-
bination of structural bottlenecks, slower advanced 
economy growth and, in some cases, high debt and 
tighter financial conditions. These factors, alongside 
subdued commodity prices and civil strife or conflict 
in some cases, contribute to subdued medium-term 
prospects for Latin America; the Middle East, North 
Africa, and Pakistan region; and parts of sub-Saharan 
Africa. In particular, convergence prospects are bleak 
for some 41 emerging market and developing econo-
mies, accounting for close to 10 percent of global 
GDP in purchasing-power-parity terms and with 
total population close to 1 billion, where per capita 
incomes are projected to fall further behind those in 
advanced economies over the next five years.
Risks Are Tilted to the Downside
While global growth could surprise favorably if 
trade differences are resolved quickly so that busi-
ness confidence rebounds and investor sentiment 
strengthens further, the balance of risks to the outlook 
remains on the downside. A further escalation of trade 
tensions and the associated increases in policy uncer-
tainty could further weaken growth. The potential 
remains for sharp deterioration in market sentiment, 
which would imply portfolio reallocations away from 
risk assets, wider spreads over safe haven securities, 
and generally tighter financial conditions, especially 
for vulnerable economies. Possible triggers for such 
an episode include a no-deal Brexit withdrawal of the 
United Kingdom from the European Union; persis-
tently weak economic data pointing to a protracted 
global growth slowdown; and prolonged fiscal 
uncertainty and elevated yields in Italy—particularly 
if coupled with a deeper recession—with possible 
adverse spillovers for other euro area economies. A 
rapid reassessment by markets of the monetary policy 
stance in the United States could also tighten global 
financial conditions. Over the medium term, climate 
change and political discord in the context of rising 
inequality are key risks that could lower global poten-
tial output, with particularly severe implications for 
some vulnerable countries.      
Policy Priorities
Amid waning global growth momentum and limited 
policy space to combat downturns, avoiding policy 
missteps that could harm economic activity needs to be 
the main priority. Macroeconomic and financial policy 
should aim to prevent further deceleration where 
output could fall below potential and facilitate a soft 
landing where policy support needs to be withdrawn. 
At the national level, this requires monetary policy 
to ensure that inflation remains on track toward the 
central bank’s target (or if it is close to target, that it 
stabilizes there) and that inflation expectations remain 
anchored. It requires fiscal policy to manage trade-
offs between supporting demand and making sure 
that public debt stays on a sustainable path. Where 
fiscal consolidation is needed and monetary policy is 
constrained, its pace should be calibrated to secure 
stability while avoiding harming near-term growth 
and depleting programs that protect the vulnerable. If 
the current slowdown turns out to be more severe and 
protracted than expected in the baseline, macroeco-
nomic policies should become more accommodative, 
particularly where output remains below potential and 
financial stability is not at risk. Across all economies, 
the imperative is to take actions that boost potential 
output growth, improve inclusiveness, and strengthen 
resilience. At the multilateral level, the main priority 
is for countries to resolve trade disagreements coopera-
tively, without raising distortionary barriers that would 
further destabilize a slowing global economy.
xvi	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
1
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Recent Developments:  
Global Expansion Loses Steam
Following a broad-based upswing in cyclical growth 
that lasted nearly two years, the global economic 
expansion decelerated in the second half of 2018. 
Activity softened amid an increase in trade tensions 
and tariff hikes between the United States and China, 
a decline in business confidence, a tightening of 
financial conditions, and higher policy uncertainty 
across many economies. Against this global backdrop, 
a combination of country- and sector-specific factors 
further reduced momentum. After peaking at close to 
4 percent in 2017, global growth remained strong, at 
3.8 percent in the first half of 2018, but dropped to 
3.2 percent in the second half of the year.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
In China, necessary domestic regulatory tightening to 
rein in debt, constrain shadow financial intermediation, 
and place growth on a sustainable footing contributed 
to slower domestic investment, particularly in infrastruc-
ture. Spending on durable consumption goods also soft-
ened, with automobile sales declining in 2018 following 
the expiration of incentive programs for car purchases. 
These developments contributed to slower momentum 
over the year, with further pressure from diminishing 
export orders as US tariff actions began to take hold in 
the second half of the year. As a result, China’s growth 
declined from 6.8 percent in the first half of 2018 to 
6.0 percent in the second half of the year. The resulting 
weakening in import demand appeared to have impacts 
on trading partner exports in Asia and Europe.
Elsewhere across emerging market economies, activ-
ity moderated as worsening global financial market 
sentiment in the second half of 2018 compounded 
country-specific factors. Needed policy tightening to 
reduce financial and macroeconomic imbalances took 
effect in Argentina and Turkey; sentiment weakened 
and sovereign spreads rose in Mexico, following the 
incoming administration’s cancellation of a planned 
airport for the capital and backtracking on energy and 
education reforms; and geopolitical tensions contrib-
uted to weaker activity in the Middle East.
Advanced Economies
The euro area slowed more than expected as a com-
bination of factors weighed on activity across coun-
tries, including (1) weakening consumer and business 
sentiment; (2) delays associated with the introduction 
of new fuel emission standards for diesel-powered 
vehicles in Germany; (3) fiscal policy uncertainty, 
elevated sovereign spreads, and softening investment 
in Italy; and (4) street protests that disrupted retail 
sales and weighed on consumption spending in France. 
Growing concerns about a no-deal Brexit also likely 
weighed on investment spending within the euro area. 
Following a notable uptick in 2017, euro area econ-
omies’ exports softened considerably, in part because 
of weak intra-euro-area trade, which exacerbated poor 
sentiment across the currency area.
Elsewhere in advanced economies, activity weakened in 
Japan, largely due to natural disasters in the third quarter. 
One exception to the broader pattern was that momen-
tum in the United States remained robust amid a tight 
labor market and strong consumption growth, but invest-
ment appeared to soften in the second half of the year.
A common influence on sentiment across advanced 
and emerging market and developing economies has been 
high policy uncertainty in the wake of policy actions and 
difficulties in reaching agreement on contentious issues. 
The extended truce in the US–China trade dispute has 
provided a welcome respite in an otherwise turbulent 
policy backdrop that included Brexit negotiations, discus-
sions over the Italian budget, changes in Mexican policy 
direction under the new administration, the US federal 
government shutdown, and US policy on Iran.
Softening Industrial Production, Slower Trade
Amid high policy uncertainty and weakening prospects 
for global demand, industrial production decelerated 
(Figure 1.1), particularly for capital goods. The slowdown 
was broad based, notably across advanced economies, 
except the United States. While a cyclical slowdown in 
countries thought to be operating above potential was 
to be expected, the downturn was larger and appeared 
related to a souring of market sentiment, in part because 
of trade tensions. Global trade growth has slowed sharply 
from its peak in late 2017, with US imports from China 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
1
CHAPTER
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
2
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
subject to new US tariffs declining or stalling toward 
the end of the year (following some front-loading ahead 
of tariff hikes; Figure 1.2). Weak expectations of future 
activity seen in purchasing managers’ indexes point to a 
continuation of the slow momentum this year.
Lower Commodity Prices, Subdued Inflation Pressure
Global energy prices declined by 17 percent between 
the reference periods for the October 2018 and current 
World Economic Outlook (WEO) as oil prices dropped 
from a four-year peak of $81 a barrel in October to 
$61 in February (Figure 1.3). While supply influences 
dominated initially—notably a temporary waiver in 
US sanctions on Iranian oil exports to certain countries 
and record-high US crude oil production—weakening 
global growth added downward pressure on prices 
Advanced economies2
Emerging market economies3
World
United States
Germany
China (right scale) 
United Kingdom
Japan
Euro area 41
Industrial production
World trade volumes
Manufacturing PMI: new orders
Figure 1.1.  Global Activity Indicators
(Three-month moving average; year-over-year percent change, unless
noted otherwise)
Indicators of global activity have generally softened since the second half of 2018.
Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics; 
Markit Economics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: CC = consumer conﬁdence; PMI = purchasing managers’ index. 
1Euro area 4 comprises France, Italy, the Netherlands, and Spain.
2Australia, Canada (PMI only), Czech Republic, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong 
SAR (CC only), Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand (PMI only), Norway (CC only), 
Singapore (PMI only), Sweden (CC only), Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China, 
United Kingdom, United States.
3Argentina (CC only), Brazil, China, Colombia (CC only), Hungary, India (PMI only), 
Indonesia, Latvia (CC only), Malaysia (PMI only), Mexico (PMI only), Philippines (CC 
only), Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand (CC only), Turkey, Ukraine (CC only).
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
2015
16
17
18
Feb.
19
–1
–5
96
98
100
102
104
106
108
110
3. Consumer Conﬁdence
 (Index, 2015 = 100)
112
0
5
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
1. World Trade, Industrial Production, and Manufacturing PMI
 (Deviations from 50 for Manufacturing PMI)
6
7
2015
16
17
18
Feb.
19 
2. Industrial Production
2015
16
17
18
Jan.
19
$16bn effective
$34bn effective
$200bn 10% effective
Other
United States
United Kingdom
Japan
China
Euro area
Jan.
2018
Mar.
18
May
18
Jul.
18
Sep.
18
Nov.
18
2. US Imports from China1
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
1. Real Exports
–5
0
5
10
15
2015
16
17
18:
Q4
Source: IMF staff calculations.
1The vertical bars correspond to the timing of tariff increases: $50bn list 
announced June 15, 2018; $34bn effective (of $50bn list) July 6, 2018, and $16bn 
effective (of $50bn list) August 23, 2018; $200bn list announced July 10, 2018, 
with 10 percent tariff on $200bn effective September 24, 2018. The series show 
the evolution of US imports of goods in the various tariff lists. bn = billion.
Global trade growth has slowed sharply from its peak in late 2017. Following 
some front-loading, US imports from China subject to new US tariffs declined or 
stalled toward the end of the year.
Figure 1.2.  Trade Indicators
(Year-over-year percent change)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
3
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
toward the end of 2018. Since the beginning of this 
year, oil prices have recovered somewhat thanks to 
production cuts by oil-exporting countries. Prices of 
base metals have increased by 7.6 percent since August 
as a result of supply disruption in some metal markets 
more than offsetting subdued global demand. 
Consumer price inflation remained muted across 
advanced economies, given the drop in commodity 
prices (Figure 1.4). For most countries in this group, 
core inflation is well below central bank targets 
despite the pickup in domestic demand in the past 
two years; in the United States and United Kingdom, 
it is close to 2 percent. Although wage growth has 
been picking up across most advanced economies, 
notably in the United States and United Kingdom, it 
is still sluggish despite lower unemployment rates and 
diminished labor market slack. With wage growth 
broadly in line with labor productivity growth, unit 
labor costs continue to be restrained (Box 1.1). 
Consistent with subdued overall price and wage pres-
sures, and possibly reinforced by the slowing growth 
momentum, inflation expectations remain contained 
across advanced economies, and, in many cases, have 
softened recently.
Among emerging market economies, core inflation 
has remained below 2 percent in China as activity has 
moderated. In other cases, inflation pressure has eased 
toward the lower bound of the central bank’s target 
range with the drop in commodity prices (Indonesia) 
and slowdown in food inflation (India). For some 
economies, currency depreciations have passed through 
to higher domestic prices, partially offsetting down-
ward pressure from lower commodity prices.
Financial Conditions Are Marginally Tighter than 
in the Fall; Localized Pressures Continue
Following a notable tightening of financial condi-
tions in late 2018, market sentiment rebounded in 
early 2019. Signs of slowing global growth, moderately 
less buoyant corporate earnings, and market concerns 
about the pace of Federal Reserve policy tightening 
weighed on sentiment at the end of 2018. Prospects 
for a disorderly exit of the United Kingdom from the 
European Union (a “no-deal Brexit”) and news about 
macroeconomic stimulus and liquidity support in 
China have also influenced market movements since 
October. More recently, a shift toward more accommo-
dative monetary policy stances by major central banks 
(including a pause in interest rate hikes by the Federal 
Reserve) and the outcome of US–China trade negotia-
tions have supported a rebound in sentiment.
Financial conditions in advanced economies have eased 
since the start of the year, after tightening sharply in 
the final months of 2018 on equity price declines and 
higher risk spreads. As of early March, conditions were 
slightly tighter than in October (Figure 1.5; Figure 1.2 
of the April 2019 Global Financial Stability Report 
(GFSR)), but, in most cases, still accommodative. This 
is especially the case in the United States, where bond 
yields dropped as investors reassessed the outlook for 
monetary policy normalization. The change in tone 
of communications by major central banks has been 
an important contributor to the easing of financial 
conditions since early 2019. In January, communica-
tion by the US Federal Reserve suggested a patient and 
flexible approach to policy normalization, and at the 
March meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee, it signaled a pause in its interest rate hikes for this 
year (see the April 2019 GFSR). The European Central 
Bank, which ended its net asset purchases in December, 
announced in March a new round of targeted bank 
financing and further postponed a rise in policy rates to 
at least the end of this year. The Bank of England and 
Bank of Japan have increasingly taken more cautious 
views on the outlook. Consistent with this shift in tone, 
Average petroleum spot price
Food
Metals
Figure 1.3.  Commodity Prices
(Deﬂated using US consumer price index; index, 2014 = 100)
Commodity prices have been volatile in recent months, reﬂecting shifting supply 
inﬂuences against a backdrop of subdued demand.
20
40
60
80
100
120
2014
15
16
17
18
Feb.
19
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
4
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Mar. 21, 2018
Sep. 17, 2018
Mar. 22, 2019
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
United States
Japan
Germany
Italy
S&P 500
TOPIX
Euro Stoxx
MSCI Emerging Market
Japan
United States
United Kingdom
Germany
Italy
Figure 1.5.  Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial
Market Conditions
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
2018
19
20
21 Mar.
22
2015
16
17
18
3. 10-Year Government Bond
 Yields2
4. Credit Spreads2
 (Basis points)
US high yield
Euro high yield
US high grade
6. Price-to-Earnings Ratios2
Euro high grade
2015
16
17
18 Mar.
19
Mar.
19
5. Equity Markets2
 (Index, 2007 = 100)
2015
16
17
18
2015
16
17
18
Mar.
19
Mar.
19
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2. Policy Rate Expectations1
 (Dashed lines are from
 the October 2018 WEO)
1. US Policy Rate
 Expectations1
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
2018
19
20
21 Mar.
22
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Financial conditions in advanced economies have eased since the start of the 
year, after tightening sharply in the ﬁnal months of 2018.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; Thomson Reuters Datastream; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor’s; 
TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States, the 
sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro 
interbank offered forward rate for the euro area; updated March 22, 2019.
2Data are through March 22, 2019.
Consumer price inﬂation remained muted across advanced economies, given the 
drop in commodity prices. For some emerging market economies, currency 
depreciations have passed through to higher domestic prices, partially offsetting 
downward pressure from lower commodity prices.
Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies (AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST, 
FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HKG, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, NOR,  PRT, 
SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, TWN, USA); Emerging market and developing countries 
comprise BGR, BRA, CHL, CHN, COL, HUN, IDN, IND, MEX, MYS, PER, PHL, POL, 
ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, ZAF. Country list uses International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1AEs include AUS; exclude LUX.
4. Consumer Price Inﬂation Expectations
 (Percent)
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
0
2015
16
17
2016
17
18
Feb.
19
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
Jan.
19
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
1. Advanced Economies
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
2015
16
2015
16
17
Jan.
19
17
Jan.
19
Figure 1.4.  Global Inﬂation
(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change, unless noted
otherwise)
3. Core Consumer Price Inﬂation
 (Three-month moving average; year-over-year percent change)
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
18
18
18
Core consumer price inﬂation
Consumer price inﬂation
United States
United Kingdom
Euro area
Japan
AEs1
EMDEs (right scale)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
5
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
advanced economy sovereign securities (in particular, 
10-year US Treasury notes, German bunds, UK gilts) 
have priced in a lower path for future policy rates and 
are generally 40–80 basis points below the peaks of 
early November 2018. Italian spreads over German 
bunds, about 250 basis points as of late March, have 
declined from their late-October/early-November peaks, 
but remain elevated. Riskier asset classes have generally 
benefited from improved sentiment at the start of 2019. 
Equity markets in the United States and Europe have 
regained footing after the sharp sell-off at the end of 
2018, while high-yield corporate spreads—which had 
decompressed significantly in December—have nar-
rowed since, but still remain wider than in October. 
Financial conditions in emerging markets improved 
in early 2019 but remain somewhat tighter than in 
October (Figure 1.6). Country-specific economic funda-
mentals and political factors continued to drive differ-
entiation across economies in the group. Central banks 
in many emerging market economies (Chile, Indonesia, 
Mexico, Philippines, South Africa) have lifted policy 
rates since October because of concerns that inflation 
may rise following the increase in oil prices in 2018 and, 
for some countries, pass-through from previous cur-
rency depreciation. In China, the central bank provided 
liquidity support and reduced reserve requirements for 
all banks as growth moderated. Long-term sovereign 
yields and spreads over advanced economies are broadly 
back to October levels. In Mexico, concerns over policy 
reversals under the new administration led to a notable 
widening of the sovereign spread during November and 
December, but it has since narrowed. In Brazil, spreads 
have declined since October amid optimism about the 
prospects of pension reform under the new government. 
Following ongoing adjustments to rein in financial 
imbalances in Argentina and Turkey, spreads for both 
have declined somewhat but remain elevated. In line 
with improving risk sentiment this year, emerging mar-
ket equity indexes have recovered some of the ground 
lost in late 2018 and are now broadly at or have sur-
passed the levels of October in most cases (Figure 1.7).
Exchange rates: With regard to major currencies, as 
of late March, the US dollar was back to its Septem-
ber 2018 level: the late-2018 appreciation reversed 
following a shift in market expectations about the pace 
and extent of monetary policy tightening (Figure 1.8, 
panel 1). The euro depreciated by about 3 percent over 
this period, on weaker-than-expected macroeconomic 
data and concerns about Italy. The yen appreciated 
modestly, and the pound strengthened by about 
3 percent on shifting expectations of the outcome 
China
Brazil
Turkey
Mexico
Argentina (right scale)
September 2018 over April 2018
Latest over September 2018
Figure 1.6.  Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates and
Spreads
2015
16
17
18
Mar.
19
4. Current Account Balance and Change in EMBI Spreads1
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
400
350
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
400
350
ARG
Current account 2017 (percent of GDP)
–12
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
Change in EMBI spread
(basis points, Apr. 16, 2018–
Mar. 22, 2019)
BRA
CHL
CHN
COL
EGY
HUN
IDN
IND
MAR
MYS
MEX
PER
PHL
POL
ROU
RUS
TUR
TUN
ZAF
2
6
10
14
18
22
2. Ten-Year Government Bond Yields1
 (Percent)
3. Change in EMBI Spreads1
 (Basis points)
2015
16
17
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
18
Feb.
19
1. Policy Rate
 (Percent)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Financial conditions in emerging market economies improved in early 2019, with 
differentiation across economies based on country-speciﬁc fundamentals.
Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics; Thomson Reuters 
Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. Data labels use 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1Financial market data are through March 22, 2019.
TUN
MYS
MAR
PER
CHL
ROU
COL
ZAF
PHL
ARG
HUN
POL
EGY
TUR
MEX
BRA
IDN
RUS
IND
CHN
y  = –19.63  + 18.73
R 2 = 0.46
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
of Brexit negotiations. Emerging market currencies 
generally strengthened, helped by the pause in interest 
rate hikes by the Federal Reserve and by the truce in 
the US–China trade dispute (Figure 1.8, panel 2). This 
includes currencies that had come under more severe 
pressure in previous months—primarily the Argentine 
peso and the Turkish lira, but also the Brazilian real 
and the South African rand—as well as the Indian 
rupee and the Russian ruble. Most other Asian cur-
rencies also appreciated, with the Chinese renminbi 
strengthening by about 2 percent. 
Capital flows: Improved market sentiment toward 
emerging markets was reflected in a stabilization and 
subsequent recovery in portfolio flows, which had 
dropped sharply in the second and third quarters of 
2.
1.
COL
IDN
MYS
RUS
TUR
MEX (right scale)
CHN
MYS
BRA
COL
IDN
IND
RUS
TUR
BRA
CHN
IND
MEX
China
Emerging Asia
excluding China
Argentina
Brazil
Mexico
Russia
South Africa
Turkey
Figure 1.7.  Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and
Credit 
6.
5.
4.
3.
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2015
16
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
Credit-to-GDP Ratio1
(Percent)
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2006 08
10
12
14
16
18:
Q4
2006 08
10
12
14
16
18:
Q4
17
2015
16
17
Jan.
19
Jan.
19
2015
16
17
18 Feb.
19
2015
16
17
18
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
Feb.
19
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
Equity Markets
(Index, 2015 = 100)
Emerging market equity indexes have recovered some of the ground lost in late 
2018.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial 
Statistics (IFS); Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
1Credit is other depository corporations’ claims on the private sector (from IFS), 
except in the case of Brazil, for which private sector credit is from the Monetary 
Policy and Financial System Credit Operations published by Banco Central do 
Brasil, and China, for which credit is total social ﬁnancing after adjusting for local 
government debt swaps.
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
Real Credit Growth1
(Year-over-year percent change)
Latest over December 2018
December 2018 over September 2018
ZAF
CHN
IND
IDN
MYS
PHL
THA
HUN
POL
RUS
TUR
ARG
BRA
CHL
COL
MEX
PER
PAK
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EA = euro area. Data labels use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes. Latest data available are for March 22, 2019.
2. Emerging Market Economies
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
1. Advanced Economies
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
USA
EA
JPN GBR SWE CHE KOR TWN SGP CAN NOR AUS NZL
Following a shift in market expectations about the pace and extent of US monetary 
policy tightening, the late-2018 appreciation of the dollar reversed and emerging 
market currencies generally strengthened.
Figure 1.8.  Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, 
September 2018–March 2019
(Percent)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
7
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
2018. The recovery was particularly notable in early 
2019 as investors increased allocations to emerging 
market bond and equity funds (Figure 1.9). 
The Forecast
Near-Term Moderation, Then a Modest Pickup
Industrial production figures and surveys of purchas-
ing managers suggest that the slower momentum in 
global growth during the second half of 2018 is likely 
to continue in early 2019. The forecast envisages a 
stabilization of growth in the first half of the year and 
a gradual recovery thereafter (Figure 1.10). 
Reflecting the slowdown in activity in the latter half 
of 2018 and the first half of 2019, global growth is set 
to moderate from 3.6 percent in 2018 to 3.3 percent 
in 2019, and then to return to 3.6 percent in 2020. 
The forecast for 2019 is 0.4 percentage point lower 
than in the October 2018 WEO, while the forecast for 
2020 is 0.1 percentage point lower (Table 1.1). 
Bond
EM-VXY
Equity
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
China
Saudi Arabia
Total
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
China
Saudi Arabia
Total
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
China
Saudi Arabia
Total
Figure 1.9.  Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
Investors increased allocations to emerging market bond and equity funds in early
2019.
Sources: EPFR Global; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics; 
Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Capital inﬂows are net purchases of domestic assets by nonresidents. 
Capital outﬂows are net purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents. 
Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, and Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia, 
and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. 
ECB = European Central Bank; EM-VXY = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Volatility 
Index; LTROs = long-term reﬁnancing operations.
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
–6
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
–6
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
–6
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
2007
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18:
Q4
2010
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18 Feb.
19
1. Net Flows in Emerging Market Funds
 (Billions of US dollars)
2. Capital Inﬂows
 (Percent of GDP)
3. Capital Outﬂows Excluding Change in Reserves
 (Percent of GDP)
4. Change in Reserves
 (Percent of GDP)
Taper
tantrum
Greek
crisis Irish
crisis
1st ECB
LTROs
18:
Q4
2007
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18:
Q4
2007
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
China equity
market sell-off
US presidential
election
United States
Euro area
Japan
Argentina
Mexico
Brazil
Turkey
China
Em. Asia ex.
China 
Figure 1.10.  Half-Yearly Growth Forecasts
(Annualized semiannual percent change)
3. Selected Advanced
 Economies
4. Selected Emerging Market
 and Developing Economies
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
2. Emerging Market and
 Developing Economies
1. Advanced Economies
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
The global outlook envisages a stabilization of growth in the ﬁrst half of 2019 
followed by a gradual recovery.
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Em. Asia ex. China = emerging and developing Asia excluding China.
3.5
6.0
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
17:
H1
19:
H1
20:
H2
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2015:
H1
17:
H1
19:
H1
20:
H2
2015:
H1
17:
H1
19:
H1
20:
H2
2015:
H1
17:
H1
19:
H1
20:
H2
2015:
H1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
8
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
2018
Projections
Difference from January 
2019 WEO Update1
Difference from October 
2018 WEO1
2019
2020
2019
2020
2019
2020
World Output
3.6
3.3
3.6
–0.2
0.0
–0.4
–0.1
Advanced Economies
2.2
1.8
1.7
–0.2
0.0
–0.3
0.0
United States 
2.9
2.3
1.9
–0.2
0.1
–0.2
0.1
Euro Area
1.8
1.3
1.5
–0.3
–0.2
–0.6
–0.2
Germany
1.5
0.8
1.4
–0.5
–0.2
–1.1
–0.2
France
1.5
1.3
1.4
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
Italy
0.9
0.1
0.9
–0.5
0.0
–0.9
0.0
Spain
2.5
2.1
1.9
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Japan
0.8
1.0
0.5
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
United Kingdom
1.4
1.2
1.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
Canada
1.8
1.5
1.9
–0.4
0.0
–0.5
0.1
Other Advanced Economies2
2.6
2.2
2.5
–0.3
0.0
–0.3
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.5
4.4
4.8
–0.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
Commonwealth of Independent States
2.8
2.2
2.3
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
Russia
2.3
1.6
1.7
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
Excluding Russia
3.9
3.5
3.7
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.4
6.3
6.3
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
China
6.6
6.3
6.1
0.1
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
India3
7.1
7.3
7.5
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
ASEAN-54
5.2
5.1
5.2
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.6
0.8
2.8
0.1
0.4
–1.2
0.0
Latin America and the Caribbean 
1.0
1.4
2.4
–0.6
–0.1
–0.8
–0.3
Brazil
1.1
2.1
2.5
–0.4
0.3
–0.3
0.2
Mexico
2.0
1.6
1.9
–0.5
–0.3
–0.9
–0.8
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
1.8
1.5
3.2
–0.9
0.2
–1.2
0.2
Saudi Arabia
2.2
1.8
2.1
0.0
0.0
–0.6
0.2
Sub-Saharan Africa 
3.0
3.5
3.7
0.0
0.1
–0.3
–0.2
Nigeria
1.9
2.1
2.5
0.1
0.3
–0.2
0.0
South Africa
0.8
1.2
1.5
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
Memorandum
European Union
2.1
1.6
1.7
–0.3
–0.1
–0.4
–0.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.6
5.0
5.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
Middle East and North Africa 
1.4
1.3
3.2
–0.9
0.3
–1.2
0.3
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
3.1
2.7
2.9
–0.3
0.0
–0.4
0.0
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
3.8
3.4
3.9
–0.6
–0.1
–0.6
–0.2
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.3
3.0
3.2
–1.1
–0.1
–1.0
–0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.6
4.6
5.3
–0.5
–0.3
–0.2
–0.2
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.1
2.7
3.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.3
4.0
4.8
–0.5
0.0
–0.8
0.0
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
29.4
–13.4
–0.2
0.7
0.2
–12.5
4.2
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export 
weights)6
1.6
–0.2
1.1
2.5
–0.1
0.5
0.8
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.6
2.1
–0.1
0.1
–0.3
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7
4.8
4.9
4.7
–0.2
0.1
–0.3
0.1
London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) 
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
2.5
3.2
3.8
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.3
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during January 14–February 11, 2019. Economies are listed on the basis 
of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2019 World Economic Outlook Update, and October 2018 World Economic Outlook forecasts. The 
differences are also adjusted to include Argentina’s consumer prices since the July 2018 Update.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a base year. 
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
9
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table 1.1 (continued)
Year over Year
Q4 over Q48
Projections
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2017
2018
2019
2020
World Output
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.6
4.0
3.4
3.5
3.6
Advanced Economies
2.4
2.2
1.8
1.7
2.6
2.0
1.8
1.8
United States 
2.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.5
3.0
2.2
1.7
Euro Area
2.4
1.8
1.3
1.5
2.7
1.1
1.6
1.4
Germany
2.5
1.5
0.8
1.4
2.8
0.6
1.4
1.3
France
2.2
1.5
1.3
1.4
2.8
0.9
1.6
1.3
Italy
1.6
0.9
0.1
0.9
1.7
0.0
0.6
0.8
Spain
3.0
2.5
2.1
1.9
3.1
2.4
1.9
1.7
Japan
1.9
0.8
1.0
0.5
2.4
0.3
0.3
1.4
United Kingdom
1.8
1.4
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.0
1.5
Canada
3.0
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.9
1.6
1.8
1.8
Other Advanced Economies2
2.9
2.6
2.2
2.5
2.9
2.4
2.4
2.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.8
4.5
4.4
4.8
5.2
4.7
4.9
5.0
Commonwealth of Independent States
2.4
2.8
2.2
2.3
1.5
3.4
1.6
2.0
Russia
1.6
2.3
1.6
1.7
1.0
3.4
1.2
1.7
Excluding Russia
4.1
3.9
3.5
3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.6
6.4
6.3
6.3
6.8
6.3
6.4
6.3
China
6.8
6.6
6.3
6.1
6.7
6.4
6.3
6.0
India3
7.2
7.1
7.3
7.5
8.1
6.8
7.2
7.6
ASEAN-54
5.4
5.2
5.1
5.2
5.4
5.1
5.3
5.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
6.0
3.6
0.8
2.8
6.2
0.7
2.1
2.9
Latin America and the Caribbean 
1.2
1.0
1.4
2.4
1.3
0.3
2.0
2.2
Brazil
1.1
1.1
2.1
2.5
2.2
1.1
2.8
2.2
Mexico
2.1
2.0
1.6
1.9
1.5
1.7
2.0
1.6
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
2.2
1.8
1.5
3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
–0.7
2.2
1.8
2.1
–1.4
4.0
1.0
2.1
Sub-Saharan Africa 
2.9
3.0
3.5
3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
0.8
1.9
2.1
2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
1.4
0.8
1.2
1.5
2.2
0.2
1.0
1.8
Memorandum
European Union
2.7
2.1
1.6
1.7
2.8
1.6
1.7
1.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.9
4.6
5.0
5.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East and North Africa 
1.8
1.4
1.3
3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
3.2
3.1
2.7
2.9
3.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
5.4
3.8
3.4
3.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Imports
Advanced Economies
4.3
3.3
3.0
3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.5
5.6
4.6
5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.4
3.1
2.7
3.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.2
4.3
4.0
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
23.3
29.4
–13.4
–0.2
19.6
9.5
–7.5
–1.3
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export  
weights)6
6.4
1.6
–0.2
1.1
3.5
–1.9
3.6
0.9
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.7
2.0
1.6
2.1
1.7
1.9
1.9
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7
4.3
4.8
4.9
4.7
3.7
4.3
4.0
3.9
London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) 
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
1.5
2.5
3.2
3.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
5Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $68.33 in 
2018; the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $59.16 in 2019 and $59.02 in 2020.
6Starting with the January 2019 WEO Update, the IMF commodity price index and its sub-indices have been updated and have expanded coverage. The nonfuel com-
modity forecast revisions compare current projections with October 2018 projections, however, due to methodological and coverage changes, comparability is limited.
7Excludes Venezuela. See country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8For World Output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market 
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
   
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
10
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Beyond 2020, global growth is projected to plateau 
at about 3.6 percent over the medium term, similarly 
to the medium-term forecast of the October 2018 
WEO. The assumptions for trade, fiscal, and monetary 
policies as well as commodity prices, which underpin 
this baseline forecast, are outlined in Box 1.2 (see 
also Figures 1.11 and 1.12). Importantly, tariffs on 
$200 billion of US imports from China are assumed to 
stay at 10 percent (whereas in the October 2018 WEO 
and the January 2019 WEO Update they had been 
assumed to rise to 25 percent as of March 1, 2019).
The global growth forecast reflects a combination of 
waning cyclical forces and a return to tepid potential 
growth in advanced economies; a precarious recovery in 
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
October 2018 WEO
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
October 2018 WEO
2. Change in the Structural Primary Fiscal Balance
1. Change in the Structural Primary Fiscal Balance 
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Japan’s latest ﬁgures reﬂect comprehensive methodological revisions adopted in 
December 2016.
Fiscal policy is assumed to be expansionary across advanced economies in 2019 
and expected to turn contractionary in 2020 as the US stimulus starts going into 
reverse. Across the emerging market and developing economy group, ﬁscal policy 
is assumed to be expansionary in 2019 (in part reﬂecting a projected ﬁscal 
stimulus in China to offset some of the negative effects of higher tariffs), before 
turning contractionary in 2020.
–1.5
1.0
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
–1.5
2.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
United States
Japan1
France, Germany,
United Kingdom
    
Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Portugal,
Spain
Advanced
economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
Figure 1.11.  Forecast Assumptions: Fiscal Indicators
(Percent of GDP)
Average petroleum spot price
Food
Metals
2019–20 (average; Feb. 2019 commodity prices)
2019–20 (average; Feb. 2019 commodity prices)
2015–16 (cumulative)
2017–18 (cumulative)
2015–16 (cumulative)
2017–18 (cumulative)
1. Commodity and Oil Prices
 (Index, 2018 = 100)
3. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses for Commodity
 Importers1
2. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses for Commodity
 Exporters1
Figure 1.12.  Commodity Price Assumptions and
Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
Based on oil futures contracts, average oil prices are projected at $54.1 in 2019, 
rising to $55.2 in 2020. Metal prices are expected to decline 6.0 percent year over 
year in 2019 and inch down a further 0.8 percent in 2020. Food prices are 
projected to decline 2.6 percent year over year in 2019 before increasing by 
1.7 percent in 2020.
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1Gains (losses) for 2019–20 are simple averages of annual incremental gains
(losses) for 2019 and 2020. The windfall is an estimate of the change in
disposable income arising from commodity price changes. The windfall gain in
year t for a country exporting x  US dollars of commodity A and importing m 
US dollars of commodity B  in year t  – 1 is deﬁned as (Δpt
Axt  – 1 – Δpt
Bmt  – 1) / 
Yt  – 1, in which Δpt
A and Δpt
B are the percentage changes in the prices of A and B 
between year t  – 1 and year t, and Y is GDP in year t  – 1 in US dollars. See also 
Gruss (2014).
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
SAU
KAZ
DZA
NGA
RUS
COL
MYS
CAN
AUS
MEX
BRA
ARG
IDN
–8
–4
0
4
8
USA
EGY
TUR
FRA
DEU
ITA
POL
CHN
ESP
JPN
IND
PAK
THA
KOR
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
2018
19
20
21
22
23
24
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
11
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
emerging market and developing economies, driven to a 
great extent by economies currently experiencing severe 
macroeconomic distress; and complex factors that shape 
the prospects for potential growth in both groups.
Waning Cyclical Forces in Advanced Economies
Growth in advanced economies is projected to slow 
from 2.2 percent in 2018 to 1.8 percent in 2019 and 
1.7 percent in 2020. The estimated growth rate for 
2018 and the projection for 2019, respectively, are 
0.2 percentage point and 0.3 percentage point lower 
than in the October 2018 WEO, mostly reflecting 
downward revisions for the euro area.
The projected slowdown in advanced economies 
in 2019 accounts for over two-thirds of the expected 
deceleration in global growth relative to 2018. With 
output gaps estimated as being closed for most econ-
omies in the group (indeed some are operating above 
their estimated potential in a context of historically 
low unemployment rates), the cyclical upsurge is set to 
retreat toward more modest potential rates of growth.
The retreat in part reflects the anticipated negative 
effects of the tariff increases enacted in 2018. A second 
notable aspect of the advanced economy growth profile 
is that the temporary boost to US and trading partner 
growth from the sizable US fiscal stimulus is expected 
to diminish during 2019 (and particularly in 2020 as 
some of its provisions start to reverse). But beyond 
these two features already incorporated into the previ-
ous forecast, the waning of cyclical forces appears more 
rapid than expected, triggered by additional devel-
opments in particular economies during the second 
half of 2018.
Growth in the euro area is set to moderate from 
1.8 percent in 2018 to 1.3 percent in 2019 (0.6 per-
centage point lower than projected in October) and 
1.5 percent in 2020. Although growth is expected to 
recover in the first half of 2019 as some of the tempo-
rary factors that held activity back dissipate, carry-
over from the weakness in the second half of 2018 is 
expected to hold the 2019 growth rate down. Growth 
rates have been marked down for many economies, 
notably Germany (due to soft private consumption, 
weak industrial production following the introduc-
tion of revised auto emission standards, and subdued 
foreign demand); Italy (due to weak domestic demand, 
as sovereign yields remain elevated); and France (due to 
the negative impact of street protests).
The baseline projection of about 1.2 percent and 
1.4 percent growth in the United Kingdom in 2019–20 
is surrounded by uncertainty. The downward revi-
sions relative to the October 2018 WEO reflect the 
negative effect of prolonged uncertainty about the 
Brexit outcome, only partially offset by the positive 
impact from fiscal stimulus announced in the 2019 
budget. This baseline projection assumes that a Brexit 
deal is reached in 2019 and that the United Kingdom 
transitions gradually to the new regime. However, as 
of mid-March, the form Brexit will ultimately take 
remained highly uncertain.
In the United States, growth is expected to decline 
to 2.3 percent in 2019 and soften further to 1.9 per-
cent in 2020 with the unwinding of fiscal stimulus. 
The downward revision to 2019 growth reflects the 
impact of the government shutdown and somewhat 
lower fiscal spending than previously anticipated, while 
the modest upward revision for 2020 reflects a more 
accommodative stance of monetary policy than in the 
October forecast. Despite the downward revision, the 
projected pace of expansion for 2019 is above the US 
economy’s estimated potential growth rate. Strong 
domestic demand growth will support higher imports 
and contribute to some widening of the current 
account deficit.
Japan’s economy is set to grow by 1.0 percent in 
2019 (0.1 percentage point higher than in the October 
WEO). This revision mainly reflects additional fiscal 
support this year, including measures to mitigate the 
effects of the planned consumption tax rate increase 
in October 2019. Growth is projected to moderate to 
0.5 percent in 2020 (0.2 percentage point higher than 
in the October 2018 WEO, reflecting the effects of the 
aforementioned mitigating measures).
A Precarious Recovery in Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies
Global growth in 2019 is also weighed down by 
the emerging market and developing economy group, 
where growth is expected to tick down to 4.4 percent 
in 2019 (from 4.5 percent in 2018), 0.3 percentage 
point lower than in the October 2018 WEO. The 
decline in growth relative to 2018 reflects lower growth 
in China and the recession in Turkey, with an import-
ant carryover from weaker activity in late 2018, as well 
as a deepening contraction in Iran.
Conditions are projected to improve during 2019 as 
stimulus measures sustain activity in China and reces-
sion strains gradually ease in economies such as Argen-
tina and Turkey. In 2020, growth is projected to rise 
to 4.8 percent, driven almost entirely by an expected 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
12
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
strengthening of activity in these economies on the 
back of policy adjustment and some easing of strains 
in countries affected by conflict and geopolitical ten-
sions (Figure 1.13). For the latter group of countries 
in particular, the forecast is subject to very significant 
uncertainty. With declining growth in advanced econ-
omies, the projected pickup in global growth in 2020 
is entirely predicated on this projected improvement 
for the emerging market and developing economy 
group. Figure 1.13 also highlights the role played by 
the increasing weight of fast-growing economies, such 
as China and India, in supporting aggregate growth for 
emerging markets and developing economies as well as 
world growth.
Near-term prospects for emerging market and 
developing economies continue to be shaped by the 
interaction between country-specific fundamentals 
and a challenging external environment marked by 
the slowdown in advanced economies; trade tensions; 
expected gradual tightening of financial conditions 
consistent with some further removal of monetary 
policy accommodation in the United States; and, for 
commodity exporters, a generally subdued outlook for 
commodity prices (including oil prices, which are pro-
jected to remain below their 2018 average throughout 
the forecast horizon).
Growth in emerging and developing Asia is expected to 
dip to 6.3 percent in 2019 and 2020 (from 6.4 percent 
in 2018), with a marginal downward revision for 2020 
relative to the October WEO. Economic growth in 
China, despite fiscal stimulus and no further increase in 
tariffs from the United States relative to those in force as 
of September 2018, is projected to slow on an annual-
ized basis in 2019 and 2020. This reflects weaker under-
lying growth in 2018, especially in the second half, and 
the impact of lingering trade tensions with the United 
States. The projection for 2019 is slightly stronger 
than in the October 2018 WEO, reflecting the revised 
assumption on United States tariffs on Chinese exports, 
as described in Box 1.2, while the projection for 2020 is 
slightly weaker, as the underlying momentum in activity 
is more subdued. In India, growth is projected to pick 
up to 7.3 percent in 2019 and 7.5 percent in 2020, 
supported by the continued recovery of investment and 
robust consumption amid a more expansionary stance of 
monetary policy and some expected impetus from fiscal 
policy. Nevertheless, reflecting the recent revision to 
the national account statistics that indicated somewhat 
softer underlying momentum, growth forecasts have 
been revised downward compared with the October 
2018 WEO by 0.1 percentage point for 2019 and 
0.2 percentage point for 2020, respectively.
Activity in emerging and developing Europe in 2019 is 
expected to weaken more than previously anticipated, 
despite generally buoyant and higher-than-expected 
growth in several central and eastern European coun-
tries, before recovering in 2020. The sizable revision 
for the region is mostly due to a substantial projected 
contraction in Turkey in 2019, where the weakness in 
demand—following tighter external financing con-
ditions and needed policy tightening—is expected to 
continue in early 2019 before a recovery takes hold in 
the second half of the year.
In Latin America, growth is projected to recover 
over the next two years, to 1.4 percent in 2019 and 
2.4 percent in 2020. In Brazil, growth is projected to 
strengthen from 1.1 percent in 2018 to 2.1 percent in 
All EMDEs
EMDEs excluding stressed
EMDEs excluding ARG, TUR, stressed
EMDEs excluding ARG, TUR, stressed (constant 2018 weights,
2019–24)
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; stressed = IRN, IRQ,
LBY, SDN, SSD, UKR, VEN, YEM. Country list uses International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
The projected pickup in growth among emerging market and developing 
economies in 2020 is driven almost entirely by an expected strengthening of 
activity in economies currently in macroeconomic distress and some easing of 
strains in countries affected by conﬂict and geopolitical tensions.
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0
5.2
2014
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Figure 1.13.  Growth Rate: Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
(Percent)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
13
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
2019 and 2.5 percent in 2020. In Mexico, growth is 
now forecast to remain below 2 percent in 2019–20, a 
markdown close to 1 percentage point for both years 
relative to October. These changes, in part, reflect 
shifts in perceptions about policy direction under new 
administrations in both countries. Argentina’s econ-
omy is projected to contract in the first half of 2019 
as domestic demand slows with tighter policies to 
reduce imbalances, returning to growth in the second 
half of the year as real disposable income recovers 
and agricultural production rebounds after last year’s 
drought. Venezuela’s economy is expected to contract 
by one-fourth in 2019, and a further 10 percent in 
2020—a greater collapse than projected in the October 
2018 WEO and one that generates a sizable drag on 
projected growth for the region and for the emerging 
market and developing economy group in both years.
Growth in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghan-
istan, and Pakistan region is expected to decline to 
1.5 percent in 2019, before recovering to about 
3.2 percent in 2020. The outlook for the region is 
weighed down by multiple factors, including slower oil 
GDP growth in Saudi Arabia; ongoing macroeconomic 
adjustment challenges in Pakistan; US sanctions in 
Iran; and civil tensions and conflict across several other 
economies, including Iraq, Syria, and Yemen, where 
recovery from the collapse associated with the war is 
now expected to be slower than previously anticipated.
In sub-Saharan Africa, growth is expected to pick up 
to 3.5 percent in 2019 and 3.7 percent in 2020 (from 
3.0 percent in 2018). The projection is 0.3 percentage 
point and 0.2 percentage point lower for 2019 and 2020, 
respectively, than in the October 2018 WEO, reflecting 
downward revisions for Angola and Nigeria with the 
softening of oil prices. Growth in South Africa is expected 
to marginally improve from 0.8 percent in 2018 to 
1.2 percent in 2019 and 1.5 percent in 2020, a 0.2 per-
centage point downward revision for both years relative to 
the October projections. The projected recovery reflects 
modestly reduced but continued policy uncertainty in the 
South African economy after the May 2019 elections.
Activity in the Commonwealth of Independent States 
is projected to expand about 2¼ percent in 2019–20, 
slightly lower than projected in the October 2018 WEO, 
as weaker oil prices weigh on Russia’s growth prospects.
Modest Outlook for Medium-Term Growth
Beyond 2020, global growth is set to plateau at 
3.6 percent over the medium term. For the advanced 
economy group, growth is projected to moderate 
further over the medium term as the underlying 
structural headwinds to potential output (namely, 
continued weak productivity growth and slowing labor 
force growth) increasingly assert influence on the path 
of output as the cyclical forces discussed above fade 
away. Growth for the emerging market and developing 
economy group is expected to broadly stabilize at its 
2020 level for the outer years of the forecast horizon, 
but with important offsetting regional differences.
Specifically, for advanced economies, growth is 
projected to slow to 1.6 percent by 2022 and remain 
at that level thereafter. The productivity slowdown that 
set in before the 2008–09 global financial crisis (Adler 
and others 2017) is projected to abate somewhat, 
with a slight pickup in productivity expected over the 
medium term. Despite the apparent proliferation of 
digitalization and automation, their cumulative impact 
on productivity is expected to be modest over the 
forecast horizon—likely benefiting consumer welfare 
to a larger extent than labor productivity (Box 1.5 of 
the April 2018 WEO). Other developments potentially 
have less favorable implications for productivity. These 
include the retreat from global economic integration 
(projections for global trade volume growth have been 
marked down following the tariff increases of 2018).
The modest uptick expected in productivity is likely 
only partially to counteract the drag on potential out-
put growth anticipated from slower labor force growth 
as the population ages. This is particularly relevant for 
Japan and southern Europe (see Chapter 2 of the April 
2018 WEO for a discussion of the changes in labor 
force participation rates across advanced economies).
For emerging market and developing economies, 
growth is projected to stabilize at about 4.8 percent 
over the medium term. The combination of higher 
growth than in advanced economies and the group’s 
rising weight in global GDP translates into a signif-
icant increase in emerging market and developing 
economies’ share of global growth, from 76 percent in 
2019 to about 85 percent in 2024.
The medium-term growth forecast incorporates 
continued strong investment growth in emerging mar-
ket and developing economies, accounting for more 
than one-third of their GDP growth rate during the 
projection horizon (Figure 1.14). In turn, this robust 
investment path is predicated on a smooth trajectory 
for the drivers of capital spending; a gradual tightening 
in financial conditions (which is particularly relevant 
to the investment outlook in the emerging market and 
developing economy group, given the rapid buildup of 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
14
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
leverage during years of low interest rates); quick res-
olution of trade disagreements and subsequent easing 
of trade tensions; and broader policy actions that help 
reduce uncertainty. Chapter 3 discusses how the retreat 
from trade integration threatens the long-standing 
downward trend in the relative price of capital goods 
and how this could weigh on the investment prospects 
of developing economies. 
The medium-term growth forecast for emerging 
market and developing economies reflects important 
differences across regions. In emerging Asia, growth is 
expected to remain above 6 percent through the fore-
cast horizon. Central to this smooth growth profile is a 
gradual slowdown in China to 5.5 percent by 2024 as 
internal rebalancing toward a private-consumption and 
services-based economy continues and regulatory tight-
ening slows the accumulation of debt and associated 
vulnerabilities. Growth in India is expected to stabilize 
at just under 7¾ percent over the medium term, based 
on continued implementation of structural reforms 
and easing of infrastructure bottlenecks.
In Latin America, growth is projected to increase 
from 2.4 percent in 2020 to 2.8 percent over the 
medium term. Financial stabilization and recovery in 
Argentina, where growth is projected to strengthen to 
about 3½ percent over the medium term, contributes 
to that region’s growth improvement. So is stable, 
though moderate, growth in Brazil and Mexico (in the 
range of 2¼–2¾ percent) as structural rigidities, sub-
dued terms of trade, and fiscal imbalances (particularly 
for Brazil) weigh on the outlook.
Activity in emerging Europe is projected to pick up 
from the current post-global-financial-crisis low, with 
the region expected to grow just above 3 percent over 
the medium term. This improvement reflects primarily 
the forecast for Turkey, where activity is projected to 
gradually strengthen after the economy returns to pos-
itive annual growth in 2020. Over the medium term, 
Turkey’s growth is projected to pick up to 3.5 per-
cent as domestic demand recovers from the current 
sharp contraction that is reducing macroeconomic 
and financial imbalances. For other economies in the 
region with robust growth rates in recent years, such as 
Poland and Romania, growth is expected to moderate 
to about 3 percent over the medium term, reflecting 
the fading of stimulus from EU investment funds and 
accommodative policies.
The outlook for the Commonwealth of Independent 
States is for growth to stabilize at 2.4 percent over the 
medium term. This largely reflects sluggish growth in 
Russia of about 1½ percent over the medium term, 
weighed down by the modest outlook for oil prices 
and structural headwinds.
Prospects vary across sub-Saharan Africa, reflecting 
the heterogeneity of the economies, associated with dis-
parities in the level of development, exposure to weather 
shocks, and commodity dependence. For the region as a 
whole, growth is projected to increase from 3.7 percent 
in 2020 to about 4 percent in 2024 (although for close 
to two-fifths of economies, the average growth rate over 
the medium term is projected to exceed 5 percent). 
Growth prospects for commodity exporters are weighed 
down by the soft outlook for commodity prices, includ-
ing for Nigeria and Angola, where growth is expected to 
reach about 2.6 percent and 3.9 percent, respectively, in 
the medium term. In South Africa, growth is projected 
Inventories
Net foreign balance
Public consumption
Private consumption
Fixed investment
GDP
Figure 1.14.  Contributions to GDP Growth
(Percent)
1. Advanced Economies
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Source: IMF staff estimates.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
–1
Over the forecast horizon, investment growth in emerging market and developing 
economies is projected to account for more than one-third of their GDP growth 
rate.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
15
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
to stabilize at 1¾ percent over the medium term as 
structural bottlenecks continue to weigh on investment 
and productivity, and metal export prices are expected 
to remain subdued. Rising debt-service costs as financial 
conditions tighten globally and difficult adjustment 
processes to diversify production structures away from 
resource extraction are expected to weigh on growth in 
many economies across the region.
The medium-term outlook for the Middle East, 
North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan region is 
largely shaped by the outlook for fuel prices, needed 
adjustment to correct macroeconomic imbalances in 
certain economies, and geopolitical tensions. Growth 
in Saudi Arabia is expected to stabilize at about 
2¼–2½ percent over the medium term, as stronger 
non-oil growth is countered by the subdued outlook 
for oil prices and output. In Pakistan, in the absence 
of further adjustment policies, growth is projected to 
remain subdued at about 2.5 percent, with continued 
external and fiscal imbalances weighing on confidence. 
Elsewhere in the region, activity is weighed down by 
the expected impact of sanctions in Iran, civil strife 
in Syria and Yemen, and rising debt-service costs and 
tighter financial conditions in Lebanon.
Convergence prospects are bleak for some emerging 
market and developing economies. Across sub-Saharan 
Africa and the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan region, 41 economies, accounting for close 
to 10 percent of global GDP in purchasing-power-parity 
terms and close to 1 billion in population, are pro-
jected to grow by less than advanced economies in per 
capita terms over the next five years, implying that 
their income levels are set to fall further behind those 
economies (Figure 1.15, panels 1 and 2). Panel 3 of 
Figure 1.15 documents the heterogeneity in per capita 
growth rates in sub-Saharan Africa, where the majority 
of countries is projected to grow at rates well above the 
weighted average for the region.
Inflation Outlook
The outlook for inflation largely mirrors the pros-
pects for growth and commodity prices discussed above. 
Inflation is projected to remain broadly at current levels 
for the advanced economy group, while for the emerg-
ing market and developing economy group excluding 
Venezuela, it is set to resume its steady decline of the 
past decade after a temporary modest rise this year.
Consistent with the softer outlook for commod-
ity prices and the expected moderation in growth, 
1995–2005
2006–18
2019–24
Figure 1.15.  Per Capita Real GDP Growth
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
–6
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Average growth rate, 2019–24
3. Sub-Saharan Africa: Population in 2018 and projected growth
 rates in GDP per capita, 2019–24
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
1. By Country Group
10
41 economies accounting for close to 10 percent of global GDP in purchasing- 
power-parity terms and close to 1 billion in population are projected to grow by 
less than advanced economies in per capita terms over the next ﬁve years. Some 
regions, such as sub-Saharan Africa, feature considerable heterogeneity in per 
capita growth rates.
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States; 
EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; LAC = Latin America and the 
Caribbean; MENAP = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; 
PPP = purchasing power parity; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa. Bars denote 
PPP GDP-weighted averages, red markers indicate the medians, and black 
markers denote the top and bottom deciles of per capita GDP growth in the 
country groups. The fuel and nonfuel exporter subgroups are deﬁned in Table D of 
the Statistical Appendix and cover EMDEs only. Data labels use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. The dashed line in panel 3 
shows the weighted average per capita growth rate in SSA over 2019–24.
AEs
EMDEs
LAC
MENAP
–10
0
10
20
30
Population, 2018 (millions)
UGA
TZA
ZAF
SEN
RWA
KEN
ETH
CIV
COD
AGO
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
EMDE Asia
excluding
China
EMDE
Europe
SSA
CIS
China
Fuel exporters
Nonfuel
exporters
excluding China
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
16
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
inflation is expected to decline to 1.6 percent this year 
in advanced economies, from 2.0 percent in 2018. 
With the US economy operating above potential this 
year and next, core inflation is expected to exceed 
the medium-term target of 2.0 percent, and decline 
to target thereafter. In the euro area, core inflation 
is expected to gradually increase from 1.2 percent in 
2018 to about 2 percent in 2022 as the economy is 
operating above potential. Japan’s core inflation rate 
(excluding fresh food and energy) is projected to rise 
to 1.4 percent by the end of 2020 as the consumption 
tax rate is raised in October this year, softening back to 
about 1.3 percent in the medium term.
Inflation in emerging market and developing econ-
omies excluding Venezuela, while stable across most 
regions, is nonetheless expected to firm to 4.9 per-
cent this year from 4.8 percent in 2018, reflecting 
developments in a few economies. These include a 
temporary boost to consumer price inflation from a 
higher value-added tax rate in Russia and a gradual 
pickup in price pressure in India because of relatively 
strong demand conditions and a modest increase in 
food inflation from a low base. Still-elevated inflation 
expectations as Argentina adjusts to a new anchoring 
regime under a revamped monetary and exchange rate 
framework is also a notable temporary effect. As they 
fade, and growth stabilizes across the emerging market 
and developing economy group, inflation is set to 
moderate to about 4 percent over the medium term.
External Sector Outlook
Trade Growth
Global trade growth slowed considerably in 2018. 
The slowdown reflects some payback in the first quarter 
from very high growth in late 2017 and, subsequently, 
the impact of increased trade tensions on spending on 
capital goods (which are heavily traded) and a more gen-
eral slowdown in global activity. The forecast for 2019 
is for some further slowdown, reflecting to an import-
ant extent the weakness in trade growth in late 2018, 
followed by some recovery in 2020. In subsequent years, 
trade growth is projected to continue at broadly the 
same pace as in 2018 as investment demand gradually 
recovers in emerging market and developing economies, 
offsetting the slowdown in capital spending in advanced 
economies projected for 2020 and beyond.
Current Account Positions
Global current account deficits and surpluses 
are estimated to have widened marginally in 2018 
compared with the previous year. Higher oil prices 
have been the main driver of this widening: they are 
estimated to have boosted the current account balance 
of oil exporters by about 3½ percent of their GDP. 
Symmetrically, the current account deficits of some 
Asian net oil importers (such as India, Indonesia, and 
Pakistan) have widened, reflecting their higher oil 
import bills. Among major current account surplus 
and deficit countries and regions, the current account 
surplus of China declined considerably, to 0.4 percent 
of GDP, while the US current account deficit was 
unchanged at 2.3 percent, and the surplus of the euro 
area declined marginally to 3.0 percent.
Forecasts for 2019 and beyond indicate a grad-
ual reduction in global current account deficits and 
surpluses, particularly after 2020 (Figure 1.16).1 The 
surplus of oil exporters will fall, as average oil prices 
are projected to drop from their 2018 level, and the 
current account surpluses in the euro area, Japan, 
and other advanced Asian economies are projected to 
decline gradually. Among deficit countries, the current 
account balance of the United States is projected to 
widen in 2019–20—driven by expansionary fiscal 
policy—and to narrow again thereafter. The recently 
imposed trade measures by the United States and 
retaliatory actions by trading partners are expected to 
have limited impact on overall external imbalances (see 
Chapter 4 and the 2018 External Sector Report for a 
discussion of the relationship between trade costs and 
external imbalances).
As highlighted in the External Sector Report, many 
countries’ current account imbalances in 2017 were 
too large in relation to country-specific norms con-
sistent with underlying fundamentals and desirable 
policies. As shown in panel 1 of Figure 1.17, excess 
current account balances in 2018 are estimated to have 
declined, supported in many cases by real exchange 
rate movements. Medium-term projections suggest, on 
average, further movement of current account bal-
ances in the same direction (Figure 1.17, panel 2).2 At 
the same time, given that changes in macroeconomic 
fundamentals relative to 2017 affect not only current 
1Balance of payments data show a notable positive world current 
account discrepancy in recent years. This discrepancy is assumed to 
decline gradually during the forecast period, with projected global 
current account surpluses compressing more than global current 
account deficits.
2The change in the current account balance during 2018 is esti-
mated to have offset, on average, about one-fifth of the 2017 current 
account gap; the change between 2017 and 2024 would offset less 
than half of the 2017 gap.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
17
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
account balances but also their equilibrium values, the 
path of future excess imbalances cannot be precisely 
inferred from this exercise.3 
International Investment Positions
Changes in international investment positions reflect 
both net financial flows and valuation changes arising 
from fluctuations in exchange rates and asset prices. 
Given that WEO projections assume broadly stable 
real effective exchange rates and limited variation 
in asset prices, changes in international investment 
positions are driven by projections for net external bor-
3For instance, an improvement in the terms of trade is typically 
associated with a more appreciated equilibrium exchange rate.
rowing and lending (in line with the current account 
balance), with their ratios to domestic and world GDP 
affected by projected growth rates for individual coun-
tries and for the global economy as a whole.4,5
4WEO forecasts include projections of 10-year government bond 
yields, which would affect bond prices going forward, but the impact 
of those changes in bond prices on the valuation of external assets 
and liabilities is typically not included in international investment 
position forecasts.
5In addition to changes in exchange rates, the decline in global 
equity prices in late 2018 (compared with their levels at the end of 
2017) implies deterioration of international investment positions at 
the end of 2018 in countries with significant net holdings of equity 
and foreign direct investment abroad and a corresponding improve-
ment in positions for countries with net equity liabilities.
Afr. and ME
Japan
China
Eur. creditors
Adv. Asia
Oil exporters
United States
Other adv.
Em. Asia
Eur. debtors
Lat. Am.
CEE
Discrepancy
Figure 1.16.  Global Current Account Balance
(Percent of world GDP)
Global current account deﬁcits and surpluses are projected to gradually decline, 
particularly after 2020.
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan 
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South 
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, 
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, 
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, 
Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, 
Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, 
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab 
Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, 
France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom).
–4
4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
2002
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
Excess current account balances in 2018 are estimated to have declined, 
supported in many cases by real exchange rate movements. Medium-term 
projections suggest, on average, further movement of current account balances in 
the same direction.
1. 2017 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current
 Account Balances, 2017–18
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
–4
–2
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
ESP
NLD
ITA
DEU
FRA
BEL
SGP
HKG
CHE
SWE
KOR
SAU
CAN
AUS
TUR
THA
ZAF
POL
RUS
MEX
MYS
IDN
IND
BRA
ARG
USA
GBR
JPN
CHN
Change in current-account-to-GDP
ratio, 2017–18
Change in current-account-to-GDP
ratio, 2017–24
Current account gap, 2017
2. 2017 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current
 Account Balances, 2017–24
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
0
2
4
6
8
ESP
NLD
ITA
DEU
FRA
BEL
SGP
HKG
CHE
SWE
KOR
SAU
CAN
AUS
TUR
THA
ZAF
POL
RUS
MEX
MYS
IDN
IND
BRA
ARG
USA
GBR
JPN
CHN
Current account gap, 2017
Figure 1.17.  Current Account Balances in Relation to
Economic Fundamentals
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
18
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
As panel 1 of Figure 1.18 shows, creditor and debtor 
positions as a share of world GDP are projected to 
widen slightly this year, and then to broadly stabilize 
as a share of world GDP over the forecast horizon. 
On the creditor side, the growing creditor positions of 
a group of European advanced economies, a result of 
large projected current account surpluses, is offset by 
some reduction in the creditor position of China and 
oil exporters. On the debtor side, the debtor position 
of the United States increases initially and then stabi-
lizes with the forecast reduction in its current account 
deficit as the fiscal stimulus is withdrawn, while the 
position of euro area debtor countries further improves 
significantly.
Similar trends are highlighted in panel 2 of Fig-
ure 1.18, which shows projected changes in net 
international investment positions as a percentage of 
domestic GDP across countries and regions between 
2017 and 2024, the last year of the WEO projection 
horizon. The net creditor position of advanced Euro-
pean economies is projected to be above 80 percent 
of GDP and of Japan to exceed 65 percent, while the 
net creditor position of China would decline to below 
10 percent. The debtor position of the United States 
is projected to approach 50 percent of GDP, some 
9 percentage points above the 2017 estimate, while 
the net international investment position of a group of 
euro area debtor countries, including Italy and Spain, 
is expected to improve by more than 25 percentage 
points of their collective GDP. By 2024, net foreign 
liabilities, at about 32 percent of their GDP, would be 
half what they were a decade earlier.
Implications of Imbalances
Sustained excess external imbalances in the world’s 
key economies and policy actions that threaten to 
widen such imbalances pose risks to global stability. 
The fiscal easing under way in the United States is 
projected to increase the US current account deficit. 
This could aggravate trade tensions and result in a 
faster tightening of global financing conditions, with 
negative implications for emerging market economies, 
especially those with weak external positions. Over 
the medium term, widening debtor positions in key 
economies could constrain global growth and possibly 
result in sharp and disruptive currency and asset price 
adjustments (see also the 2018 External Sector Report).
As discussed in the “Policy Priorities” section, the 
US economy—which is already operating beyond full 
employment—should implement a medium-term plan 
to reverse the rising ratio of public debt, accompanied 
by fiscal measures to gradually boost domestic capac-
ity. This would help ensure more sustainable growth 
dynamics and contain external imbalances. Stronger 
reliance on demand growth in some creditor countries, 
especially those, such as Germany, with the policy 
space to support it, would help facilitate domestic and 
Afr. and ME
Japan
China
Eur. creditors
Adv. Asia
Oil exporters
United States
Other adv.
Em. Asia
Eur. debtors
Lat. Am.
CEE
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan 
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South 
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, 
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, 
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan,
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, 
Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); IIP = international investment position; 
Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, 
Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, 
Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; 
Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New 
Zealand, United Kingdom).
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Adv. Asia
Japan
Eur. creditors
Afr. and ME
Em. Asia
Lat. Am.
Other adv.
United States
Oil exporters
China
CEE
Eur. debtors
Projected change in IIP, 2017–24
Net IIP, 2017
2. Net IIP, 2017, and Projected Changes, 2017–24
 (Percent of GDP)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23 24
1. Global International Investment Position
 (Percent of world GDP) 
Figure 1.18.  Net International Investment Position
Creditor and debtor positions as a share of world GDP are projected to widen 
slightly this year, and then to broadly stabilize as a share of world GDP over the 
forecast horizon.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
19
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
global rebalancing while sustaining global growth over 
the medium term.
Risks: Skewed to the Downside
The outlook discussed in the preceding section 
envisages that global growth will stabilize in the first 
half of 2019 and recover gradually thereafter. If the 
ongoing trade truce between the United States and 
China is resolved with a rollback of tariff increases 
enacted in 2018, rising business confidence and finan-
cial sentiment could lift growth above this baseline 
forecast. Some optimism about a positive resolution 
of trade differences between the United States and 
China is indeed already reflected in market valuations. 
However, the possibility of further downward revisions 
is high, and the balance of risks remains skewed to the 
downside. Key sources of downside risk to the global 
outlook include:
Trade tensions: Global trade, investment, and 
output remain under threat from ongoing trade 
tensions. The November 30, 2018, signing of the 
US-Mexico-Canada Agreement to replace the North 
American Free Trade Agreement; the extension past 
March 1, 2019, of the truce between the United States 
and China on tariff increases; and the announced 
reduction in Chinese tariffs on US car imports are 
steps in the right direction. However, final outcomes 
remain subject to a negotiation process in the case 
of the US–China dispute and domestic ratification 
processes for the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement. In 
addition, a proposal to raise tariffs on all imported 
cars and car parts remains under consideration in 
the United States. Failure to resolve differences and a 
resulting increase in tariff barriers above and beyond 
what is incorporated into the forecast would lead to 
higher costs of imported intermediate and capital 
goods and higher final goods prices for consumers. 
Beyond these direct impacts, higher trade policy 
uncertainty and concerns of escalation and retal-
iation would reduce business investment, disrupt 
supply chains, and slow productivity growth. The 
resulting depressed outlook for corporate profitability 
could dent financial market sentiment and further 
dampen growth (see Scenario Box 1 of the Octo-
ber 2018 WEO). 
Downside risks in systemic economies: The global 
growth profile is shaped by projections of a recovery in 
the euro area as one-off factors dissipate, avoidance of 
a no-deal Brexit, some firming of growth in China as 
stimulus measures take effect, and a gradual softening 
of growth in the United States as fiscal stimulus fades. 
The materialization of risks in these economies would 
lower global growth directly and through real and 
financial spillovers.
In Europe, a protracted period of elevated yields in 
Italy would put further stress on Italian banks, weigh 
on economic activity, and worsen debt dynamics. 
Other Europe-specific factors that could give rise to 
broader risk aversion and a widespread increase in risk 
spreads include the rising possibility of a no-deal Brexit 
and European Parliamentary election outcomes that 
delay or reverse progress on strengthening the euro 
area architecture. More generally, a no-deal Brexit that 
severely disrupts supply chains and raises trade costs 
could potentially have large and long-lasting negative 
impacts on the economies of the United Kingdom and 
the European Union (see Scenario Box 1).
In the United States, the market-implied path of 
expected policy rates remains below the Federal Open 
Market Committee’s projections, raising the possibility 
of a market reassessment of the expected policy path if 
US economic data remain strong. This could result in 
higher US interest rates, renewed dollar appreciation, 
and tighter financial conditions for emerging market 
and developing economies with balance sheet vulnera-
bilities (in the form of elevated currency and maturity 
mismatches). As discussed in the April 2019 GFSR, 
the US credit cycle is at an advanced stage, with a 
rising share of lower-rated issuers in the corporate 
bond market and a growing volume of covenant-lite 
loans extended to highly indebted companies that 
offer limited protection for investors in the event of a 
default. If US growth were to weaken, such financial 
fragilities could amplify and prolong the slowdown by 
leading to debt-service difficulties in highly lever-
aged companies, credit rating downgrades, and rising 
rollover risks, with further negative feedback effects on 
corporate spending.
In China, the authorities have responded to the 
slowdown in 2018 by limiting the extent of financial 
regulatory tightening, injecting liquidity through 
cuts in bank reserve requirements, and reducing the 
personal income tax and value-added tax for small and 
medium enterprises. Nevertheless, if trade tensions fail 
to ease, activity may fall short of expectations. Further-
more, excessive stimulus to support near-term growth 
through a loosening of credit standards, or a resurgence 
of shadow banking activity and off-budget infrastruc-
ture spending, would heighten financial vulnerabilities, 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
20
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
reduce future policy space, and raise downside risks to 
medium-term growth.
Other financial vulnerabilities: Cyberattacks on finan-
cial infrastructure are another source of risk because 
they can severely disrupt cross-border payment systems 
and the flow of goods and services. As noted in the 
April 2019 GFSR, wide-ranging reversals of postcrisis 
regulatory reform or a continuation of still relatively 
accommodative financial conditions could foster addi-
tional financial vulnerabilities, especially if financial 
intermediaries intensify their search for returns in an 
environment of slower global growth.
Political uncertainty: A host of other potential factors 
add downside risk to global investment and growth. 
These include policy uncertainty about the agenda of 
new administrations or surrounding elections, geo-
political conflict in the Middle East, and tensions in 
east Asia (Figures 1.19 and 1.20; see also see Box 1.5 
of the October 2018 WEO). These risk factors in 
isolation may not have a strong impact on investment 
and growth beyond the countries directly affected, 
but a sequence of such events—combined with trade 
tensions and tighter global financial conditions—could 
have outsize effects on sentiment that reverberate on a 
broader scale. 
Medium-term risks: Risks of a somewhat 
slower-moving nature with serious implications for 
the medium- and long-term outlook include pervasive 
effects of climate change and a decline in trust with 
regard to establishment institutions and political par-
ties. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) reported in October 2018 that, at current 
rates of increase, global warming could reach 1.5°C 
above preindustrial levels between 2030 and 2052, 
bringing with it extremes of temperature, precipitation, 
and drought. Such extremes would have devastating 
humanitarian effects and inflict severe, persistent 
output losses across a broad range of economies 
Global economic policy uncertainty (PPP weight)
US trade policy uncertainty (right scale)
Figure 1.19.  Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions
(Index)
Source: Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016).
Note: The Baker-Bloom-Davis index of Global Economic Policy Uncertainty (GEPU) 
is a GDP-weighted average of national EPU indices for 20 countries: Australia, 
Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, France, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Korea, Mexico, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and 
the United States. Mean of global economic policy uncertainty index from 1997 to 
2015 = 100; mean of US trade policy uncertainty index from 1985 to 2010 = 100. 
PPP = purchasing power parity. 
Global economic policy uncertainty remains elevated, notwithstanding a decline in 
US trade policy uncertainty.
Jan.
2016
Apr.
16
Jul.
16
Oct.
16
Jan.
17
Apr.
17
Jul.
17
Oct.
17
Jan.
18
Apr.
18
Jul.
18
Oct.
18
Feb.
19
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Figure 1.20.  Geopolitical Risk Index
(Index)
Source: Caldara and Iacoviello (2018).
Note: ISIS = Islamic State. The Caldara and Iacoviello Geopolitical Risk index
reﬂects automated text-search results of the electronic archives of 11 national and
international newspapers. The index is calculated by counting the number of
articles related to geopolitical risk in each newspaper for each month (as a share
of the total number of news articles), and normalized to average a value of 100 in
the 2000–09 decade. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2010
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18 Feb.
19
Arab Spring:
Syrian and
Libyan wars
Syrian
civil war
escalation
Russian
actions
in Crimea
ISIS
escalation
Paris 
attacks
High geopolitical risk complicates the outlook.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
21
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
(Chapter 3 of the October 2017 WEO). The warning 
from the IPCC comes amid substantial distrust of 
establishment institutions and mainstream political 
parties—a distrust often born of rising inequality and 
entrenched beliefs that existing economic arrangements 
do not work for all. The accompanying polarization of 
views and growing appeal of extreme policy plat-
forms imperil the medium-term outlook by making it 
difficult to implement structural reforms for boosting 
potential output growth and strengthening resilience, 
including against climate-related risks.
Fan chart analysis: Fan chart analysis—based on 
equity and commodity market data and the dispersion 
of inflation and term spread projections of private 
forecasters—shows a downward shift in the balance of 
risks relative to the April 2018 WEO (Figure 1.21). 
The worsening profile mostly reflects the anticipated 
drag associated with the risk of oil prices rebounding 
sharply from their recent rapid drop. As discussed 
in the April 2019 GFSR, growth-at-risk analysis 
suggests slightly higher near-term downside risks to 
global financial stability compared with those in the 
October 2018 report and continued elevated risks to 
medium-term growth. 
Policy Priorities: Enhance Resilience, Raise 
Medium-Term Growth Prospects
The modest projected pickup in global economic 
growth next year relies to an important extent on the 
easing of macroeconomic strains in currently stressed 
emerging market and developing economies and on 
avoiding a sharp slowdown in advanced economies. 
In this context, avoiding policy missteps that could 
harm economic activity should be the main priority. 
Macroeconomic and financial policy should aim to 
guard against further deceleration where output may 
fall below potential and to ensure a soft landing where 
policy support needs to be withdrawn. At the national 
level, monetary policy should aim to keep inflation 
on track toward the central bank’s target (and, where 
it is on target, to ensure that it stabilizes there) and to 
keep inflation expectations anchored. Fiscal policy will 
need to manage trade-offs between supporting demand 
and ensuring that public debt remains on a sustain-
able path. In particular, where fiscal consolidation is 
needed, policy should calibrate its pace to secure stabil-
ity without suppressing near-term growth and harming 
programs that protect the vulnerable (see the April 
2019 Fiscal Monitor). Financial sector policies can 
GDP (right scale)
VIX
Term spread
(right scale)
Oil
Balance of risks for
Current year
Next year
50 percent conﬁdence interval
70 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval from April 2018 WEO
2. Balance of Risks Associated with Selected Risk Factors2
 (Coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying
 variables)
3.
4.
1. Prospects for World GDP Growth1
 (Percent change)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE); 
Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
1The fan chart shows the uncertainty around the April 2019 World Economic 
Outlook (WEO) central forecast with 50, 70, and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. 
As shown, the 70 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 percent interval, and 
the 90 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 and 70 percent intervals. See 
Appendix 1.2 of the April 2009 WEO for details. The 90 percent intervals for the 
current-year and one-year-ahead forecasts from the April 2018 WEO are shown.
2The bars depict the coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying 
variables. The values for inﬂation risks and oil market risks enter with the opposite 
sign since they represent downside risks to growth.
3GDP measures the purchasing-power-parity-weighted average dispersion of GDP 
growth forecasts for the Group of Seven economies (Canada, France, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States), Brazil, China, India, and Mexico. VIX 
is the CBOE Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 Implied Volatility Index. Term spread 
measures the average dispersion of term spreads implicit in interest rate forecasts 
for Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Oil is the CBOE 
crude oil volatility index. Forecasts are from Consensus Economics surveys. 
Dashed lines represent the average values from 2000 to the present.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2016
17
18
19
20
0
25
50
75
100
125
0.0
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.6
2006 08 10 12 14 16
Feb.
19
Figure 1.21.  Risks to the Global Outlook
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Term spread
S&P 500
Inﬂation risk
Oil market risks
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
2006 08
10
12
14
16
Feb.
19
Dispersion of Forecasts and Implied Volatility3
WEO baseline
The balance of risks to the outlook has shifted downward relative to the April 2018 
World Economic Outlook.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
22
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
complement these efforts by securing the strength of 
balance sheets and address vulnerabilities proactively by 
deploying macroprudential tools, such as countercycli-
cal capital buffers or targeted sectoral capital buffers (or 
higher risk weights and provisions on such exposures) 
and developing, where needed, borrower-based tools to 
mitigate risks stemming from high debt vulnerabilities. 
This will enhance resilience to a potentially more vol-
atile environment in global asset markets (as discussed 
in greater detail in the April 2019 GFSR).
If the current slowdown turns more severe and 
protracted than envisaged in the baseline, the macro-
economic policy stance should become more accom-
modative, particularly where output already is or could 
fall below potential and where there is policy space. If 
fiscal policy is on a consolidation path and monetary 
policy is constrained, its pace would have to slow to 
ensure adequate support for near-term demand. Where 
a weaker outlook and worsening market sentiment 
reinforce each other, the need for clear communication 
and cooperative efforts to tackle unresolved issues—
such as the US–China trade dispute and Brexit—will 
become even more pressing.
Beyond 2020, the forecast of broadly stable growth 
at 3.6 percent, despite major subregions and key 
economies slowing over the medium term, relies to an 
important extent on weights shifting toward those with 
relatively higher growth rates. Boosting medium-term 
growth prospects remains a priority for most advanced 
economies. A policy priority for several emerging mar-
ket and developing economies continues to be a stron-
ger revenue base for needed social and infrastructure 
spending. Sustained poverty reduction and increased 
inclusiveness, as well as debt sustainability, depend on 
it. A second cross-cutting theme is the need to ensure 
that the gains benefit all segments of society through 
adequate social spending on education, health, and 
safety net policies that protect the vulnerable. (Box 1.3 
documents a related set of challenges stemming from 
persistent spatial disparities in labor market outcomes 
and productivity within countries.)
Advanced Economies—Policy Priorities
Among advanced economies, consumer price inflation 
generally remains below target, and wage pressures are 
relatively subdued (although picking up in a few cases). 
Monetary policy should stay accommodative in these 
economies until inflation starts showing clear signs of 
rising toward central banks’ targets. With monetary 
policy trained on countercyclical demand management, 
fiscal policy should emphasize measures that boost 
potential output and raise inclusiveness, while main-
taining public finances on a sustainable path. In the 
absence of a major deceleration of growth, countries 
where public debt is high should pursue gradual fiscal 
consolidation that avoids sharp drags on growth and 
secures adequate social insurance for the vulnerable. If 
there are clear signs of a substantially deeper and more 
protracted slowdown, monetary and fiscal policy would 
need to become more accommodative. Further safe-
guarding financial systems—including through raising 
bank capital and liquidity buffers, enhancing macro-
prudential oversight of nonbank financial institutions, 
developing macroprudential tools as needed, and 
avoiding a rollback of postcrisis regulatory reforms—
remains vital in the context of continued monetary 
policy accommodation.
The modest medium-term outlook for the group 
(potential output growth rates are estimated in the 
range of 0.5–1.5 percent for most advanced econo-
mies) calls for measures to raise labor force partici-
pation rates and productivity growth. These include 
public investment (coupled with incentives to raise 
private spending as needed) in infrastructure, lifelong 
learning and workforce skills, and research and devel-
opment. Protecting dynamism—by ensuring that com-
petition policy frameworks facilitate new firm entry 
and curb incumbents’ abuse of market power—remains 
vital when a few big firms are cornering increasingly 
larger market shares across technology, retail, financial 
services, and other sectors in many advanced econo-
mies (Chapter 2 documents trends in market power 
across advanced economies and their macroeconomic 
implications).
In the United States, even though output is already 
above potential, the Federal Reserve’s patient approach 
to normalization is appropriate, considering the 
uncertainty around the baseline and muted inflation. 
The path of the policy interest rate should depend 
on incoming data, the economic outlook, and risks. 
Under the WEO baseline projection, labor markets 
are expected to tighten further and wage growth to 
pick up, likely warranting a further rate hike in the 
second half of the year. Rapid tightening could weaken 
inflation expectations and activity, while delayed 
tightening could contribute to financial vulnerabilities 
and a sharper downturn down the road. The 2017 tax 
overhaul and subsequent increases in spending have 
widened the fiscal deficit and added to an already 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
23
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
unsustainable US public debt profile. Fiscal policy 
should focus on raising the revenue-to-GDP ratio, 
with greater reliance on indirect taxes to counteract 
the anticipated rise in aging-related spending. Regard-
ing financial sector policies, the current risk-based 
approach to regulation, supervision, and resolution 
should be preserved (and strengthened in the case of 
nonbank financial institutions) to counteract vulner-
ability from weaker corporate credit underwriting 
standards, rising corporate leverage, and emerging 
cybersecurity threats. Improving medium-term growth 
prospects will require incentivizing greater labor force 
participation and enhancing workforce skills.
In the United Kingdom, despite the historically 
low unemployment rate and a recent pickup in wage 
growth, the uncertainty surrounding Brexit nego-
tiations calls for a cautious, data-dependent mone-
tary response. Similarly, the envisaged pace of fiscal 
consolidation, anchored by the objective of narrowing 
the cyclically adjusted public sector deficit to below 
2 percent of GDP by 2020–21, should be adjusted 
if growth slows materially. Structural reforms should 
focus on improving infrastructure quality and boost-
ing the basic skills of high school graduates, and labor 
market policies should ensure a smooth redeployment 
of workers to expanding sectors from those negatively 
affected after Brexit.
In the euro area, core inflation continues to remain 
well below target and wage growth relatively sluggish 
despite labor markets tightening in many econo-
mies in the currency zone. Monetary policy should 
continue to remain accommodative. In this regard, 
the forward guidance from the European Central 
Bank that it will reinvest maturing securities until 
well after the first interest rate hikes is welcome. 
Fiscal space varies across the currency area. In some 
countries (France, Italy, Spain), buffers should be 
rebuilt gradually to avoid reigniting adverse feed-
back spirals between sovereign and bank risks and 
to secure stability. In Germany, where growth has 
been slowing, the available fiscal space can be used 
to increase public investment in physical and human 
capital or reduce the labor tax wedge—measures that 
would boost potential output and help with external 
rebalancing. Prompt adoption of these measures is 
essential if the current weakness in activity persists. 
If a severe downside scenario were to materialize in 
the euro area, available monetary policy tools could 
be complemented with fiscal easing by countries that 
have appropriate fiscal space and financing condi-
tions. A synchronized fiscal response, albeit appro-
priately differentiated across member countries, can 
strengthen the area-wide impact. Completing the 
banking union and continuing the cleanup of balance 
sheets remain vital for strengthening credit intermedi-
ation in some economies. Structural reform priorities 
vary according to country-specific needs. In France, 
efforts to reduce corporate administrative burdens, 
promote innovation, and strengthen competition in 
the services sector would complement steps taken 
to improve labor market flexibility and boost poten-
tial growth. In Italy, measures to decentralize wage 
bargaining would help align wages and labor pro-
ductivity, thereby enhancing labor market flexibility 
and boosting employment growth. In Spain, efforts 
to reduce labor market duality would support job 
creation and incentivize private investment.
In Japan, sustained monetary accommodation will 
be necessary to lift inflation expectations and progress 
toward the central bank’s target. Fiscal policy should be 
geared toward ensuring long-term fiscal sustainability 
while protecting growth. The coupling of the planned 
October increase in the consumption tax rate with fis-
cal measures to support near-term activity is welcome. 
A sustainable debt trajectory calls for further gradual 
and steady increases in the consumption tax rate and 
reforms of the social security framework. The success of 
the broad Abenomics agenda of reflating the economy 
depends crucially on also lifting productivity growth 
and wage inflation, for which reducing labor market 
duality to increase productivity of nonregular workers 
remains vital. Durably counteracting the aging-induced 
decline in labor force growth will require, among other 
initiatives, further raising female labor force supply and 
encouraging more use of foreign labor.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies—
Policy Priorities
The variation in performance across emerging 
market and developing economies in the recent past 
in a context of volatile external conditions has high-
lighted the importance of policy frameworks oriented 
toward securing growth prospects and strengthening 
resilience. Monetary policy should focus on anchoring 
inflation expectations where inflation remains high or 
recent currency depreciations threaten pass-through to 
domestic prices. Where expectations are well anchored, 
monetary policy can support domestic activity as 
needed (see Chapter 3 of the October 2018 WEO). 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
24
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Tighter external financial conditions can expose 
vulnerabilities related to high public debt as well 
as balance sheet maturity and currency mismatches 
accumulated during years of ultralow interest rates 
(see Box 1.1 of the April 2019 Fiscal Monitor for an 
analysis of the fiscal implications of potentially tighter 
financial conditions in emerging market economies). 
Fiscal policy should ensure that debt ratios remain 
sustainable, which would also contain borrowing costs 
and create space to combat downturns. Improving the 
targeting of subsidies, rationalizing recurrent expen-
ditures, and mobilizing revenue can help preserve 
capital outlays needed to boost potential growth and 
the social spending that improves inclusion. In some 
cases, macroprudential regulatory and supervisory 
frameworks will have to be strengthened to deal with 
high private debt burdens, rein in excess credit growth, 
and contain balance sheet currency and maturity 
mismatches. Exchange rate flexibility can complement 
these policies by helping to buffer shocks. It can also 
help prevent persistent misalignments of relative prices 
that lead to resource misallocation and the buildup of 
financial imbalances. Across all economies, reforms to 
ensure sustainable, inclusive growth remain essential, 
particularly given that the medium-term prospects 
for per capita growth are relatively subdued for many 
economies in this group.
In China, the economy’s reliance on credit has 
declined somewhat following regulatory efforts to 
rein in shadow banking and control the buildup of 
debt. Despite recent weaker momentum stemming 
from trade tensions, policies should stay focused on 
deleveraging and rebalancing the economy away from 
a growth model based on credit-fueled investment 
toward one that is more sustainable and led by private 
consumption. Reducing leverage in the economy will 
require continued scaling back of widespread implicit 
guarantees on debt, early recognition and disposal 
of distressed assets, and fostering more market-based 
credit allocation that better aligns risk-adjusted returns 
with borrowing costs. Building on the recent increases 
in the private consumption share of GDP (up close 
to 40 percent in 2017 from 35 percent in 2012), 
continued rebalancing will require a more progressive 
tax code; higher spending on health, education, and 
social transfers; and reduced barriers to labor mobility. 
Enhancing productivity growth will require reducing 
the footprint of state-owned enterprises and further 
reducing barriers to entry in certain sectors, such as 
telecommunications and banking. To avoid a sharp 
near-term growth slowdown that could derail the 
overarching reform agenda, some centrally financed 
on-budget fiscal expansion in 2019 may be appropri-
ate. It should avoid large-scale infrastructure stimulus 
and instead emphasize targeted transfers to low-income 
households so as to lower poverty and inequality 
(Box 1.2 of the April 2019 Fiscal Monitor).
In India, continued implementation of structural 
and financial sector reforms with efforts to reduce 
public debt remain essential to secure the economy’s 
growth prospects. In the near term, continued fiscal 
consolidation is needed to bring down India’s elevated 
public debt. This should be supported by strength-
ening goods and services tax compliance and further 
reducing subsidies. Important steps have been taken 
to strengthen financial sector balance sheets, includ-
ing through accelerated resolution of nonperforming 
assets under a simplified bankruptcy framework. These 
efforts should be reinforced by enhancing governance 
of public sector banks. Reforms to hiring and dis-
missal regulations would help incentivize job creation 
and absorb the country’s large demographic dividend; 
efforts should also be enhanced on land reform to 
facilitate and expedite infrastructure development.
In Argentina, projections for growth have been 
revised upward, and higher nominal wages and rising 
inflation expectations are expected to generate more 
persistent inflationary pressures in 2019 than projected 
in the October 2018 WEO. Downside risks to the 
economy remain sizable, the materialization of which 
could lead to a shift in investor preferences away from 
peso assets and put pressure on the currency and the 
capital account. Against this backdrop, continued 
implementation of the stabilization plan under the 
IMF-supported economic reform program is crucial 
to shore up investor confidence and restore sustainable 
growth that lifts living standards for all segments of 
society. To this end, meeting the primary fiscal balance 
target of zero in 2019 and 1 percent of GDP in 2020 
is essential to bring down financing needs and avoid 
reigniting liquidity pressures. Continued achievement 
of monetary targets will be crucial to re‑anchoring 
inflation expectations and rebuilding central bank 
credibility. Complementing these efforts to stabilize 
the economy in the near term, a resumption of the 
structural reform agenda will help lift the economy’s 
medium-term growth prospects.
In Brazil, the main priority is to contain rising 
public debt while ensuring that needed social spending 
remains intact. The spending cap introduced in 2016, 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
25
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
which envisages a 0.5 percent of GDP a year improve-
ment in the primary fiscal balance, is a step in the 
right direction toward facilitating fiscal consolidation. 
However, more up-front adjustment is needed, partic-
ularly cuts to the public wage bill and pension reforms 
to curb rising outlays—while protecting vital social 
programs for the vulnerable. With inflation still close 
to target, monetary policy can stay accommodative 
to support aggregate demand as needed. Building on 
recent reforms to labor and subsidized credit markets, 
efforts to improve infrastructure and the efficiency of 
financial intermediation would help lift productivity 
and boost medium-term growth prospects.
In Mexico, where sovereign spreads have widened 
significantly since October, it is essential to avoid 
delaying needed structural reforms, as this would 
create additional uncertainty detrimental to private 
investment and employment growth. Sticking with the 
medium-term fiscal consolidation plan (and possibly 
aiming for an even larger reduction in the deficit) 
would stabilize the public debt, lift confidence, and 
create space both to respond to shocks and to accom-
modate aging-related spending needs. Provided infla-
tion remains subdued and expectations well anchored, 
monetary policy can stay accommodative with scope to 
cut rates if needed.
In Turkey, the New Economic Program provides a 
framework to deal with complex issues in the econ-
omy. Against this backdrop, a comprehensive and 
credible policy mix is needed to secure macroeconomic 
stability. The pace of fiscal consolidation should be 
appropriately calibrated given the subdued outlook 
and—in a context of high inflation and elevated 
inflation expectations—the limited scope for monetary 
policy to support activity. Steps to rationalize spending 
channeled through public-private partnerships and 
more transparency in this area would help underpin 
the fiscal anchor. Greater transparency about financial 
balance sheet health, and further strengthening balance 
sheets where needed, would be helpful in addressing 
lingering uncertainties, as would additional efforts to 
address nonfinancial corporate sector stress, including 
debt vulnerabilities.
In Russia, the recent revision of the fiscal rule 
delivered a procyclical positive fiscal impulse and could 
weaken policy credibility. Further fiscal consolida-
tion will be needed over the medium term to ensure 
sustainability. The central bank policy rate has been 
raised above the neutral rate following higher inflation 
pressure in the second half of 2018. Accordingly, pro-
vided inflation does not rise, there is room to provide 
monetary support should activity weaken in the near 
term. Building on efforts to strengthen financial stabil-
ity (including closure of weak banks and reforms to the 
resolution framework), the structure and governance of 
the banking system should be geared toward enhancing 
efficiency of credit intermediation. In addition, contin-
ued efforts to improve property rights and governance, 
reform labor markets, and invest in infrastructure 
would boost private investment and productivity 
growth and support convergence toward advanced 
economy income.
In South Africa, gradual fiscal consolidation will be 
needed to stabilize the public debt. Public wage savings 
should be given priority to preserve vital social outlays 
for the vulnerable and fund productive investment 
to boost potential growth. Transfers to public entities 
should be contingent on downsizing and eliminat-
ing wasteful spending. The fiscal consolidation could 
also be supported by expanding the tax base and 
through strengthening tax administration and effec-
tive anti-tax-avoidance provisions that reduce profit 
shifting. Structural reforms, particularly to product and 
labor markets, would foster an environment conducive 
to expanding private investment, job creation, and 
productivity growth.
Low-income developing countries share many of the 
policy priorities of the emerging market economy 
group, especially in raising resilience to volatile external 
conditions. Several low-income “frontier” economies 
have seen external financing conditions tighten sharply 
in recent months. Priorities include strengthening 
monetary and macroprudential policy frameworks 
while preserving exchange rate flexibility. Public debt 
stocks have increased rapidly in this group during a 
period of low interest rates. As financial conditions 
turn less accommodative, rollover risks may increase, 
and wider sovereign spreads may spill into higher 
borrowing costs for firms and households. Fiscal policy 
should be geared toward containing the buildup of 
debt while protecting measures that help the vul-
nerable and support progress toward the Sustainable 
Development Goals. This would require broadening 
the revenue base; strengthening tax administration; 
eliminating wasteful subsidies; and prioritizing spend-
ing initiatives on infrastructure, health, education, and 
poverty reduction.
While gradual fiscal consolidation is a priority 
shared across the group of low-income developing 
countries, commodity-exporting developing economies 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
26
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
face additional pressure from the subdued outlook for 
commodity prices. Reorienting spending toward infra-
structure and social outlays, together with boosting 
domestic revenue mobilization by broadening the tax 
base and strengthening revenue administration, are 
crucial in this regard. Beyond placing public finances 
on a sustainable footing, an overarching priority for 
this group is to diversify away from dependence on 
resource extraction and refining. While country cir-
cumstances differ, common policy areas help achieve 
this broad goal. These include sound macroeconomic 
management, ensuring broad-based labor force partic-
ipation by lifting education quality and worker skills, 
reducing infrastructure shortfalls, boosting financial 
development and inclusion, and incentivizing the entry 
of firms and private investment (by strengthening 
property rights, contract enforcement, and reducing 
barriers to trade).
Low-income developing countries have also borne 
the brunt of climate change and potent natural disas-
ters. Lowering the fallout from these events will require 
adaptation strategies that invest in climate-smart 
infrastructure, incorporate appropriate technologies 
and zoning regulations, and deploy well-targeted social 
safety nets.
Multilateral Policies
Since early 2018, trade actions by the United 
States and retaliation by trading partners have taken 
an increasing toll on sentiment. Policymakers should 
cooperate to address the sources of dissatisfaction with 
the rule-based trading system, reduce trade costs, and 
resolve disagreements without raising tariff and non-
tariff barriers. Doing so would avoid injecting further 
destabilizing dynamics into a slowing global economy. 
Beyond trade, fostering closer cooperation on a range 
of issues would help broaden the gains from global 
economic integration. The agenda includes completing 
the postcrisis financial regulatory reforms, strengthen-
ing the global financial safety net to reduce the need 
for countries to self-insure against external shocks, 
tackling international taxation issues and minimizing 
cross-border avenues for tax evasion, and promoting 
mitigation of and adaptation to climate change.
 Trade: Cross-border integration through trade open-
ness has been a critical source of productivity growth, 
knowledge diffusion, and welfare gains for countries 
at all income levels (see, for example, Chapter 2 of the 
October 2016 WEO for estimates of welfare gains from 
trade and Chapter 3 of this WEO on the role of trade 
integration in lowering capital goods prices and boost-
ing investment globally over the past three decades). 
Unwinding the trade-restrictive measures implemented 
so far, reducing trade costs further, and resolving dis-
agreements durably within the rule-based multilateral 
trade system could therefore reignite a major driver of 
global productivity growth. This would be supported 
by modernizing the World Trade Organization (WTO) 
rules and commitments to address areas of growing 
relevance, such as services and e-commerce and subsidies 
and technology transfer—and ensuring that existing 
rules are applied and enforced, for example, by urgently 
resolving the impasse over the WTO’s Appellate Body. 
Well-designed and ambitious regional arrangements—
such as the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement 
for Trans-Pacific Partnership and the EU-Japan Eco-
nomic Partnership Agreement—can also help. More 
generally, there is a need to enhance the governance 
of trade. For example, the idea that all countries need 
to participate in all negotiations is being revisited; this 
could allow those countries that wish to move further 
and faster to do so, while keeping new agreements inside 
the WTO and open to all WTO members.
Global financial stability: Global cooperation is 
needed to safeguard the significant gains achieved over 
the past decade in strengthening the financial system 
and to resist pressure to roll back portions of the 
reform. The reform agenda should be fully imple-
mented. Examples include implementing the leverage 
ratio and net stable funding ratio; devising effective 
resolution frameworks and enhancing supervisory 
intensity for globally important financial institutions, 
especially across borders; bolstering the tools and 
policymaking capabilities of macroprudential entities; 
and mitigating systemic risk from nonbank financial 
institutions through continued vigilance on the regula-
tory perimeter and filling data gaps. Coordinated and 
collective action is needed to confront emerging risks, 
such as those arising from the growing importance of 
central counterparties and the potential for cyberse-
curity breaches, and to combat cross-border money 
laundering and the financing of terrorism. These 
would also help limit the withdrawal of correspondent 
banking relationships, which are vital to low-income 
countries’ access to international payment systems. In 
addition, an adequately financed global safety net can 
protect economies with robust fundamentals that may 
otherwise be vulnerable to cross-border contagion and 
spillovers when downside risks to the global outlook 
are elevated.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
27
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Taxation: With the rise of multinational enterprises, 
international tax competition has made it increasingly 
difficult for governments to collect revenues needed 
to finance their budgets. Multilateral cooperation is 
needed to reinforce existing efforts aimed at tack-
ling tax evasion and avoidance and mitigation of tax 
competition, such as through the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development–Group of 
Twenty Base Erosion and Profit Shifting initiative (see 
Box 1.3 of the April 2019 Fiscal Monitor).
Longer-term challenges: Multilateral cooperation 
is indispensable for tackling longer-term issues that 
imperil the sustainability and inclusiveness of global 
growth. Curbing greenhouse gas emissions and con-
taining the associated consequences of rising global 
temperatures and devastating climate events are a 
global imperative (see Chapter 3 of the October 2017 
WEO on the macroeconomic impact of weather 
shocks and IMF 2019 for a discussion of fiscal policy 
options for implementing climate change mitigation 
and adaptation strategies). By adding to migrant flows, 
climate-related events compound an already-complex 
situation of refugee flight from conflict areas, often 
to countries already under severe strain. International 
migration will become increasingly important, too, 
as many advanced economies confront the challenges 
of their aging populations. International cooperation 
would create opportunities to streamline the integra-
tion of migrants—and so help to maximize the labor 
supply and productivity benefits they bring to desti-
nation countries, and to support remittance flows that 
lessen the burden on source countries. Finally, a truly 
global effort is also needed to curb corruption, which 
is undermining faith in government and institutions 
in many countries (see the April 2019 Fiscal Monitor).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
28
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal 
model is used to explore the economic implications of 
the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European 
Union without a free trade deal in the second quarter 
of 2019. Two scenarios are presented, providing a 
range of possible outcomes. Both scenarios include 
measures already in place or announced that seek to 
lower the short-term impact, including temporary 
exemption of a large share of UK imports (from both 
the European Union and countries outside the Euro-
pean Union) from tariffs in the event of no-deal, and 
temporary recognition regimes for some financial ser-
vices. Differences between the two scenarios illustrate 
some of the uncertainty about the impact of a no-deal 
Brexit. Scenario A assumes no border disruptions and 
a relatively small increase in UK sovereign and corpo-
rate spreads. Scenario B incorporates significant border 
disruptions that increase import costs for UK firms 
and households (and to a lesser extent for the Euro-
pean Union) and a more severe tightening in financial 
conditions. Both scenarios are compared to the April 
2019 World Economic Outlook (WEO) baseline, which 
assumes that the United Kingdom leaves the European 
Union’s customs union and single market and reaches 
a broad free trade agreement with the European 
Union, with a gradual transition to the new regime. 
There are several common assumptions behind the 
two scenarios:
Trade costs with European Union (tariffs): Under a 
no-deal Brexit, UK exports to the European Union 
revert to being subject to the World Trade Orga-
nization’s Most Favored Nation (MFN) rules, with 
tariffs increasing by mid-2019 as a result (see Scenario 
Table 1 for a comparison of some of the assumptions 
in the current baseline and in the no-deal Brexit sce-
narios). Imports from the European Union not subject 
to the temporary tariff regime also revert to MFN 
rules in mid-2019, while those subject to the regime 
revert in mid-2020.  
Trade costs with European Union (nontariff barriers): 
The scenarios assume an increase in nontariff trade 
costs, reflecting the emergence of a customs and 
regulatory border between the United Kingdom and 
the European Union, including the loss of passport-
ing rights for the United Kingdom’s financial sector. 
Most of the increase in nontariff costs on the EU 
side takes place in the first year, with the exemption 
of nontariff barriers on some services, such as certain 
financial sector activities and transport, which increase 
in the second year. On the UK side, there is a gradual 
three-year transition, reflecting the United Kingdom’s 
stated approach to prioritize continuity by temporarily 
recognizing EU standards in multiple areas. Overall, 
the reduction in nontariff barriers gained from the 
United Kingdom’s EU membership—about 20 percent 
in tariff-equivalent terms—is eventually reversed.1
Trade costs with countries outside the European Union: 
The United Kingdom loses most third-country free 
trade agreements currently in place through its EU 
membership (covering about 15 percent of all UK 
trade). UK exports to those countries revert to MFN 
rules for two years starting in mid-2019, while UK 
imports do so either in mid-2019 or in mid-2020, 
depending on whether the temporary tariff regime 
1IMF (2018). The box does not assume additional disruptions 
in the financial sector beyond the loss of passporting rights, 
which is modeled as a barrier to services trade.
Scenario Table 1. Trade Assumptions in the Baseline, Scenario A, and Scenario B
The WEO Baseline
No-Deal Scenarios
A
B
Trade arrangements
Trade with third  
countries
The United Kingdom retains 
access to existing agreements 
between EU and third countries
The United Kingdom sets tariffs unilaterally to zero  
on 87 percent of its imports from mid-2019 to  
mid-2020; the United Kingdom loses access to most 
existing agreements, secures new agreements by 2021
Trade with the 
European Union
No tariff increases;  
nontariff barriers gradually 
increase by 10 percent in  
tariff equivalent terms
Tariffs increase by 4 percent in mid-2019 (mid-2020 for 
UK imports subject to temporary tariff regime); nontariff 
barriers increase gradually by an additional 14 percent  
(in tariff equivalent terms) relative to baseline
Border disruption
No
No
Yes
Tightening of financial conditions
No
Small
More severe
Scenario Box 1.1. A No-Deal Brexit
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
29
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
applies. The scenarios assume new trade agreements 
are secured after two years, and on terms similar to 
those currently in place.
Stricter immigration policies: Both scenarios assume a 
reduction in the net migration flow from the Euro-
pean Union to the United Kingdom of 25,000 people 
per year until 2030, in line with the UK government’s 
intention to reduce net immigration. For simplicity, it 
is assumed that the net flow of migrants to the Euro-
pean Union increases by a similar amount.
The scenarios differ in the extent of border disruptions 
and in the reaction of financial markets following no 
deal:
Border disruption: To illustrate the possible contri-
bution of border disruptions to a no-deal Brexit, 
Scenario A makes the simplifying assumption that no 
such disruptions take place. Under Scenario B instead, 
delays in the customs-clearing process arise despite the 
preparatory measures, raising import costs for firms 
and households in the United Kingdom, and to a 
lesser extent in the European Union. The trade disrup-
tions in that scenario are estimated to cause in the first 
and second year, respectively, a decline in UK GDP of 
1.4 percent and 0.8 percent and a decline in EU GDP 
of 0.2 percent and 0.1 percent.2
Financial conditions: The simulations include addi-
tional effects coming from a tightening of financial 
conditions, lasting through the second half of 2020, 
due to greater uncertainty, a decline in confidence, 
or both. The tightening is small in Scenario A, with 
UK sovereign spreads increasing by 12.5 basis points 
and UK corporate spreads increasing by 20 basis 
points, and no tightening of financial conditions in 
the European Union or the rest of the world. Given 
the border disruption costs, the tightening is more 
severe in Scenario B, with UK sovereign and corporate 
spreads increasing by 100 basis points and 150 basis 
points, respectively.3 Corporate spreads would increase 
2The loss in GDP assumes there will be delays in the process-
ing of imports from the European Union during the first month 
of the new regime (equivalent to 8 percent of UK imports). 
For comparison, the assumed effect from this channel is about 
half the effect assumed in the disorderly “no deal, no transition” 
scenario by the Bank of England (Bank of England 2018).
3The calibration of this layer is based on estimates according 
to which the Brexit vote outcome contributed about 100 basis 
points to corporate spreads in the United Kingdom (ECB 2017). 
The observed increase in spreads was smaller, as the Brexit vote 
effect was offset in part by accommodative monetary policy and 
supportive global macro conditions.
temporarily by 25 basis points in the European Union, 
and by 15 basis points in the rest of the world.
Regarding the scope for a policy response, it is 
assumed that monetary policy in the United Kingdom 
is eased according to a Taylor-type reaction function, 
while the euro area is unable to ease conventional 
monetary policy further due to the lower bound 
constraint on nominal interest rates. Should additional 
unconventional monetary policy measures be imple-
mented, the decline in EU GDP would be smaller 
in the short to medium term than what is simulated 
here.4 The scenarios also assume some automatic fiscal 
stabilization, which is reflected in an increase in the 
overall government deficit in both the United King-
dom and the European Union in the short to medium 
term.
Before turning to the results, it is worth stressing 
that the simulations do not reflect the full effects 
from Brexit, as some of these effects are already in the 
current baseline. In addition, the range of possible 
effects provided by the two alternative scenarios cap-
tures some, but not all, of the uncertainty about the 
timing and magnitude of the channels associated with 
a no-deal Brexit, as well as possible policy responses. 
The assumed increase in nontariff barriers could be 
considerably smaller, and the outcome more benign, 
if the two sides recognize existing product standards, 
at least temporarily. The extent of the border disrup-
tion and the tightening of financial conditions are 
also very uncertain, as is the degree to which financial 
sector output would decline in the long term due to 
the loss of passporting rights. The simulations do not 
include additional effects on productivity from higher 
trade costs, which could similarly weigh on long-term 
output, nor do they include possible effects stemming 
from capital outflows and additional pressures on the 
exchange rate.5
4The monetary policy response in the remaining regions 
follows a Taylor-type reaction function, except for Japan, which 
is also constrained by the lower bound on nominal interest rates. 
The latter does not play any role in the simulations given the 
small impact on that country.
5The simulations feature a small, temporary real depreciation 
of the pound, mainly due to an accommodative monetary policy. 
Effects on output from capital outflows are unclear. On one 
hand, a more depreciated exchange rate would support external 
competitiveness. On the other hand, there could be a negative 
shock on UK households’ wealth, especially if financial condi-
tions tighten further..
Scenario Box 1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
30
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The simulations are shown in Scenario Figure 1. 
Panel 1 plots the paths for UK GDP implied by the 
two alternative scenarios—the current (April 2019 
WEO) baseline, and the WEO baseline from April 
2016 (before the Brexit vote)—to help illustrate the 
effects of Brexit already present in the current baseline. 
Results for the European Union and the world in 
panels 2 and 3 are shown, instead, as deviations from 
the current baseline. Under Scenario A, the increase 
in trade barriers has an immediate negative impact on 
UK foreign and domestic demand. The more gradual 
approach on the UK side eases transition costs by 
limiting the increase in import costs in the short term. 
Other channels—modest financial tightening and 
stricter immigration policies—add little to the short-
to-medium-term dynamics. The total negative effect 
on UK GDP (the difference between the yellow and 
blue line in panel 1) is about 3.5 percent by 2021. As 
UK monetary policy stays accommodative and wages 
and prices adjust, households and firms gradually 
replace imports with domestic production, and the 
economy recovers somewhat in the medium term. 
The decline in UK demand and the gradual increase 
in trade costs also lead to a decline in activity in the 
European Union, with a 0.5 percent decrease in GDP 
by 2021. The aggregate EU effects mask important 
heterogeneity across countries, given varying degrees 
of exposures to the United Kingdom.6 Effects on 
other regions are negligible. The decline in the United 
Kingdom and the European Union accounts for most 
of the decrease in global GDP (0.2 percent over the 
same period). 
The long-term effects of a no-deal Brexit relative 
to the current WEO baseline are the same in both 
alternative scenarios (shown in Scenario Figure 2) and 
reflect two channels. First, higher tariffs and nontariff 
barriers significantly reduce the returns to capital in 
the United Kingdom and the European Union. Con-
sequently, firms’ desired capital stock falls, reducing 
potential output in the long term. The impact, not 
surprisingly, is much larger in the United Kingdom. 
Second, stricter immigration policies reduce the size 
of the labor force in the United Kingdom and expand 
the size of the labor force in the European Union. In 
combination, these effects lower UK potential output 
6A country-specific analysis is beyond the scope of this box.
WEO April 2019
WEO April 2016
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario Figure 1.  Real GDP in Brexit Scenario
(Percent deviation from control, unless noted 
otherwise)
3. World
2. European Union excluding United Kingdom
1. United Kingdom
 (Index, 2015 = 100)
95
115
100
105
110
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
–1.0
0.2
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
23
2018
19
20
21
22
–1.0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
23
2018
19
20
21
22
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
Scenario Box 1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
31
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
by almost 3 percent in the long term, relative to the 
current baseline. In the case of the European Union, 
the decline in potential output is about 0.3 percent. 
The long-term effect on output in other regions is 
negligible, whereas global GDP is down by 0.1 percent 
in the long term.
Comparison with Other Studies
Other studies have typically focused on the long-term 
impact of Brexit relative to staying in the European 
Union, with negative effects on output estimated at 3 
percent to 10 percent. The long-term results presented 
here are in the middle of the range, once the effects that 
are in the current baseline—a long-term loss of 3 per-
cent of GDP according to IMF (2018)—are included.7
7Other studies have estimated the prior gains to the United 
Kingdom from joining the European Union, with most papers 
focusing on the impact on trade flows and showing a wide range 
of estimates. When mapped into output effects, and depending 
on the approach, the benefits range from 3 percent to 20 percent 
(HM Treasury 2016).
Long-term trade effects
Long-term immigration effects
Scenario Figure 2.  Brexit Long-Term Real 
GDP Effects
(Percent deviation from April 2019 WEO baseline)
–3.5
–3.0
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
United
Kingdom 
European Union
excluding
United Kingdom
World
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
Scenario Box 1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
32
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
During the 2017–18 cyclical upsurge in global 
growth, labor markets tightened in advanced econo-
mies, such as Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, 
and the United States. Headline unemployment rates 
declined (in some cases from levels already approach-
ing historical lows); rates of involuntary part-time 
employment dropped; and labor force participation 
rates rose (Figure 1.1.1). 
Consistent with the decline in headline unem-
ployment and diminishing latent slack in the form 
of involuntary part-time employment, nominal 
wage growth picked up in these economies. (Chap-
ter 2 of the October 2017 World Economic Outlook 
discusses the importance of these cyclical factors in 
The authors of this box are Weicheng Lian and Yuan Zeng.
accounting for subdued wage growth in advanced 
economies after the 2008–09 global financial crisis.) 
Wage growth in these economies has recovered some 
of the lost ground, but it is still below averages seen 
before the crisis.
The continued sluggishness in wage growth can 
largely be accounted for by productivity growth being 
far weaker than it was before the crisis. Nominal wage 
growth has been broadly in line with labor productiv-
ity growth in these economies, and there is scant evi-
dence of unit labor costs (the ratio of nominal wages 
to labor productivity) rising in a sustained manner—as 
seen in panel 3 of Figure 1.1.1. As such, pass-through 
from rising wage growth to consumer price inflation 
has been limited so far, even after a sustained period of 
declining unemployment.
Box 1.1. Labor Market Dynamics in Selected Advanced Economies
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
33
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Labor force participation rate
(15–64 years)
Unemployment rate
Involuntary part-time
employment share (RHS)
Wage growth rate (yoy)
Unit labor cost growth rate
(yoy, RHS) 
Sources: Haver Analytics; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: RHS = right scale; yoy = year over year.
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
70
72
74
76
78
80
0
1
2
3
8. United Kingdom
9. United Kingdom
7. United Kingdom
4. Germany
6. Germany
1. United States
2. United States
3. United States
5. Germany
–6
–4
–2
0
–2
0
2
4
6
8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
70
72
74
76
78
80
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
70
72
74
76
78
80
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2000
04
08
12
16
2000
04
08
12
16 18
2000 04
08
12
16 18
18
11. Japan
70
72
74
76
78
80
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10. Japan
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2
4
6
8
10
12
2000
04
08
12
2000
04
08
12
16
2000
04
08
12
16
2000
04
08
12
16 18
18
2000
04
08
12
16 18
2000
04
08
12
16
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
12. Japan
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
–2
0
2
4
6
8
2000
04
08
12
16 18
18
18
16
2000
04
08
2000
04
08
12
16 18
12
16 18
18
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Figure 1.1.1.  Labor Market Dynamics in Selected Advanced Economies
(Percent)
Box 1.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
34
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The global forecast rests on the following key 
assumptions on policies, financial conditions, and 
commodity prices:
•• Tariffs: The tariffs imposed by the United States as of 
September 2018 and retaliatory measures by trading 
partners are factored into the baseline forecast. For 
US actions, besides tariffs on solar panels, washing 
machines, aluminum, and steel announced in the 
first half of 2018, these include a 25 percent tariff 
on $50 billion in imports from China (July and 
August 2018) and a 10 percent tariff on an addi-
tional $200 billion in imports from China (Septem-
ber 2018). In light of recent developments in the 
US–China negotiations, tariffs on $200 billion of US 
imports from China are assumed to stay at 10 per-
cent (whereas in the October 2018 World Economic 
Outlook (WEO) and the January 2019 WEO Update 
they had been assumed to rise to 25 percent as of 
March 1, 2019). Also incorporated in the baseline 
forecast is China’s response to the September 2018 
US action, which included tariffs of 5–10 percent on 
$60 billion in imports from the United States.
•• Fiscal policy: Fiscal policy is assumed to be expansion-
ary across advanced economies in 2019 and expected 
to turn contractionary in 2020 as the US stimulus 
starts unwinding. Similarly, fiscal policy is assumed 
to be expansionary across the emerging market and 
developing economy group in 2019 (in part reflect-
ing a projected fiscal stimulus in China to offset 
some of the negative effects of higher tariffs), before 
turning contractionary in 2020 (Figure 1.11).
•• Monetary policy: The US federal funds rate is 
expected to increase to about 2.75 percent by the 
end of 2019, with one hike projected this year. Pol-
icy rates are assumed to remain at close to zero in 
Japan through 2020 and negative in the euro area 
until mid-2020.
•• Financial conditions: The baseline forecast assumes 
a gradual tightening of global financial conditions 
with the relative intensity varying across econo-
mies, based on underlying economic and political 
fundamentals.
•• Commodity prices: Based on oil futures contracts, 
average oil prices are projected at $59.2 in 2019 
and $59.0 in 2020 (down from $68.8 and $65.7, 
respectively, in the October 2018 WEO). Oil prices 
are expected to remain in that range, reaching 
about $60 a barrel by 2023 (broadly unchanged 
from the October 2018 WEO forecast), consistent 
with subdued medium-term demand prospects and 
offsetting production adjustments that avoid large 
excess supply. Metal prices are expected to increase 
2.4 percent year over year in 2019 and decline by 
2.2 percent in 2020 (compared with a decrease of 
3.6 percent followed by a slight pickup of 0.4 per-
cent in the October WEO). Price forecasts of 
most major agricultural commodities have been 
revised down. Food prices are projected to decline 
2.9 percent year over year in 2019 before increasing 
2.1 percent in 2020 (compared with the projected 
increases of 1.7 percent and 0.3 percent in the 
October 2018 WEO).
Box 1.2. Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
35
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Regional and urban–rural disparities in income, 
labor market outcomes, and productivity have 
attracted a lot of attention in recent years. There is 
concern that, coupled with a slow recovery from 
the global financial crisis, persistent and rising 
spatial disparity may have contributed to widening 
income inequality and growing disillusionment with 
globalization.
Regional disparities may not necessarily call for 
policy intervention. If spatial inequality results from 
regional specialization based on comparative advantage 
(for instance due to natural endowments) or returns 
to scale in production (due to complementarities and 
agglomeration economies), spatial inequality in output 
may be the flip side of efficient resource allocation. 
Over time, regional incomes should converge as labor 
and capital reallocate in response to interregional 
factor price differentials.
However, in some cases, regions fail to converge 
in this way. Many countries have regions with 
chronic problems. Regional disparities could remain 
persistently large because of market failures: when 
there are difficulties starting new centers of activity, 
coordination failure can follow, and obstacles to factor 
mobility can limit their reallocation.
Large, persistent disparities impose costs on the 
people and places left behind and on booming areas. 
These can have political economy implications, reduce 
trust, and increase political polarization. Although it 
is only one component of income inequality across 
individuals and households, this dimension has been 
studied much less and may have added significance 
when spatial and regional divisions align with political 
and ethnic tensions.
Large Disparities
Within-country disparities in per capita GDP are 
large (Figure 1.3.1, panels 1 and 2).1 While regional 
disparities in the per capita GDP of emerging markets 
The author of this box is Zsoka Koczan.
1The Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development regional database relies on national 
purchasing-power-parity (PPP) deflators because subnational PPP 
deflators are not widely available. The lack of region-specific PPP 
deflators may lead to overestimation of within-country income 
differentials (as poorer regions likely also have lower prices; see, 
for instance, Aten and Heston 2005). Rich and poor regions also 
exhibit systematic differences alongside other dimensions, such 
as labor market indicators, educational attainment, and even 
health outcomes.
Region at 10th percentile, 2013
Region at 90th percentile, 2013
Average
Advanced economies
Emerging markets (right scale)
Region at 10th percentile, 2013
Region at 90th percentile, 2013
Average
Figure 1.3.1.  Regional Disparities in GDP per 
Capita
Sources: Gennaioli and others (2014); Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development Regional 
Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 1 and 2 refer to 2013 (the most recent year 
with wide cross-country coverage), constant PPP GDP per 
capita. Panel 3 is based on a balanced subset of eight 
advanced economies and eight emerging markets for which 
longer time series are available. Recent patterns are very 
similar for a larger set of countries with shorter time series. 
Overseas territories are included. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging markets; PPP = purchasing 
power parity.
1964
70
80
90
2000
10 14
3. Regional Disparities over Time
 (GDP per capita in richest region/GDP per
 capita in poorest region)
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
SVN
KOR
FIN
PRT
SWE
AUT
DNK
NOR
GRC
IRL
ESP
AUS
NLD
NZL
GBR
BEL
ITA
DEU
CAN
CZE
FRA
SVK
USA
2. Regional Disparities in EMs
 (National average = 100)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
1. Regional Disparities in AEs
 (National average = 100)
0
300
50
100
150
200
250
POL
BGR
HUN
CHL
BRA
RUS
ROU
COL
Box 1.3. Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
36
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
are more pronounced than in advanced economies, 
these ranges have been shrinking since the early 1990s, 
following a rise before that. In contrast, advanced 
economies experienced shrinking disparities and 
within-country convergence until the 1980s, but 
divergence since. This pattern is widely documented 
for the United States,2 where the increase in spatial 
disparity has been particularly marked. 
Regional differences in per capita GDP also appear 
to be very persistent. A region’s relative position com-
pared with the country average is closely correlated 
with its relative position even 10 years ago: the 10-year 
lag of normalized GDP per capita at the regional level 
still predicts about three-quarters of the variation in 
normalized regional per capita GDP today.
Obstacles to Mobility?
Such persistence may raise concerns about adjust-
ment mechanisms. With free mobility of labor, 
workers in regions with high unemployment or low 
average wages would choose to migrate to regions with 
low unemployment and a higher average wage, and 
thereby over time eliminate the differential in unem-
ployment and wages.
However, wages may not be responsive enough to 
labor market conditions, leading to excessive swings in 
2See Berry and Glaeser (2005); Moretti (2011); Ganong and 
Shoag (2017); Giannone (2017); Austin, Glaeser, and Summers 
(2018); Economic Innovation Group (2018); Hendrickson, 
Muro, and Galston (2018); and Nunn, Parsons, and Sham-
baugh (2018).
unemployment in response to shocks. Liquidity con-
straints may force workers who become unemployed 
to leave the region rather than borrow and wait for the 
upturn, leading to excessive labor outmigration. Con-
versely, large fixed costs of migration may prevent the 
unemployed or those with fewer skills from moving. 
The behavior of house prices may affect the mobility 
of homeowners.
The differential impacts of globalization and auto-
mation across sectors, occupations, and geographic 
areas could also result in different regional effects of 
global forces. In the context of such diverse regional 
economies experiencing localized shocks, country-level 
policies may then be ineffective.3
Declining mobility has received a lot of attention 
in the United States, where interstate mobility is at a 
historic low. However, that fits with the broad decline 
of within-country migration in advanced economies.4 
Migration is also highly selective. Those with more 
education and the employed are more likely to move 
than those with less education or who are unem-
ployed. This could suggest that falling dynamism may 
be one of the factors underlying the recent increase in 
regional disparities in advanced economies.
3See Leichenko and Silva (2004); Chiquiar (2008); Kandi-
lov (2009); Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013); Hakobyan and 
McLaren (2016); and Partridge and others (2017). See also 
Chapter 2 of the April 2018 World Economic Outlook.
4It has increased in emerging markets, on average, though 
from very low levels.
Box 1.3 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
37
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Special Feature 
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Energy prices have decreased since the release of the 
October 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO), 
mostly driven by lower oil prices. After surging to their 
highest point since 2014 because of concerns over US 
sanctions against Iran, oil prices fell to their lowest 
point since the second half of 2017 following record US 
oil production growth, the prospects for weaker global 
economic growth, and temporary waivers for imports 
of Iranian oil. In response to falling prices, oil exporters 
agreed to cut production, providing some price support. 
While a growth slowdown in China and trade tensions 
put downward pressure on metal prices in 2018, metal 
prices recovered on fiscal stimulus in China, improved 
global market sentiment, and supply disruptions in some 
metal markets. Prices of agricultural goods have increased 
somewhat as news of weaker global income growth and 
excess supply conditions in some grain markets were 
more than offset by a recovery of world sugar prices and 
excess demand for animal protein sources. This special 
feature also includes an in-depth analysis of the relation-
ship between commodity prices and economic activity.
The IMF’s Primary Commodity Price Index declined 
by 6.9 percent between August 2018 and February 
2019, the reference periods for the October 2018 and 
current WEO, respectively (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 1). 
Amid high volatility, energy prices drove that decline, 
falling sharply by 17.0 percent, while base metal prices 
increased as trade tensions and weaker economic activity 
in China were more than offset by supply disruptions. 
Food prices increased by 1.9 percent as exceptional 
yields in some grain markets were more than offset by 
higher prices for meat and a rebound in sugar prices. 
Oil prices increased to more than $80 a barrel in early 
October, attaining their highest level since November 
2014 as US sanctions against oil imports from Iran 
loomed.1 In the last months of 2018, however, oil prices 
declined sharply thanks to record production growth in 
the United States and the issuance of waivers for most 
of the countries that import oil from Iran. In response 
to that slump, Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
The authors of this special feature are Christian Bogmans, Lama 
Kiyasseh, Akito Matsumoto, Andrea Pescatori (team leader), and 
Julia Xueliang Wang, with research assistance from Lama Kiyasseh 
and Julia Xueliang Wang.
1Oil price in this document refers to the IMF average petroleum 
spot price, which is based on UK Brent, Dubai, and West Texas 
Intermediate, equally weighted, unless specified otherwise.
Countries (OPEC) and non-OPEC oil exporters agreed 
to cut production. Coal prices decreased as China’s 
economy grew at its slowest pace since 1990, while 
natural gas prices fluctuated widely, driven by changing 
weather conditions, especially in North America.
Oil Price Roller Coaster
In early October, oil prices surpassed $80, their 
highest level since November 2014, ahead of US 
sanctions against Iran’s oil sector that took effect in 
November. However, the US administration issued 
waivers that allowed several major importing countries 
to continue importing crude oil from Iran. In addition, 
US crude oil production averaged 10.9 million barrels 
a day (mbd) in 2018, an increase of 1.6 mbd over the 
previous year (exceeding expectations by 0.3 mbd since 
the October WEO) and the largest growth in its his-
tory.2 Canada, Iraq, Russia, and Saudi Arabia also pro-
duced at high levels. As a result, oil prices fell sharply 
between early October and the end of November. On 
December 7, 2018, OPEC and non-OPEC (including 
Russia) countries agreed to cut their crude oil produc-
tion by 0.8 mbd and 0.4 mbd, respectively, from their 
October 2018 level, starting in January 2019 for an 
initial six-month period. Oil producers’ cuts, coupled 
with unplanned outages supported oil prices, which 
rebounded to above $60 in February. Natural gas spot 
prices declined sharply in response to ample supply fol-
lowing a volatile start of the winter because of chang-
ing weather conditions; long-term natural gas contract 
prices declined in tandem with medium-term oil price 
futures. Coal prices have decreased, prompted by lower 
Chinese economic activity as well as lower oil prices.
As of February, oil futures contracts indicated that 
Brent prices will stay at about $60 for the next five 
years. (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 2). Baseline assumptions, 
also based on futures prices, suggest average annual 
prices of $59.2 a barrel in 2019—a decrease of 13.4 per-
cent from the 2018 average—and $59.0 a barrel in 
2020 for the IMF’s average petroleum spot prices. On 
the demand side, lower oil prices are offsetting underly-
ing oil demand from weaker global economic growth—
the International Energy Agency expects oil demand 
2In September 2018, the Energy Information Agency expected an 
increase in US oil production of 1.3 mbd.
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
38
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
to grow by 1.3 mbd and 1.4 mbd in 2018 and 2019, 
respectively, a 0.1 mbd downward revision for both 
years (relative to the October WEO). On the supply 
side, since the beginning of 2019, mandatory produc-
tion cuts by Canada and the supply cuts by OPEC and 
non-OPEC countries, including involuntary outages in 
Venezuela, are gradually slowing oil output growth.
Although risks are balanced, substantial uncertainty 
around the baseline oil price projections remains 
because of high policy uncertainty (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 3). Upside risks to prices in the short term 
include geopolitical events in Middle East, civil unrest 
in Venezuela, a tougher US stance against Iran and 
Venezuela, and slower-than-expected US production 
growth. Downside risks include stronger-than-expected 
US production and noncompliance among OPEC and 
non-OPEC countries. Trade tensions and other risks to 
global growth can also further affect global activity and 
its prospects, in turn reducing oil demand.
 Metal Prices Rebounded
Metal prices increased 7.6 percent between August 
2018 and February 2019. By the end of 2018, the 
IMF annual base metals price index had reached its 
lowest point in 16 months due to weakening growth, 
notably in China, and global trade tensions. How-
ever, metal prices rebounded since then, driven by the 
expectation of fiscal stimulus in China and improved 
global market sentiment—coupled with a sharp 
increase in iron ore prices due to the Brumadinho dam 
disaster (Brazil).
Iron ore prices increased 28.8 percent between August 
2018 and February 2019 amid supply disruptions from 
the world’s top iron ore miners, including a derailment 
of a BHP iron ore train on November 5, a fire at a Rio 
Tinto’s export terminal on January 10, and the collapse 
of Brumadinho dam at Vale SA’s mine on January 
25. The dam collapse will have ramifications for the 
industry, which could experience a prolonged halt of 
operations at some iron ore mines and a slowdown of 
new projects. (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 4). Copper prices 
increased 4.1 percent on US–China trade optimism 
and market deficit for both concentrate and refined 
copper. Aluminum fell 9.2 percent, following the 
lifting of US sanctions on the giant Russian aluminum 
producer Rusal and improved prospects for removal of 
the production embargo by the Brazilian Federal govern-
ment on Hydro’s Alunorte (the world’s largest alumina 
refinery) in the second half of 2019. Nickel, a key 
All commodities
Energy
Food
Metals
October 2017 WEO
October 2018 WEO
April 2018 WEO
April 2019 WEO
Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval
Aluminum
Copper
Iron ore
Nickel
Figure 1.SF.1.  Commodity Market Developments
1. Commodity Price Indices
 (2016 = 100)
2005 06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2. Brent Futures Curves1
 (US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis) 
30
50
40
60
70
80
90
Dec. 2017
Dec. 18
Dec. 19
Dec. 20
Dec. 21
Dec. 22
Dec. 23
3. Brent Price Prospects2
 (US dollars a barrel)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; 
Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and are derived from 
future prices. October 2018 WEO prices are based on February 7, 2019, closing.
2Derived from prices of futures options on February 7, 2019. 
2013
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0
40
80
120
160
200
4. Metal Price Indices
 (Jan. 2, 2014 = 100)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Jan. 2014
Jan. 15
Jan. 16
Jan. 17
Jan. 18
Jan. 19
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
39
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENT AND FORECASTS
input for stainless steel and batteries in electric vehicles, 
dropped 5.4 percent between August and February 2019 
on stronger-than-expected production from Indonesia 
and the Philippines. Zinc, which is used mainly to 
galvanize steel, increased 7.8 percent from August to 
February 2019 on persistent supply tightness, partly due 
to the ongoing environmental clampdown in China, the 
world’s largest producer of zinc. Cobalt saw the deepest 
fall in prices of all metals during the reference period, 
declining by 49.3 percent due to rising supply from the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The IMF annual base metal price index is pro-
jected to increase by 2.4 percent in 2019 (relative to 
its average in 2018) and decrease by 2.2 percent per 
year in 2020. Upside risks to the outlook are higher- 
than-expected metals demand from China and supply 
shortages as a result of more stringent environmen-
tal regulations in major metal-producing countries. 
Downside risks stem from a faster moderation in 
global economic growth and a further slowdown of the 
Chinese economy (the biggest world metal consumer).
Food Prices Increased Slightly
Trade tensions, weak emerging market currencies, 
and exceptionally strong US grain yields constituted 
the primary drags on global food prices in the first 
three quarters of 2018. Since then, prices have been 
less volatile. The IMF’s food and beverage price index 
has increased slightly, by 1.9 percent, as news of weaker 
global economic activity and excess supply in markets, 
such as those for wheat and cotton, was outweighed by 
excess demand for animal protein sources and a recovery 
of world sugar prices from multiyear lows.
Wheat prices decreased by 15.8 percent between 
August 2018 and February 2019 as a competitive 
Russian ruble supported Russian exports. Absent news 
on harvests from major producing countries and in 
anticipation of lower trade tensions, a reversal of yields 
to the mean, and normalization of US dollar strength, 
prices of corn and soybeans have slowly moved up, 
increasing by 4.4 percent and 5.6 percent, respectively, 
between August 2018 and February 2019.
Poultry prices increased, by 3.9 percent, because of 
strong consumer demand. World sugar prices jumped 
by 23.7 percent, in part due to expectations of lower 
output in 2019 from top producers Brazil and India. 
Following weaker-than-expected demand and given 
ample stocks in China, the price of cotton declined by 
14.2 percent between August 2018 and February 2019, 
even as hot weather took a toll on global cotton crops.
Food prices are projected to decrease by 2.9 per-
cent a year in 2019 and then increase by 2.1 percent 
in 2020. Weather disruptions are an upside risk to 
the forecast. On February 14, 2019, the US National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced 
that weak El Niño climate conditions have taken effect 
and are expected to continue into spring, which could 
have local impacts on crops. A resolution of the trade 
conflict between the United States—the world’s largest 
food exporter—and China is another source of upside 
potential for prices.
Commodity Prices and Economic Activity
Introduction
What do commodity prices tell us about economic 
activity? This special feature analyzes the bountiful and 
rich information embedded in the prices of the many 
commodities traded in major commodity markets around 
the world and shows how this information is useful to 
nowcast or even forecast global economic activity.3
There are at least two major reasons commodity 
prices are useful indicators of global economic activity. 
First, even in a world where services take the spot-
light, commodities still represent about 17 percent of 
global trade and are fundamental production inputs.4 
A change in global economic activity will therefore 
be reflected in the global demand for commodities 
(Barsky and Kilian 2004; Alquist, Bhattarai, and 
Coibion forthcoming). Second, commodities are stor-
able, so, like those of financial assets, their prices reflect 
both current and expected future demand and supply 
conditions. Given that many commodities are regularly 
traded in liquid and deep markets, their prices can 
swiftly move in response to changes in market tight-
ness, including news and changes in sentiment about 
global economic conditions.
In practice, it is not easy to infer economic activity 
from commodity prices. The presence of commodity 
supply shocks and commodity-specific demand factors 
is, in fact, a prominent confounding influence5 and 
3Nowcasting is a statistical model that exploits real-time data to 
provide a timely estimate of major economic activity indicators (such 
as GDP) that are usually released by statistical agencies with a delay.
4Industrial commodities (metals and raw agricultural materials) 
are essential inputs for the manufacturing sector. Energy commodi-
ties, because they are crucial to the transportation and petrochemical 
sectors and to power generation, indirectly affect the entire global 
production system. And food and beverage commodities, usually 
affected by income, underpin the food chain.
5For example, extreme weather conditions can substantially affect 
crop output and demand for natural gas.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
40
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
even perhaps a reason for reverse causality—especially in 
the case of oil—potentially introducing an element of 
countercyclicality (Hamilton 1996, 2003). To tackle this 
problem, the analysis is split into two parts. The first 
identifies commodity price cycles and provides insights 
into the cyclical synchronization between commodity 
prices and economic activity. The second part exploits 
comovement among commodity prices to isolate global 
demand factors from other confounding influences 
and then tests whether the extracted global factors have 
nowcasting and predictive power for economic activity.
Cyclicality and Comovement of Commodity Prices
This section identifies commodity price cycles and 
looks, across a broad set of commodity prices, at com-
modities with the highest pair-wise synchronization with 
economic activity (that is, bellwethers). It also derives a 
commodity-market-wide synchronization measure.
The methodology to identify periods of contraction 
and expansion follows the business-cycle-dating proce-
dure of Harding and Pagan (2002).6 This procedure is 
applied to an unbalanced panel, starting in 1957, of 57 
(real) commodity price series that fall into four broad 
categories: energy, metals, food and beverages, and 
raw agricultural materials.7 The same procedure is also 
applied to detrended global industrial production and 
GDP.8 (Figure 1.SF.2 presents four examples.)
6Drawing on Cashin, McDermott, and Scott (2002), the Harding 
and Pagan (2002) methodology is used to identify peaks and troughs 
in the time path of real commodity prices. A candidate turning point is 
identified as a local maximum or minimum if the price in that month 
is either greater or less than the price in the two months before and the 
two months after. The sequence of resulting candidate turning points 
is then required to alternate between peaks and troughs. Furthermore, 
each phase defined by the turning points (expansion or contraction) 
must be at least 12 months long. (This commodity-price-cycle-dating 
algorithm is an adaptation of the business-cycle-dating algorithm set 
out by Bry and Boschan (1971) and later popularized by Harding 
and Pagan (2002). An advantage of using a Bry and Boschan–type 
algorithm to date commodity price cycles is that it provides a tractable 
means of applying an objective cycle-dating rule to a large data set.)
7All commodity price series are monthly averages of prices from 
the IMF’s Primary Commodity Price System and are denominated 
in US dollars and divided by US consumer price inflation. Prices 
are not prefiltered, given that most commodities do not show a 
clear trend. The academic literature still debates whether commodity 
prices, in general, have a trend. Grilli and Yang (1988) argues that 
commodity prices have a downward tendency; more recently, Jacks 
(2013) and Stuermer (2018) found a modest upward trend. Results 
are mostly unchanged if a linear trend is removed.
8A Hodrick-Prescott filter with a very low lambda is used to 
extract a stable trend from global industrial production and GDP. 
Quarterly GDP data have been interpolated monthly. Although the 
dating algorithm can handle nonstationarity, some statistics that 
Brent, USD/bbl, (left scale)
Global industrial production (right scale)
Copper, USD/mt, (left scale)
Global industrial production (right scale)
Cotton, US cents/lb, (left scale)
Global industrial production (right scale)
Coffee, US cents/kg, (left scale) 
Global GDP (right scale)
Figure 1.SF.2.  Commodity Cycles and Economic Activity
1. Coffee
2. Cotton
3. Copper
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Peaks and troughs are identiﬁed using the Harding and Pagan’s (2002) 
business cycle dating procedure. Global industrial production (IP) is spliced back 
using OECD IP (1975/79) and US IP (<1975). Dark (light) shaded areas represent 
synchronized contractions (expansions) in both economic activity and the selected 
commodity price. White shaded areas represent asynchronized movements. bbl = 
barrel; kg = kilogram; lb = pound; mt = metric ton; USD = US dollar.
4. Brent
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
1957
70
80
90
2000
10
18
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
–0.06
–0.04
–0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
1979
90
2000
10
18
0
1,500
3,000
4,500
6,000
7,500
1957
70
80
90
2000
10
18
0
50
100
150
200
250
1957
70
80
90
2000
10
18
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
41
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENT AND FORECASTS
Most commodities show asymmetric phases charac-
terized by longer and dull contractions punctuated by 
sharp expansions (Table 1.SF.1).9 Energy commodities 
stand out because they have the longest and sharpest 
phases; a full energy cycle tends to last slightly less 
than four years. Overall, however, the characterization 
of cycles is quite similar across commodity groups and 
appears to be in line with a long-standing body of 
literature that highlights the interaction of commodity 
supply shocks with storage demand as an important 
driver of commodity price movements (Deaton and 
Laroque 1992; Cashin, McDermott, and Scott 2002). 
Supply shocks, especially when inventory stocks or 
spare production capacity is low, tend to cause spikes 
in prices, but a large array of literature also stresses 
the role of demand factors (Barsky and Kilian 2004; 
Alquist, Bhattarai, and Coibion forthcoming—among 
many). It is therefore interesting to calculate the 
synchronization of phases (or technically, concordance) 
between commodity prices and economic activity.10
With few exceptions, agricultural prices, especially 
food prices, are, on average, only modestly in sync 
with economic activity (Figure 1.SF.3). Bellwethers 
of global industrial production are mostly base metals 
(such as zinc, copper, and tin) and, to a lesser extent, 
energy and fertilizers. Propane shows the highest 
synchronization with global industrial production, 
but its time series and the time series for natural gas 
compare stationary and nonstationary series (for example, concor-
dance) can be misleading.
9Online Annex 1.SF.1 (available at www​.imf/​en/​Publications/​
WEO) shows cyclical properties for each individual commodity price 
series and tests different sets of parameters for the dating algorithm 
that impose longer minimum durations for phases and cycles.
10Technically, the synchronization metric used is the concordance, 
which calculates the share of time two series that are in the same 
phase (Harding and Pagan 2002). Concordance is bounded between 
0 and 1; two independent random walks have a concordance of 0.5.
start only in 1992 and hence are shorter than for most 
other commodities—suggesting a possible increase in 
synchronization between commodities and economic 
activity over the past few decades, which is also consis-
tent with the findings of the factor analysis in the next 
section. Interestingly, some raw agricultural materials, 
such as cotton, have relatively high synchronization 
with global industrial production while, in general, 
food and beverages, relative to other commodities, are 
more synchronized to global GDP than to industrial 
production. This is because income, rather than pro-
duction, plays a more relevant role in their demand (an 
example is arabica coffee).11
Periods of sizable movement in economic activity 
(booms or busts) should increase comovement, and 
therefore synchronization, among all commodities. 
Most commodities, not only bellwethers, should move 
in sync with global industrial production or GDP. 
Accordingly, it is useful to derive a metric that calcu-
lates the share of commodities that are in the expan-
sion (contraction) phase—that is, a commodity-wide 
concordance.12 This metric should be related to global 
economic activity, with turning points (periods of 
maximum or minimum synchronization among com-
modity prices) falling within expansionary or contrac-
tionary phases of global activity. The commodity-wide 
concordance should, thus, be indicative of how 
much global demand factors, relative to supply or 
11As expected, the metals that are less in sync with economic 
activity are precious metals, such as gold and silver, and those that 
have not always been freely traded in spot markets, such as iron ore 
(before 2009), because both buyers and suppliers seek long-term 
security in a market with little output growth. Uranium is not freely 
traded because of its unique applications and geopolitical sensitivity.
12A value of 1 (–1) means that all commodity prices are expand-
ing (contracting) simultaneously—perfect synchronization—while 
a value of 0 implies that half of commodity prices are in the same 
phase, lowest synchronization.
Table 1.SF.1. Commodity Price Cycle Descriptive Statistics
Duration
Amplitude
Sharpness
(Months)
(Log difference, percent)
(Log difference, percent)
Expansion
Contraction
Expansion
Contraction
Expansion
Contraction
Energy
20
24
64.72
62.81
3.37
3.01
Base Metals
18
24
55.19
57.98
3.05
2.41
Food and Beverages
16
20
45.25
49.60
2.80
2.33
Agricultural Raw Materials
18
22
43.27
46.70
2.46
2.00
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Price cycles are identified using the Harding and Pagan (2002) methodology. Duration measures the average length (in months) of a price phase 
(expansion or contraction). Amplitude measures the average price change (in percentage terms) from trough to peak in case of an expansion, and from peak 
to trough in case of a contraction. Sharpness measures the average price increase per month (in percentage terms) experienced during an expansion, and the 
average price decline during a contraction. All statistics are calculated by averaging over all commodities in a particular group.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
42
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
commodity-specific demand factors, are driving com-
modity prices in a given period.
Figure 1.SF.4 shows that commodity-wide concor-
dance anticipates turning points of economic activity, 
given that it typically peaks (or troughs) when activity 
is expanding or contracting most. This is a promising 
result, highlighting the presence of common latent 
factor(s) related to global activity that drive commodity 
prices. The next section will try to exploit this insight 
to nowcast and forecast movements in the global busi-
ness cycle using commodity prices.
Do Commodity Prices Help Nowcast and Forecast Global 
Economic Activity?
To isolate movements in commodity prices that 
are driven by global economic activity, a factor model 
is estimated at monthly frequency using principal 
components (Stock and Watson 2002; West and Wong 
2014; Delle Chiaie, Ferrara, and Giannone 2018).13 
13The approach in Delle Chiaie, Ferrara, and Giannone (2018) 
that allows for group-specific factors gives slightly inferior results.
Agricultural raw materials
Energy
Fertilizers
Food and beverage
Metals
Asynchronization line
Figure 1.SF.3.  Synchronization with Economic Activity
Propane
Zinc
WTI
Copper
Sunﬂower seed oil
Platinum
Rice
Sorghum
Soybean meal
Fishmeal
Coarse wool
Orange juice
Potassium
Silver
Gold
Fish
Tea
Iron ore
Bananas
Maize (corn)
Beef
Robusta coffee
Softwood logs
Swine (pork)
Hardwood logs
Oats
Poultry
Dairy products (milk)
Cocoa
World sugar
Olive oil
Uranium
Sawn softwood
US sugar
Japan natural gas
Nitrogen
Tin
Cobalt
Nickel
Cotton
Brent
Arabica coffee
Palladium
Hard sawnwood
US natural gas
Aluminum
Palm oil
Australia coal
Rapeseed oil
Phosphate
Hides
Barley
Wheat
Lead
EU natural gas
Rubber
Soybean oil
Soybean
1. Higher Synchronization
2. Lower Synchronization
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars represent the synchronization of a given commodity with de-trended 
global industrial production (IP) (darker bars) and GDP (lighter bars). 
Synchronization is deﬁned as the concordance between the price cycle of a given 
commodity and the business cycle (de-trended GDP or IP) where phases of 
expansions and contractions are identiﬁed using Harding and Pagan’s (2002) 
procedure. Concordance calculates the share of time two series are in the same 
phase; a concordance above 0.5 denotes a positive synchronization. WTI = West 
Texas Intermediate.
Commodity-wide concordance (left scale)
Global industrial production (right scale)
Figure 1.SF.4.  Commodity-Wide Synchronization
(Percent)
1960 65
70
75
80
85
90
95 2000 05
10
15 18
–120
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
–12
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Global industrial production (IP) is spliced back using OECD IP (1975–79) 
and US IP (<1975). Shading represents contractions in the IP variable. 
Commodity-wide concordance is the share of commodities in expansion 
(contraction). 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
43
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENT AND FORECASTS
Given that supply- and commodity-specific demand 
shocks make commodity prices diverge, estimating 
latent factors that cause commodity prices to comove 
should help construct a proxy for global economic 
activity.14 Following this logic, the higher the number 
of commodities used, the better the identification of 
global demand factors. In practice, however, it may be 
preferable to exclude commodities, such as gold and 
silver, that behave more like financial assets or those 
that are too closely related, such as soybean meal and 
soybean oil (Kilian and Zhou 2018).15
The first two extracted factors explain about 20 per-
cent of the variance in commodity price monthly 
changes. The relevance of the remaining factors drops 
off quickly and is not statistically related to economic 
activity.16 Figure 1.SF.5 plots the first and second 
latent factors extracted jointly with (demeaned) global 
GDP growth, cumulated over time. Even though the 
first and second factors are contemporaneously orthog-
onal by construction, when cumulated, they show a 
positive correlation, 0.67. The first factor is a global 
factor; the second represents a negative demand shift 
for agricultural products relative to energy and metals 
and is therefore a relative-price factor.17 Given that the 
relative-price factor helps account for movements in 
agricultural prices, first factors are extracted by first 
splitting the sample into agricultural and nonagricul-
tural (energy and metals) commodities. Interestingly, 
the global factor and the relative-price factor are very 
14The idea that global demand causes comovement in commodity 
prices is clearly not novel. For example, Barsky and Kilian (2004) 
interprets the strong comovement of the real price of oil and a real 
price index of industrial raw materials and metals in the early 1970s 
as evidence of a common demand component in both prices. More 
generally, a large body of literature is based on a range of different 
models and data that finds most of the fluctuations in (especially 
industrial) commodity prices are driven by shifts in aggregate 
demand (see, for example, Barsky and Kilian 2004; Kilian 2009; 
Nakov and Pescatori 2010; Kilian and Murphy 2014; Alquist, 
Bhattarai, and Coibion forthcoming; and Delle Chiaie, Ferrara, and 
Giannone 2018, among others).
14Interestingly, Pindyck and Rotemberg (1990) notes how 
seemingly uncorrelated commodities (whose cross-price elasticities 
of demand and supply are close to zero) show excess comovement, 
which suggests the presence of a latent global (possibly heteroscedas-
tic) factor that affects all prices at the same time.
15To estimate the latent factors, the log differences of prices 
(divided by the US consumer price index) have been z-scored. The 
use of log-detrended or log differences is less relevant for the estima-
tion (Kilian and Zhou 2018).
16This is in line with Stock and Watson (2002). That study uses 
a different set of indicators to show that the first two factors are the 
most informative and have the highest predictive content.
17This can be seen by inspecting the factor loadings, avail-
able on request.
well approximated by a linear combination of the two 
first factors of the split subsamples.18 The relative-price 
factor, however, has a negative sign on the first factor 
of the agriculture subsample. The relationship between 
the global factor and global GDP is visually quite strik-
ing (Figure 1.SF.5), but the relative-price factor also 
seems to move with GDP during some sharp down-
turns (by leading them) and subsequent recoveries.19
Because the first release of global industrial produc-
tion lags by two months and that of GDP lags by one 
quarter, they are often substantially revised, so it is 
useful to test whether latent factors can help nowcast 
global activity. To do so, global industrial production 
and GDP are regressed on their own lagged value 
18A regression of the global (relative-price) factor on the first 
factors extracted from the agriculture and nonagriculture samples 
separately yields an R-squared of 0.99 (0.88).
19The (negative of the) first factor in levels mimics movements 
in the US dollar real effective exchange rate (REER), which is not 
a surprise, given that the dollar is the numerator for all commodity 
prices in the sample. This association is, however, much weaker at 
higher frequencies, such as monthly changes, and weakens further 
when, to construct the REER, noncommodity currencies are 
excluded because, as is well known, they move inversely with the 
price of the commodity exported (Chen and Rogoff 2003). Intro-
ducing the US dollar REER into the nowcasting and forecasting 
exercise does not alter the results.
Global GDP (right scale)
Global factor
Relative factor
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: First and second principal components are cumulated; log difference in 
global GDP is de-meaned and cumulated.
Figure 1.SF.5.  Latent Factors and Economic Activity
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
– 0.10
– 0.08
– 0.06
– 0.04
– 0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
1980
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
18
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
44
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
and latent factors and on one period of their own lag. 
Whether the introduction of the latent factors statis-
tically improves the nowcast estimate of the economic 
activity indicator (industrial production or GDP) is 
tested, and the results are compared with a benchmark 
autoregressive (AR)(p) process (following Stock and 
Watson 2002). Varying specifications are tried: only 
the global factor is used (specification 1); the global 
and relative factors are introduced together (specifica-
tion 2); the sample is split into agricultural and nonag-
ricultural commodities and the respective first factors 
are used (specification 3). All specifications can include 
their own lags, optimally chosen.
Results shown in Table 1.SF.2 indicate that for 
industrial production, at monthly frequency, intro-
ducing the global factor and the relative-price factor 
increases the ability to nowcast industrial production 
relative to the benchmark AR(p) process—in which 
the number of lags, p, is determined optimally. 
Because monthly industrial production growth is 
quite volatile, nowcasting yields modest improve-
ments. More striking is its ability to nowcast GDP 
(Table 1.SF.3). The improvement in the root mean 
square error relative to the AR(p) benchmark is 
already 10 percent with only the global factor from 
one month of commodity price information. The 
improvement increases to 15 percent when the quar-
ter is completed. The R-squared is also high, at about 
0.48.20 Interestingly, commodity prices are mostly 
informative during periods of high economic volatil-
ity, when the AR(p) process fails the most (Figure 1.
SF.6). Results are similar when using the two first 
factors extracted from the agricultural and nonagri-
cultural group taken separately.
Factor lags are also significant, so it is possible 
to test whether commodity prices also help predict 
global activity. Forecast evaluations are based on the 
out-of-sample forecast performance. Given data for 
industrial production, GDP, and estimated princi-
pal components, each specification is first estimated 
using the sample period 1980–98 and then recur-
sively reestimated to forecast for 2000–18.21 For 
each period, the model forecasts for next period’s 
one-month-ahead and three-month-ahead industrial 
20Regression results are available upon request. It is also worth 
noting that predictability declines when using global GDP (indus-
trial production) at market exchange rates, probably because of the 
greater relevance of services in advanced economies.
21Each model is reestimated with the addition of new data 
(recursive scheme). Models using principal components have a fixed 
lag length, but the optimal lag length of the AR model is chosen 
each time, using Bayesian information criteria or Akaike informa-
tion criteria.
Table 1.SF.2. Global Industrial Production Nowcast
Benchmark
Specification 1
Specification 2
Specification 3
RMSE
0.55%
0.54%
0.53%
0.54%
Ratio
1
0.99
0.97
0.98
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample period = January 1980 to December 2018. Benchmark = autoregressive process with the optimal lag based on Bayesian 
information criterion; Specification 1 = first principal component; Specification 2 = first two principal components; Specification 3 = first 
principal components of agricultural and nonagricultural commodities. Optimal lag of independent variables added based on Bayesian 
information criterion for all specifications. RMSE = root mean square error; Ratio = relative RMSE, RMSE divided by benchmark RMSE.
Table 1.SF.3. Global GDP Nowcast
Metric
Benchmark
Specification 1
Specification 2
Specification 3
One Month 
Information
RMSE
0.42%
0.38%
0.37%
0.38%
Ratio
1
0.90
0.90
0.90
Two Months 
Information
RMSE
0.42%
0.36%
0.36%
0.36%
Ratio
1
0.87
0.86
0.86
Quarter  
Information
RMSE
0.42%
0.36%
0.35%
0.35%
Ratio
1
0.86
0.84
0.85
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample period = 1980:Q1 to 2018:Q3. Benchmark = autoregressive process with the optimal lag based on Bayesian information criterion; Specification 
1 = first principal component; Specification 2 = first two principal components; Specification 3 = first principal components of agricultural and nonagricultural 
commodities. One-period lagged dependent variable is added in all specifications. Information is available one, two, or three months into the quarter. RMSE = 
root mean square error; Ratio = relative RMSE, RMSE divided by benchmark RMSE.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
45
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENT AND FORECASTS
production growth.22 The forecast performance is 
based on the root mean squared forecast error.
22After running the forecast through entire periods, several 
forecast performance measures are calculated. These include the root 
mean squared prediction errors between model forecasts and actual 
growth, mean absolute prediction errors, bias (mean prediction 
error), and efficiency (the correlation between prediction error and 
prediction). Results are available on request.
Results in Table 1.SF.4 show that all specifica-
tions improve the one-month-ahead global industrial 
production forecast (relative to the benchmark): 
specification (2), which uses both the global and 
relative factors, does best and improves the forecast by 
10 percent.
The one-quarter-ahead GDP forecast is also 
improved, but only as price information in the quarter 
becomes available.23 In practice, global GDP data may 
not be available in the next two quarters. For exam-
ple, in May, first-quarter world GDP is not available, 
whereas data for April commodity prices are. This 
timeliness is why commodity prices are useful to fore-
cast GDP growth for the next quarter. As months pass, 
the forecasting performance improves because com-
modity price movements more accurately reflect the 
current quarter. When the full quarter is available, the 
root mean squared forecast error of the next-quarter 
GDP is improved by almost 10 percent relative to 
the benchmark.
In conclusion, there is a wealth of information 
embedded in commodity prices that can be very useful 
for taking the pulse of global economic activity. Once 
idiosyncratic factors are eliminated, major movements 
in prices of base metals, and, to some extent, energy 
and agricultural products, can tell us a lot about the 
state of the global economy, especially when economic 
activity takes place during significant fluctuations—
when the need for forecasting and nowcasting is 
most compelling.
23The specification is tested when price data for the first, both first 
and second, and all three month(s) of the quarter are available.
Actual
AR(1) + two factors
AR(1)
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AR = autoregressive process; two factors = ﬁrst two principal components. 
Regressions are based on quarterly data from 1980:Q1 to 2018:Q3.
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
Figure 1.SF.6.  Global Real GDP Growth Nowcast: Actual
versus Fitted Value
(Percent, quarter-over-quarter)
Table 1.SF.4. Forecasting Global Industrial Production and GDP
Metric
Benchmark
Specification 1
Specification 2
Specification 3
IP
Month
RMSE
0.55%
0.50%
0.49%
0.50%
Ratio
1
0.92
0.90
0.92
GDP
One Month 
Information
RMSE
0.51%
0.50%
0.51%
0.51%
Ratio
1
0.99
1.00
1.00
Two Months 
Information
RMSE
0.51%
0.48%
0.48%
0.48%
Ratio
1
0.95
0.95
0.95
Quarter  
Information
RMSE
0.51%
0.46%
0.46%
0.46%
Ratio
1
0.91
0.91
0.90
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Benchmark = autoregressive process with the optimal lag based on Bayesian information criterion; Specification 1 = first principal component; Specification 
2 = first two principal components; Specification 3 = first principal components of agricultural and nonagricultural commodities. One-period lagged dependent 
variable is added in all specifications for IP. Information is available one, two, or three months into the quarter. IP = industrial production; RMSE = root mean 
square error; Ratio = relative RMSE, RMSE divided by benchmark RMSE.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
46
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
Europe
2.2
1.2
1.8
3.2
2.9
2.8
2.2
2.2
2.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Europe 
1.8
1.3
1.6
1.9
1.4
1.6
2.7
2.6
2.5
7.1
7.0
6.9
Euro Area4,5
1.8
1.3
1.5
1.8
1.3
1.6
3.0
2.9
2.8
8.2
8.0
7.7
Germany
1.5
0.8
1.4
1.9
1.3
1.7
7.4
7.1
6.8
3.4
3.4
3.3
France
1.5
1.3
1.4
2.1
1.3
1.5
–0.7
–0.4
0.0
9.1
8.8
8.4
Italy
0.9
0.1
0.9
1.2
0.8
1.2
2.6
2.9
2.6
10.6
10.7
10.5
Spain
2.5
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.2
1.6
0.8
0.8
0.8
15.3
14.2
14.1
Netherlands
2.5
1.8
1.7
1.6
2.3
1.6
9.8
9.3
8.9
3.8
3.7
3.6
Belgium
1.4
1.3
1.4
2.3
1.9
1.6
0.4
0.3
0.5
5.9
5.9
5.9
Austria
2.7
2.0
1.7
2.1
1.8
2.0
2.3
2.0
1.9
4.9
5.1
5.0
Greece
2.1
2.4
2.2
0.8
1.1
1.4
–3.4
–2.7
–2.6
19.6
18.5
17.5
Portugal 
2.1
1.7
1.5
1.2
1.0
1.7
–0.6
–0.4
–0.5
7.1
6.8
6.3
Ireland
6.8
4.1
3.4
0.7
1.2
1.5
10.0
9.1
8.3
5.7
5.3
5.0
Finland
2.4
1.9
1.7
1.2
1.3
1.5
–0.5
0.1
0.4
7.5
7.2
7.1
Slovak Republic
4.1
3.7
3.5
2.5
2.4
2.2
–2.0
–1.0
–0.7
6.6
6.1
6.0
Lithuania
3.4
2.9
2.6
2.5
2.3
2.3
1.4
1.1
0.6
6.3
6.3
6.2
Slovenia
4.5
3.4
2.8
1.7
1.4
1.6
6.5
4.4
3.4
5.3
4.8
4.9
Luxembourg
3.0
2.7
2.8
2.0
1.6
1.9
5.2
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
Latvia
4.8
3.2
3.1
2.6
2.4
2.4
–1.0
–1.4
–1.7
7.4
7.3
7.3
Estonia
3.9
3.0
2.9
3.4
3.0
2.8
1.7
1.5
1.1
5.4
4.7
3.5
Cyprus 
3.9
3.5
3.3
0.8
0.5
1.6
–5.6
–7.3
–6.5
8.4
7.0
6.0
Malta
6.4
5.2
4.4
1.7
1.8
1.9
10.1
9.3
8.8
4.0
4.1
4.3
United Kingdom
1.4
1.2
1.4
2.5
1.8
2.0
–3.9
–4.2
–4.0
4.1
4.2
4.4
Switzerland
2.5
1.1
1.5
0.9
0.8
0.9
9.8
9.0
9.0
2.6
2.8
2.8
Sweden
2.3
1.2
1.8
2.0
1.9
1.7
2.0
2.4
2.5
6.3
6.3
6.3
Norway
1.4
2.0
1.9
2.8
1.9
1.7
8.1
7.4
7.2
3.9
3.7
3.7
Czech Republic
2.9
2.9
2.7
2.2
2.3
2.0
0.2
–0.6
–0.8
2.5
3.1
3.2
Denmark
1.2
1.7
1.8
0.7
1.1
1.3
6.0
5.5
5.1
5.0
4.9
4.9
Iceland
4.6
1.7
2.9
2.7
2.8
2.5
2.9
0.8
1.1
2.7
3.3
3.6
San Marino
1.1
0.8
0.7
1.6
1.6
1.7
0.4
0.4
0.2
8.0
8.1
8.1
Emerging and Developing Europe6
3.6
0.8
2.8
8.7
9.0
7.5
–2.2
–0.9
–1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Turkey
2.6
–2.5
2.5
16.3
17.5
14.1
–3.6
0.7
–0.4
11.0
12.7
11.4
Poland
5.1
3.8
3.1
1.6
2.0
1.9
–0.7
–1.1
–1.5
3.8
3.6
3.5
Romania
4.1
3.1
3.0
4.6
3.3
3.0
–4.6
–5.2
–4.8
4.2
4.8
4.9
Hungary
4.9
3.6
2.7
2.8
3.2
3.1
0.5
0.5
0.6
3.7
3.5
3.4
Bulgaria5
3.2
3.3
3.0
2.6
2.4
2.3
3.9
1.9
1.3
5.2
5.0
5.0
Serbia
4.4
3.5
4.0
2.0
2.0
2.5
–5.2
–5.5
–5.0
13.7
13.4
13.2
Croatia
2.7
2.6
2.5
1.5
1.5
1.6
2.9
2.1
1.6
10.0
9.0
8.0
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia. 
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
47
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
Asia
5.5
5.4
5.4
2.4
2.5
2.8
1.2
1.2
1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Asia
1.8
1.7
1.7
1.3
1.3
1.6
3.9
3.9
3.9
3.2
3.1
3.1
Japan
0.8
1.0
0.5
1.0
1.1
1.5
3.5
3.5
3.6
2.4
2.4
2.4
Korea 
2.7
2.6
2.8
1.5
1.4
1.6
4.7
4.6
4.5
3.8
4.0
3.9
Australia
2.8
2.1
2.8
2.0
2.0
2.3
–2.1
–2.1
–2.1
5.3
4.8
4.8
Taiwan Province of China
2.6
2.5
2.5
1.5
1.1
1.2
11.6
11.4
10.7
3.8
3.7
3.7
Singapore
3.2
2.3
2.4
0.4
1.3
1.4
17.7
17.6
17.1
2.1
2.0
2.0
Hong Kong SAR
3.0
2.7
3.0
2.4
2.4
2.5
3.5
3.2
3.4
2.8
2.8
2.8
New Zealand
3.0
2.5
2.9
1.6
2.0
1.9
–4.0
–4.4
–4.3
4.2
4.4
4.4
Macao SAR 
4.7
4.3
4.2
3.0
2.5
2.7
35.0
37.4
38.7
1.8
1.8
1.8
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.4
6.3
6.3
2.6
2.8
3.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
China
6.6
6.3
6.1
2.1
2.3
2.5
0.4
0.4
0.3
3.8
3.8
3.8
India4
7.1
7.3
7.5
3.5
3.9
4.2
–2.5
–2.5
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
ASEAN-5
5.2
5.1
5.2
2.8
2.8
3.0
0.6
0.6
0.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Indonesia
5.2
5.2
5.2
3.2
3.3
3.6
–3.0
–2.7
–2.6
5.3
5.2
5.0
Thailand
4.1
3.5
3.5
1.1
1.0
1.3
7.7
7.1
6.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
Malaysia
4.7
4.7
4.8
1.0
2.0
2.6
2.3
2.1
2.1
3.3
3.3
3.3
Philippines
6.2
6.5
6.6
5.2
3.8
3.3
–2.6
–2.2
–1.8
5.3
5.5
5.4
Vietnam
7.1
6.5
6.5
3.5
3.1
3.3
3.0
3.1
2.6
2.2
2.2
2.2
Other Emerging and Developing 
Asia5
5.3
6.3
6.2
4.5
4.6
5.3
–3.3
–2.8
–2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Emerging Asia6
6.5
6.3
6.3
2.6
2.8
3.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Mon-
golia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) economies, China, and India.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
48
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
North America
2.7
2.2
1.9
2.7
2.2
2.7
–2.3
–2.4
–2.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
United States 
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.4
2.0
2.7
–2.3
–2.4
–2.6
3.9
3.8
3.7
Canada
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.2
1.7
1.9
–2.6
–3.1
–2.8
5.8
5.9
6.0
Mexico
2.0
1.6
1.9
4.9
3.8
3.1
–1.8
–1.7
–1.9
3.3
3.5
3.6
Puerto Rico4
–2.3
–1.1
–0.7
2.5
0.3
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
11.0
11.0
11.2
South America5
0.4
1.1
2.4
7.1
8.1
6.1
–1.8
–1.9
–1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Brazil
1.1
2.1
2.5
3.7
3.6
4.1
–0.8
–1.7
–1.6
12.3
11.4
10.2
Argentina
–2.5
–1.2
2.2
34.3
43.7
23.2
–5.4
–2.0
–2.5
9.2
9.9
9.9
Colombia
2.7
3.5
3.6
3.2
3.4
3.2
–3.8
–3.9
–3.8
9.7
9.7
9.5
Venezuela
–18.0
–25.0
–10.0
929,789.5
10,000,000
10,000,000
6.0
1.4
–1.9
35.0
44.3
47.9
Chile
4.0
3.4
3.2
2.3
2.3
3.0
–3.1
–3.2
–2.8
6.9
6.5
6.2
Peru
4.0
3.9
4.0
1.3
2.4
2.0
–1.5
–1.4
–1.5
6.7
6.6
6.5
Ecuador
1.1
–0.5
0.2
–0.2
0.6
1.2
–0.7
0.4
1.4
3.7
4.3
4.7
Bolivia
4.3
4.0
3.9
2.3
2.3
3.6
–4.7
–5.2
–5.1
4.0
4.0
4.0
Uruguay
2.1
1.9
3.0
7.6
7.6
7.2
–0.6
–0.8
–1.2
8.0
8.1
7.9
Paraguay
3.7
3.5
4.0
4.0
3.6
4.0
0.5
–0.8
0.4
5.6
5.7
5.8
Central America6
2.7
3.2
3.5
2.6
2.7
3.0
–3.6
–2.9
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Caribbean7
4.7
3.6
3.7
3.7
2.4
4.3
–2.3
–2.3
–2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Latin America and the Caribbean8
1.0
1.4
2.4
6.2
6.5
5.1
–1.9
–1.9
–2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
East Caribbean Currency Union9
2.1
4.0
3.1
1.3
1.6
2.0
–10.5
–9.6
–9.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Aggregates exclude Venezuela. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the 
Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5Includes Guyana and Suriname. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America comprises Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See country-specific notes for Argentina and 
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as Anguilla 
and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
49
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Annex Table 1.1.4.  Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account 
Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
Commonwealth of Independent States4
2.8
2.2
2.3
4.5
5.7
5.0
5.0
3.8
3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Net Energy Exporters 
2.7
2.1
2.2
4.0
5.7
5.0
6.2
4.9
4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Russia
2.3
1.6
1.7
2.9
5.0
4.5
7.0
5.7
5.1
4.8
4.8
4.7
Kazakhstan
4.1
3.2
3.2
6.0
5.5
5.0
0.6
0.1
0.6
5.0
5.0
5.0
Uzbekistan
5.0
5.0
5.5
17.9
16.5
11.9
–7.8
–5.6
–4.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Azerbaijan
1.4
3.4
3.1
2.3
2.5
2.5
12.6
11.7
13.3
5.0
5.0
5.0
Turkmenistan
6.2
6.3
6.0
13.6
13.0
9.0
3.1
–2.3
–3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Net Energy Importers 
3.6
2.8
3.1
7.6
6.2
5.3
–4.3
–4.0
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ukraine 
3.3
2.7
3.0
10.9
8.0
5.9
–3.7
–2.5
–2.4
9.0
8.5
8.1
Belarus
3.0
1.8
2.2
4.9
5.0
5.0
–2.3
–4.0
–2.3
0.8
0.8
0.8
Georgia
4.7
4.6
5.0
2.6
2.5
3.0
–7.9
–8.0
–7.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Armenia
5.0
4.6
4.5
2.5
2.1
3.0
–6.2
–4.6
–4.3
18.1
17.9
17.7
Tajikistan
7.0
5.0
4.5
3.8
6.7
6.2
–5.3
–7.0
–6.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kyrgyz Republic
3.5
3.8
3.4
1.5
2.2
4.9
–9.8
–10.9
–8.6
6.8
6.8
6.8
Moldova 
4.0
3.5
3.8
3.1
3.3
5.1
–9.9
–7.7
–8.0
4.1
4.0
4.0
Memorandum
Caucasus and Central Asia5
4.2
4.1
4.1
8.2
7.8
6.4
0.5
–0.5
–0.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income CIS Countries6
5.0
4.8
5.1
11.9
11.3
9.0
–7.8
–6.6
–6.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Net Energy Exporters Excluding Russia
4.1
4.0
4.1
9.0
8.4
6.7
1.6
0.5
0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), are included in this group for reasons of geography and 
similarity in economic structure.
5Caucasus and Central Asia comprises Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
6Low-Income CIS countries comprise Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
50
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current 
Account Balance, and Unemployment 
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
1.8
1.5
3.2
10.4
9.7
9.3
2.3
–0.9
–0.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
0.6
0.4
2.8
9.2
9.0
8.8
5.3
0.9
1.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
2.2
1.8
2.1
2.5
–0.7
2.2
8.3
3.5
2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iran 
–3.9
–6.0
0.2
31.2
37.2
31.0
4.3
–0.4
–0.6
13.9
15.4
16.1
United Arab Emirates
1.7
2.8
3.3
3.1
2.1
2.1
6.6
5.9
5.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
2.1
2.3
1.8
4.3
5.6
6.7
–9.1
–12.5
–9.3
11.7
12.6
13.7
Iraq
0.6
2.8
8.1
0.4
2.0
2.0
4.9
–6.7
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
2.2
2.6
3.2
0.2
0.1
3.7
9.3
4.6
4.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kuwait
1.7
2.5
2.9
0.7
2.5
2.7
12.7
7.4
8.0
1.3
1.3
1.3
Oil Importers5
4.2
3.6
4.0
12.8
11.0
10.2
–6.5
–6.1
–5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Egypt
5.3
5.5
5.9
20.9
14.5
12.3
–2.4
–2.4
–1.7
10.9
9.6
8.3
Pakistan
5.2
2.9
2.8
3.9
7.6
7.0
–6.1
–5.2
–4.3
6.1
6.1
6.2
Morocco
3.1
3.2
3.8
1.9
1.4
2.0
–4.5
–4.1
–3.5
9.8
9.2
8.9
Sudan
–2.1
–2.3
–1.3
63.3
49.6
58.1
–11.5
–9.9
–10.0
19.5
21.4
20.9
Tunisia
2.5
2.7
3.2
7.3
7.5
5.6
–11.2
–10.1
–9.1
15.6
. . .
. . .
Lebanon
0.2
1.3
2.0
6.1
2.0
2.3
–27.0
–28.2
–28.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Jordan
2.0
2.2
2.4
4.5
2.0
2.5
–7.4
–8.2
–8.0
18.3
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Middle East and North Africa
1.4
1.3
3.2
11.4
10.0
9.6
3.1
–0.5
–0.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Israel6
3.3
3.3
3.3
0.8
0.9
1.7
1.9
1.7
1.4
4.0
4.0
4.0
Maghreb7
3.4
2.8
2.5
5.1
5.2
5.7
–6.8
–8.3
–7.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mashreq8
4.8
5.0
5.5
18.8
13.0
11.1
–7.0
–6.8
–6.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, Oman, and Yemen. 
5Includes Afghanistan, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation.
6Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
7The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia. 
8The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
51
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
Sub-Saharan Africa
3.0
3.5
3.7
8.5
8.1
7.4
–2.6
–3.7
–3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
1.3
2.0
2.6
12.9
11.8
10.9
1.5
–1.2
–0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
1.9
2.1
2.5
12.1
11.7
11.7
2.1
–0.4
–0.2
22.6
. . .
. . .
Angola
–1.7
0.4
2.9
19.6
17.5
11.1
1.3
–3.8
–1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Gabon
1.2
3.1
3.9
4.8
3.0
2.5
–1.9
–3.6
–1.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Chad
3.1
4.5
6.0
2.5
2.9
3.0
–4.8
–6.1
–4.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Republic of Congo
0.8
5.4
1.5
1.2
1.5
1.8
5.5
4.7
5.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle-Income Countries5
2.7
3.4
3.3
4.6
5.1
5.3
–3.2
–3.2
–3.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
0.8
1.2
1.5
4.6
5.0
5.4
–3.4
–3.4
–3.7
27.1
27.5
27.8
Ghana
5.6
8.8
5.8
9.8
9.1
8.4
–3.2
–3.0
–3.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Côte d’Ivoire 
7.4
7.5
7.2
0.3
2.0
2.0
–3.4
–3.0
–2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Cameroon
4.0
4.3
4.7
0.9
1.2
1.5
–4.0
–3.7
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Zambia
3.5
3.1
2.9
7.0
10.7
12.0
–5.0
–2.9
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Senegal
6.2
6.9
7.5
0.5
1.3
1.5
–7.2
–7.3
–10.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income Countries6
5.9
5.3
5.7
7.7
7.4
5.7
–6.8
–7.3
–7.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ethiopia
7.7
7.7
7.5
13.8
9.3
8.0
–6.5
–6.0
–5.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kenya
6.0
5.8
5.9
4.7
4.4
5.0
–5.4
–5.0
–4.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tanzania
6.6
4.0
4.2
3.5
3.5
4.5
–3.7
–3.9
–4.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Uganda
6.2
6.3
6.2
2.6
3.6
4.4
–6.8
–8.2
–9.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Madagascar
5.2
5.2
5.3
7.3
6.7
6.3
0.3
–1.4
–3.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Democratic Republic of the Congo
3.9
4.3
4.4
29.3
8.4
6.7
–0.5
–1.8
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Sub-Saharan Africa Excluding  
South Sudan
3.1
3.4
3.7
8.2
8.1
7.4
–2.6
–3.7
–3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table  A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP. 
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles.
6Includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger, 
Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
52
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 
(Annual percent change; in international currency at purchasing power parity)
Average
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
World
2.4
3.0
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.1
2.1
2.5
2.4
2.1
2.4
2.5
Advanced Economies
1.1
1.2
0.7
0.9
1.6
1.7
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.3
1.3
1.2
United States
0.8
0.8
1.5
1.1
1.7
2.1
0.8
1.6
2.2
1.6
1.2
0.9
Euro Area1
0.8
1.3
–1.1
–0.5
1.1
1.7
1.7
2.3
1.7
1.0
1.4
1.2
Germany
1.0
3.7
0.5
0.3
1.8
0.6
1.3
2.1
1.2
0.7
1.4
1.3
France
0.6
1.7
–0.2
0.1
0.4
0.7
0.9
1.9
1.4
0.8
1.0
1.1
Italy
–0.2
0.2
–3.2
–2.3
–0.3
0.9
1.3
1.7
1.1
–0.3
0.9
0.7
Spain
0.8
–1.4
–3.0
–1.3
1.7
3.8
3.2
3.0
2.4
1.7
1.4
1.3
Japan
0.6
–0.3
1.7
2.2
0.5
1.3
0.6
2.1
1.0
1.2
0.8
1.0
United Kingdom
1.0
0.8
0.8
1.4
2.2
1.5
1.0
1.2
0.7
0.6
0.8
1.1
Canada
0.8
2.1
0.7
1.3
1.8
–0.1
0.1
1.7
0.4
0.2
1.0
0.7
Other Advanced Economies2
2.6
2.5
1.3
1.6
2.2
1.4
1.6
2.2
1.9
1.5
1.8
1.7
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
4.6
4.9
3.6
3.6
3.2
2.8
3.1
3.3
3.2
3.0
3.5
3.6
Commonwealth of Independent 
States (CIS)
5.3
4.6
3.2
2.0
1.3
–2.5
0.4
1.9
2.4
1.8
2.0
2.2
Russia
5.1
5.0
3.6
1.7
0.6
–2.6
0.2
1.6
2.4
1.7
1.8
1.8
CIS Excluding Russia
6.7
4.6
2.6
3.3
2.5
–1.7
1.2
3.3
3.1
2.7
2.9
3.3
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.2
6.7
5.9
5.9
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.6
5.5
5.4
5.4
5.3
China
9.9
9.0
7.4
7.3
6.7
6.4
6.1
6.2
6.2
5.9
5.8
5.5
India3
5.9
5.2
4.1
5.0
6.0
6.6
6.8
5.8
5.7
5.9
6.1
6.3
ASEAN-54
3.7
3.1
4.7
3.7
3.3
3.6
3.8
4.2
4.1
3.9
4.0
4.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.5
6.2
2.1
4.3
3.5
4.3
2.9
5.6
3.0
0.2
2.3
2.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
1.9
3.4
1.7
1.7
0.2
–0.9
–1.8
0.1
0.1
0.4
1.6
2.0
Brazil
2.5
3.1
1.0
2.1
–0.3
–4.4
–4.1
0.3
0.4
1.3
1.8
1.7
Mexico
0.2
2.4
2.4
0.2
1.7
2.2
1.9
1.0
1.0
0.7
1.0
1.9
Middle East, North Africa, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
1.8
3.8
0.6
–0.1
0.0
0.4
2.9
–0.4
–0.2
–0.5
1.2
0.8
Saudi Arabia
0.3
6.8
2.5
–0.1
1.1
3.3
–0.7
–3.2
0.2
–0.2
0.1
0.3
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.9
2.5
1.6
2.5
2.4
0.5
–1.3
0.2
0.4
0.9
1.1
1.3
Nigeria
6.0
2.1
1.5
2.6
3.5
–0.1
–4.2
–1.9
–0.8
–0.6
–0.2
–0.2
South Africa
2.2
1.8
0.7
1.0
0.3
–0.4
–1.2
–0.2
–1.3
–0.4
–0.1
0.2
Memorandum
European Union
1.2
1.5
–0.6
0.1
1.6
2.0
1.8
2.5
1.9
1.3
1.5
1.4
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.8
3.6
1.7
3.7
3.7
2.2
1.2
2.6
2.4
2.7
2.9
3.1
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 
1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
53
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
References
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kilic Celik, 
Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2017. “Gone 
with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF Staff Discussion 
Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Alquist, Ron, Saroj Bhattarai, and Olivier Coibion. 
2014. “Commodity-Price Comovement and Global Eco-
nomic Activity.” NBER Working Paper 20003, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
———. Forthcoming. “Commodity-Price Comovement and 
Global Economic Activity.” Journal of Monetary Economics.
Aten, Bettina, and Alan Heston. 2005. “Regional Output 
Differences in International Perspective.” In Spatial Inequality 
and Development, edited by Ravi Kanbur and Anthony J. 
Venables. New York: Oxford University Press.
Austin, Benjamin, Edward Glaeser, and Lawrence H. Summers. 
2018. “Saving the Heartland: Place-Based Policies in 21st Cen-
tury America.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (March 8).
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. 
’’The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import 
Competition in the United States.’’ American Economic 
Review 103 (6): 2121–168.
Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. 
“Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 131 (4): 1593–636.
Bank of England. 2018. “EU Withdrawal Scenarios and Mone-
tary and Financial Stability.”
Barsky, Robert B., and Lutz Kilian. 2004. “Oil and the Macro-
economy since the 1970s.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 
(4): 115–34.
Berry, Christopher R., and Edward Glaeser. 2005. “The Diver-
gence of Human Capital Levels across Cities.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 11617, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Bry, Gerhard, and Charlotte Boschan. 1971. “Interpretation 
and Analysis of Time-Series Scatters.” American Statisti-
cian 25 (2): 29–33.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2018. “Measuring Geo-
political Risk.” International Finance Discussion Papers 1222, 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Cashin, Paul, Christopher McDermott, and Alasdair Scott. 
2002. “Booms and Slumps in World Commodity 
Prices.” Journal of Development Economics 69 (1): 277–96.
Chiquiar, Daniel. 2008. “Globalization, Regional Wage Differen-
tials, and the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem: Evidence from 
Mexico.” Journal of International Economics 74: 70–93.
Deaton, Angus, and Guy Laroque. 1992. “On the Behavior of 
Commodity Prices.” Review of Economic Studies 59 (1): 1–23.
Delle Chiaie, Simona, Laurent Ferrara, and Domenico 
Giannone. 2018. “Common Factors of Commodity Prices.” 
CEPR Discussion Paper 12767, Center for Economic Policy 
Research, Washington, DC.
Economic Innovation Group. 2018. “From Great Recession 
to Great Reshuffling: Charting a Decade of Change Across 
American Communities.” https://​eig​.org/​wp​-content/​uploads/​
2018/​10/​2018​-DCI​.pdf.
European Central Bank (ECB). 2017. “Assessing the Decou-
pling of Economic Policy Uncertainty and Financial Con-
ditions,” Special Feature in ECB Financial Stability Review, 
May 2017.
Ganong, Peter, and Daniel Shoag. 2017. “Why Has Regional 
Income Convergence Declined?” Journal of Urban Econom-
ics 102: 76–90.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, 
and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. “Growth in Regions.” Journal of 
Economic Growth 19 (3): 259–309.
Giannone, Elisa. 2017. Skilled-Biased Technical Change and 
Regional Convergence. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Grilli, Enzo, and Maw Cheng Yang. 1988. “Primary Commodity 
Prices, Manufactured Goods Prices, and the Terms of Trade 
of Developing Countries: What the Long Run Shows.” World 
Bank Economic Review 2 (1): 1–47.
Gruss, Bertrand. 2014. “After the Boom-Commodity Prices and 
Economic Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.” 
IMF Working Paper 14/154, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Hakobyan, Shushanik, and John McLaren. 2016. “Looking for 
Local Labor Market Effects of NAFTA.” Review of Economics 
and Statistics 98 (4): 728–41.
Hamilton, James. 1996. “This Is What Happened to the Oil 
Price-Macroeconomy Relationship.” Journal of Monetary 
Economics 38 (2): 215–20.
———. 2003. “What Is an Oil Shock?” Journal of Economet-
rics 113 (2): 363–98.
Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan. 2002. “Dissecting the Cycle: 
A Methodological Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Econom-
ics 49 (2): 365–81.
Hendrickson, Clara, Mark Muro, and William A. Galston. 
2018. Strategies for Left-Behind Places. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution.
HM Treasury. 2016. “HM Treasury analysis: the long-term eco-
nomic impact of EU membership and the alternatives”
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018. “United  
Kingdom: Selected Issues.” IMF Country Report 18/317, 
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2019. “Fiscal Policies for 
Implementing Paris Climate Strategies.” Washington, DC.
Jacks, David S. 2013. “From Boom to Bust: A Typology of Real 
Commodity Prices in the Long Run.” Cliometrica 1–20.
Kandilov, Ivan T. 2009. “Do Exporters Pay Higher Wages? 
Plant-Level Evidence from an Export Refund Policy in 
Chile.” World Bank Economic Review 23 (2): 269–94.
Kilian, Lutz. 2009. Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Dis-
entangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the Crude Oil 
Market.” American Economic Review 99 (3): 1053–69.
Kilian, Lutz, and Daniel P. Murphy. 2014. “The Role of 
Inventories and Speculative Trading in the Global Market for 
Crude Oil.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 29 (3): 454–78.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
54
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Kilian, Lutz, and Xiaoqing Zhou. 2018. “Modeling Fluctuations 
in the Global Demand for Commodities.” Journal of Interna-
tional Money and Finance 88: 54–78.
Leichenko, Robin, and Julie Silva. 2004. “International Trade, 
Employment, and Earnings: Evidence from US Rural Coun-
ties.” Regional Studies 38 (4): 355–74.
Moretti, Enrico. 2011. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of 
Labor Economics, edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. E. Card, 
1237–313. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Nakov, Anton, and Andrea Pescatori. 2010. “Oil and the Great 
Moderation.” Economic Journal 120 (543): 131–56.
Nunn, Ryan, Jana Parsons, and Jay Shambaugh. 2018. “The 
Geography of Prosperity.” The Hamilton Project, Brookings 
Institution, Washington, DC.
Partridge, Mark D., Dan S. Rickman, M. Rose Olfert, and 
Ying Tan. 2017. “International Trade and Local Labor  
Markets: Do Foreign and Domestic Shocks Affect 
Regions Differently?” Journal of Economic Geography 17 
(2): 375–409.
Pindyck, Robert, and Julio Rotemberg. 1990. “The Excess 
Comovement of Commodity Prices.” Economic Journal 100 
(December): 1173–189. 
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2002. “Forecasting 
Using Principal Components from a Large Number of 
Predictors.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 97 
(460): 1167–179.
Stuermer, Martin. 2018. “150 Years of Boom and Bust: What 
Drives Mineral Commodity Prices?” Macroeconomic Dynamics 
22 (3): 702–17.
West, Kenneth D., and Ka-Fu Wong. 2014. “A Factor Model for 
Co-Movements of Commodity Prices.” Journal of Interna-
tional Money and Finance 42: 289–309.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
55
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
This chapter investigates whether corporate market 
power has increased and, if so, what the macro­economic 
implications are. The three main takeaways from a 
broad analysis of cross-country firm-level patterns are 
that (1) market power has increased moderately across 
advanced economies, as indicated by firms’ price mark-
ups over marginal costs rising by close to 8 percent since 
2000, but not in emerging market economies; (2) the 
increase has been fairly widespread across advanced 
economies and industries, but within them, it has been 
concentrated among a small fraction of dynamic—more 
productive and innovative—firms; and (3) although the 
overall macroeconomic implications have been modest 
so far, further increases in the market power of these 
already-powerful firms could weaken investment, deter 
innovation, reduce labor income shares, and make it 
more difficult for monetary policy to stabilize output. 
Even as rising corporate market power seems, so far, more 
reflective of “winner-takes-most” by more productive 
and innovative firms than of weaker pro-competition 
policies, its challenging macroeconomic implications call 
for reforms that keep future market competition strong.
Introduction
Public debate about rising corporate power is 
mounting. Heightened interest has unfolded amid the 
rise of corporate giants, such as in the tech industry, 
and because of broader, often worrisome macroeco-
nomic trends in advanced economies over the past 
three decades. As shown in Figure 2.1, these trends 
include (1) sluggish investment despite falling borrow-
ing costs and rising expected returns from investment, 
as captured by the ratio of the market value of firms to 
the book value of their capital stock (so-called Tobin’s 
Q); (2) a growing disconnect between a roughly stable 
rate of return on productive capital and a falling rate 
The authors of this chapter are Wenjie Chen, Federico Díez (lead), 
Romain Duval (lead), Callum Jones, and Carolina Villegas-Sánchez, 
with contributions from Mai Chi Dao, Jiayue Fan, Christopher 
Johns, and Nan Li, and supported by Luisa Calixto, Rebecca Eyassu, 
and Ariana Tayebi.
of return on safer assets, such as the bonds of gov-
ernments and the healthiest firms; (3) a widening 
gap between financial and productive wealth; and (4) 
falling labor income shares and rising income inequal-
ity. A fifth trend is the well-documented slowdown in 
productivity growth (Adler and others 2017).
Could rising market power be one factor behind 
slowing trend growth and growing inequality? Other 
drivers that may account for one or several of the five 
macroeconomic trends listed above have been put 
forward. Examples include a slowing pace of major 
inventions or long lags before these pay off; protracted 
weak demand, as featured in Chapter 4 of the April 
2015 World Economic Outlook (WEO); mismeasured 
(underreported) intangible capital; falling investment 
prices (Chapter 3 of the April 2017 WEO); growing 
demand for safe assets; and weaker worker bargaining 
power. Unlike these drivers, however, rising corporate 
market power can, in principle, contribute to all five 
trends simultaneously (Stiglitz 2015; Caballero, Farhi, 
and Gourinchas 2017; De Loecker and Eeckhout 
2017; Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold 2018). Increased 
market power would be expected to lead firms to 
invest less in physical and other forms of capital than 
would be optimal (trend 1), which would weaken pro-
ductivity growth (trend 5) without necessarily reducing 
returns on capital, even if returns on risk-free assets 
were to decline for other reasons (trend 2). In parallel, 
the value of shareholders’ assets would grow faster than 
the sheer value of their productive capital (trend 3), 
and workers’ share of total income would mechanically 
fall (trend 4).
At the same time, neither the rise of market power 
itself nor its macroeconomic implications have been 
firmly established. Broad market concentration is 
generally not a good gauge of market power; it is hard 
to measure and can be misleading. Better, more direct 
measures, such as price markups—the ratio of a good’s 
price to the marginal cost of producing it—are not 
readily available and, so far, they have been studied 
mostly for the small subset of listed firms (De Loecker 
and Eeckhout 2017, 2018; Díez, Leigh, and Tambun-
lertchai 2018). A full picture of market power trends 
THE RISE OF CORPORATE MARKET POWER 
AND ITS MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS
2
CHAPTER
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
56
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
across the broader economy is needed to gauge the mac-
roeconomic implications for aggregate investment, labor 
income shares, and the effectiveness of monetary policy, 
to use these as examples. Even rising economy-wide 
markups need not imply declining competition if they 
merely enable firms to recoup the growing fixed costs—
or reward them for the higher risks—associated with 
large investments in intangible assets, such as research 
and development or information technology systems.
The drivers of any possible rise in market power 
have also yet to be uncovered. This matters because dif-
ferent drivers could call for very different policy reme-
dies. At one extreme, rising market power could be the 
outcome of greater competition and winner-takes-most 
dynamics in the digital age. For example, in many 
industries, the rising importance of economies of scale 
and scope, network effects, managerial and technical 
skills, and specific intangible assets—such as patents, 
proprietary information technology systems, and large 
consumer databases—may help the most dynamic 
firms achieve market dominance. Inasmuch as such 
firms have higher markups and profit shares, any 
increase in competition that benefits them could result 
in higher aggregate markups and profit shares (Van 
Reenen 2018). At the other extreme, rising market 
power could reflect an increase in anticompetitive 
product market regulations or weaker antitrust enforce-
ment (Gutiérrez and Philippon 2018).
To explore these issues, this chapter looks at close to 
1 million firms covering large swaths of the economy 
across 27 countries—about two-thirds of which are 
advanced economies and one-third (mostly central and 
eastern European) are emerging market economies. 
The aim is to gauge market power trends over the past 
two decades, assess their macroeconomic implications, 
and—more tentatively—shed some preliminary light 
on their underlying drivers.1 The chapter tackles the 
following questions:
•• Has corporate market power increased globally? 
How do trends in market power differ across coun-
try income groups, countries, industries, and firms?
•• What might be the drivers of rising market power? 
Can the data reveal the possible roles of changes in 
the structure of product markets—associated with 
1The countries included in the analysis are Austria, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, 
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, the Slovak 
Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States.
Nominal capital/GDP
Nominal wealth/GDP
Corporate net operating surplus/capital
10-year real government bond rate
Tobin’s Q (ratio)
It /Kt  – 1, value terms (percent,
right scale)
Figure 2.1.  Worrisome Macroeconomic Trends
4
6
8
10
12
1975
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
1975
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
1975
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
46
48
50
52
54
56
1975
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
14
4. Labor Share
(Percent)
3. Wealth and Capital
(Percent)
2. Return on Capital and Long-Term Interest Rates
(Percent)
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
–5
0
5
10
15
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1. Tobin’s Q and Investment
Increased market power could, in principle, be a factor behind several important 
macroeconomic trends of the past decades.
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Penn World 
Table 9.0; United Nations; World Inequality Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Aggregate series are advanced economy medians. Tobin’s Q is deﬁned as 
equity value/net worth (current prices). Investments are cumulated into capital 
stocks using asset-speciﬁc geometric depreciation rates using the perpetual 
inventory method. See Online Annex Table 2.1.2 for a list of countries used in 
median calculations.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
57
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
the rise of the digital economy or other factors—and 
of a policy-driven weakening of competition?
•• What is the impact of market power on growth and 
income distribution? How does it affect the drivers 
of growth, such as investment and innovation, as 
well as labor income shares?
•• What are the policy implications? Should measures 
be taken to strengthen market competition and, if 
so, which would be effective? Are there also mac-
roeconomic policy implications of rising market 
power, such as for monetary policy?
In tackling these questions, the chapter reaches the 
following conclusions:
•• There has been a moderate rise in corporate market 
power across advanced economies. Economy-wide 
markups increased by close to 8 percent, on average, 
across firms during the 2000–15 sample period, 
alongside rising profits and market concentration. 
By contrast, markups remained broadly stable 
in emerging markets, possibly reflecting limited 
country coverage and the fact that market com-
petition was weaker than in advanced economies 
to start with.
•• Markup increases have been fairly broad based 
across countries and industries—taking place in 
almost all advanced economies and nearly two-thirds 
of country-industry pairs. The magnitude of this 
rise has varied across countries—it is larger in the 
United States than across the European Union, for 
example—and industries; it is essentially concen-
trated in nonmanufacturing industries.
•• A key contributor almost everywhere is the increase 
in markups charged by a small fraction of firms. 
Most of these firms are rather small, but the larger 
ones in the group account for the vast majority 
of the group’s total revenue. High-markup firms 
also perform better than others—their productiv-
ity is higher and they are more likely to invest in 
intangible assets, such as patents and software. In 
the United States, these firms also gained mar-
ket share during 2000–15, contributing to the 
larger increase in aggregate markups compared 
with other countries—and consistent with a 
(productivity-enhancing) growth of high-productiv-
ity, high-markup firms at the expense of those with 
low productivity and low markups.
•• This tentatively suggests that changes in the 
structure of product markets have underpinned 
at least some of the overall rise in market power. 
One such change would be the winner-takes-most 
outcome achieved by the most productive and 
innovative firms, rooted in part in specific intan-
gible assets (technological, managerial, or other); 
network effects; and economies of scale. The rather 
broad-based nature of increasing markups across 
countries and industries, and the role played by a 
small fraction of firms in most cases, also hint at 
such common forces—more than a policy-driven 
weakening of competition. At the same time, 
weak pro-competition policies can magnify 
winner-takes-most dynamics, and firms that have so 
far achieved market dominance primarily through 
innovative products and business practices may 
attempt to entrench their positions by erecting barri-
ers to entry.
•• The impact of rising markups on economic 
growth has been rather modest so far, but it could 
grow increasingly negative if the market power of 
high-markup firms—in particular—rises further. 
Higher markups have been associated with some-
what weaker investment, despite higher profits 
and Tobin’s Q; empirical estimates suggest that 
because of this, output would be about 1 percent 
higher today in the average advanced economy if 
markups had not increased since 2000—ignoring 
such factors as technological or organizational 
improvements that may have enabled some firms 
to raise their markups over time. Through this 
investment channel, rising market power may 
have also slightly reduced the natural (real) rate 
of interest, thereby making the effective lower 
bound on policy interest rates more binding. 
Effects on innovation are more ambiguous; the 
analysis suggests that they may have been margin-
ally positive so far, but would turn increasingly 
negative if high-markup firms further increase 
their market power.
•• Higher markups may not only reduce firms’ own 
capital and output, but may also spill over to other 
domestic and foreign firms through supply-chain 
links. Empirical evidence suggests that higher mark-
ups across foreign suppliers have been associated 
with slightly lower output among emerging market 
firms that purchase their inputs in less competi-
tive markets.
•• There is also evidence that rising market power 
throughout 2000–15 reduced labor shares of 
income, by a minimum of 0.2 percentage point—
about 10 percent of the overall decline—across 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
58
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
advanced economies. This lower-bound estimate 
includes only the impact of rising markups within 
firms and ignores the effect of reallocation of 
resources between firms, which is an additional fac-
tor in countries where high-markup, low-labor-share 
firms have gained market share from those with low 
markups and high labor shares. Also ignored is the 
possible contribution of the uneven rise in market 
power across firms to rising wage inequality between 
firms—which has contributed to the overall rise in 
wage inequality in some advanced economies—as 
well as to wealth inequality.
•• With mounting risks of adverse growth and income 
distribution effects from rising corporate market 
power, policymakers should keep future market 
competition strong. Helpful reforms would include 
cutting domestic barriers to entry in nonmanu-
facturing industries, liberalizing trade and foreign 
direct investment, adjusting competition policy 
frameworks to deal with emerging issues as needed, 
easing obstacles to technological catchup by lagging 
firms, and shifting the burden of corporate taxation 
onto economic rent.
The next section examines trends in market power 
across countries, industries, and firms, and attempts 
to explain what may lie behind them. The section 
that follows analyzes the implications for growth and 
income distribution, focusing on investment, innova-
tion, and labor shares. It also explores whether rising 
market power affected inflation, interest rates, and the 
dynamics of output in advanced economies after the 
2008–09 global financial crisis. The main takeaways 
and policy implications are discussed in the conclusion.
 The Rise of Corporate Market Power
Measuring market power is challenging. This 
chapter considers two main alternatives. The first, 
and most common, is the ability of firms to charge 
prices that exceed their marginal cost of production. 
Under this definition, a firm’s market power can be 
measured through its markup, defined as the ratio of 
price to marginal cost. This is the main measure used 
throughout the chapter. A second possible definition 
is the ability of firms to obtain extraordinary profits—
so-called economic rents. A frequently used indicator 
here is an (operational) profitability measure, such 
as the ratio of operating earnings to sales; this is an 
empirical measure of the Lerner index, which also 
relates closely to a firm’s markup.2 These have lim-
itations: markups can be estimated from often avail-
able firm-level data, but might overestimate market 
power in the presence of fixed costs, as these need to 
be recouped through markups if firms are to avoid 
incurring losses; Lerner indices are easy to compute, 
but hard to measure accurately and, like all measures 
of profitability, they can be volatile. As a complement, 
measures of market concentration are also computed, 
focusing, in particular, on the share of top firms in 
the total sales of a particular industry. These should be 
interpreted with great caution; they require identifying 
the appropriate market and can be misleading—for 
example, stronger competition may lead to larger, more 
productive firms gaining market share over their less 
productive, smaller counterparts, resulting in higher, 
not lower, concentration. For these reasons, markup 
indicators, rather than market concentration measures, 
are used in the empirical analysis of this chapter.
How has corporate market power evolved over 
the past two decades? To answer this question, the 
chapter uses firm-level data covering 27 countries—16 
advanced economies and 11 emerging market 
economies—since 2000.3 The raw data, which include 
information on publicly listed and privately held firms, 
typically cover at least 40 percent of total output 
reported in official sources in a given country and 
year. They have been found to be reasonably repre-
sentative of the full population of firms in most of 
the countries considered (Kalemli-Özcan and others 
2015). The final data set obtained after cleaning the 
raw data includes more than 900,000 distinct firms. 
Markups and Lerner indices are computed for each 
firm—and then aggregated up to industry or country 
level for parts of the analysis; concentration indices 
are computed for narrowly defined (four-digit NACE 
(Nomenclature statistique des activités économiques 
dans les Communauté européenne)) industries in each 
country. Building on these three measures, the analysis 
2Markups and Lerner indices are closely related in theory; their 
empirical measures, however, are very different. Following De Loecker 
and Warzynski (2012), markups are measured as the ratio of a firm’s 
output elasticity of a variable input to the share of that input in total 
revenue. By contrast, the empirical Lerner measure focuses on overall, 
not marginal, operational profitability and, as such, it captures the 
wedge between prices and average—not marginal—costs. As a result, 
there is no reason to expect both measures to be correlated a priori.
3The definition of advanced economies used in the empirical 
work of this chapter follows the WEO classification in 2000 (the 
first year in the data set, which extends to 2015). For details on  
the data, see Online Annex 2.1. All annexes are available at  
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
59
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
begins by establishing a series of facts on the recent 
dynamics of corporate market power across countries, 
industries, and firms.
Aggregate Market Power Trends
All available indicators point to a moderate increase 
in aggregate market power since 2000. Across the 27 
sample countries, the (firm-revenue-weighted) average 
markup increased by 6 percent during 2000–15, a 
modest yet steady increase (Figure 2.2, panel 1).4 At 
the same time, while more volatile than markups, aver-
age profitability, as measured by the Lerner index, also 
increased throughout the sample period (Figure 2.2, 
panel 2). This accompanying rise in profitability sug-
gests that the increase in markups goes beyond a mere 
technological change—such as higher fixed costs from 
larger intangible investments needed for firms to be 
competitive.5 Finally, to a lesser extent, market concen-
tration has also increased (Figure 2.2, panel 3). 
While the increase in market power has been fairly 
broad based, its magnitude—focusing hereafter on 
markups—has varied across countries and industries. 
First, the rise is strongly concentrated among advanced 
economies, whose average markup rose by about 
7.7 percent throughout 2000–15, versus only 1.8 per-
cent for the group of emerging market economies—
mostly in central and eastern Europe—covered by the 
data (Figure 2.3).6 There is substantial variation, as well, 
in the rise in markups across advanced economies, with 
4This is a substantially smaller number than the increase found 
in recent studies that focus only on listed firms (De Loecker and 
Eeckhout 2017, 2018; Díez, Leigh, and Tambunlertchai 2018). In 
level terms, the (firm-revenue-weighted) average markup shows an 
increase from about 1.28—corresponding to a markup of the price 
over marginal cost of 28 percent—in 2000 to 1.36 in 2015. Qualita-
tively similar, but quantitatively smaller, increases are obtained when 
considering cost-weighted average markups. However, given the 
estimation technique employed, these point estimates are identified 
only up to a constant and should therefore be seen as illustrative. See 
De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) for details.
5The correlation between changes in markups and profits across 
firms is statistically significant at the 1 percent confidence level. 
Additional analysis also finds that the increase in markups remains 
essentially unchanged after accounting for the role of overhead costs; 
this further suggests that the rise in markups reflects more than just 
the need to recoup higher fixed costs.
6This comparison refers to the differential increases in market 
power—the focus of this chapter—across country income groups, 
not to differences in markup levels and the level of competition in 
general. Considering only listed firms, but a broader sample of coun-
tries and a longer period, Díez, Leigh, and Tambunlertchai (2018) 
also find much smaller increases in markups in emerging market 
than in advanced economies.
1. Markups
(Index, 2000 = 1)
3. Concentration
(Percent)
2. Proﬁtability
(Index, 2000 = 1)
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
15
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
15
59
60
61
62
63
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
15
Figure 2.2.  Evolution of Market Power
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
All measures point toward a moderate increase in market power over time: higher 
markups, higher proﬁtability, and, to a lesser extent, higher concentration.
Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Markup calculations are based on the approach of De Loecker and Warzynski 
(2012) using the Orbis database. Panel 1 plots year ﬁxed effects from regressions 
of markups that also include country ﬁxed effects to account for entry and exit 
to/from the sample. Regressions are weighted by ﬁrms’ operating revenue. The 
measure of proﬁtability used in the ﬁgure is the Lerner index, computed as the 
weighted average of ﬁrms’ ratio of earnings before taxes to revenue. Concentration 
is computed as the ratio of sales of top four to top 20 ﬁrms within each 
country-sector bin. To aggregate, simple averages are taken across sectors within 
a country, and then the median across countries, to obtain the plotted line. See 
Online Annex Table 2.1.2 for a list of countries used in the calculations.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
60
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
significantly larger increases in the United States (twice 
as large as in the average advanced economy). Although 
markup increases have also been rather broad based 
across industries, trends differ: nearly two-thirds of the 
country-industry pairs in the sample show markup 
increases, with the largest among nonmanufacturing 
industries and in industries that use digital technologies 
most intensively.7 The average markup across manufac-
turing industries has been mostly flat.
With some exceptions, the rise in aggregate markups 
reflects mostly higher markups within incumbent firms 
and, to a lesser extent, the entry of new firms with 
higher markups, rather than a greater market share 
of high-markup incumbents. Over the full sample, 
markup increases within incumbent firms accounted 
for the full increase in the aggregate markup (the 
large positive “within” component, shown in blue in 
Figure 2.4), whereas high-markup incumbents did not 
increase their relative size (negative “reallocation” com-
7Intensity of digital usage is constructed based on Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development estimates; for details, see 
Online Annex 2.2 and Calligaris, Criscuolo, and Marcolin (2018), 
which also finds larger markup increases among digital-intensive 
firms than among other firms.
ponent). One noticeable exception is the United States, 
for which the reallocation component accounted for 
about 80 percent of the rise in the aggregate markup.8 
New firms entering the market with high markups 
also contributed about one-third of the overall rise in 
markups across advanced economies (the “entry” com-
ponent in Figure 2.4).
Rise in Markups across Firms Is Highly Uneven
 Markups have increased significantly in only a small 
fraction of incumbent firms—they are the dominant 
force behind the higher aggregate markups in most 
economies. Firms in the top decile of the markup 
distribution increased their (weighted) average markup 
8The analysis results from applying a so-called Melitz-Polanec 
decomposition (see Online Annex 2.2). The large “between” com-
ponent found for the United States is in line with recent evidence; 
see Baqaee and Farhi (2017) and De Loecker, Eeckhout, and 
Unger (2018).
Figure 2.3.  Markup Increases, by Country Income Group
(Percent change, cumulative 2000–15)
Markup increases are concentrated in advanced economies; markups in the 
selected emerging markets covered by the analysis have risen only slightly.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
All
Advanced 
economies
Selected emerging 
markets
Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure uses the 2000 World Economic Outlook deﬁnition for advanced 
economies. Markups weighted by ﬁrms' operating revenue.
Figure 2.4.  Decomposition of Markup Increases
(Percent)
Two-thirds of the overall markup increase can be accounted for by incumbent 
ﬁrms (intensive margin) and the remainder by the net entry of new ﬁrms 
(extensive margin). Among incumbents, the rise in markups reﬂects primarily an 
increase within ﬁrms rather than reallocation of market shares away from 
low-markup toward high-markup ﬁrms.
Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars plot the change in overall markups explained by each component, 
after applying a Melitz-Polanec decomposition to the markup changes between 
2000 and 2015. See Online Annex 2.2.C for details on the decomposition.
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Entry
Exit
Within
Reallocation
Incumbents:
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
61
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
by more than 30 percent, while the remaining nine 
deciles report a (weighted) average increase of just 
2 percent (Figure 2.5, panel 1). This means that any 
analysis of the drivers and macroeconomic implications 
of the overall rise in corporate market power must pay 
particular attention to this small fraction of firms in 
the top decile of the markup distribution. 
These high-markup firms are typically found in 
every broad economic sector and vary in size. In terms 
of revenue, the most-represented sectors in the top 
decile are information and communication, financial 
and insurance activities, manufacturing, and utilities. 
After accounting for the fact that some sectors have 
more firms than others, in general, the likelihood that 
a firm be in the top decile is above (the cross-sector) 
average in information and communication, finance 
and insurance activities, and utilities, while it is below 
average in construction, manufacturing, and wholesale 
and retail trade.
High-markup firms vary in size, but they tend to 
perform better than others. Most of these firms are 
rather small—in the bottom half of the size (revenue) 
distribution—but the larger ones in the group account 
for the vast majority of the group’s total revenue 
(Figure 2.5, panel 2).9 As regards performance, the top 
10 percent of firms in the markup distribution are, on 
average, about 50 percent more profitable, more than 
30 percent more productive, and more than 30 percent 
more intensive in their use of intangible assets than the 
other 90 percent (Figure 2.5, panel 3).
To sum up, there has been a moderate rise in 
corporate market power since 2000 across advanced 
economies, but not across the emerging markets 
covered by the analysis. Although increases have 
varied in magnitude across advanced economies and 
industries, in most cases, the main driving force was 
the ability of a small fraction of high-markup firms to 
strengthen their market power—and also gain market 
share in some countries, such as the United States. 
These firms were typically more dynamic than others, 
tentatively suggesting that changes in the structure 
of product markets—such as the winner-takes-most 
dynamics benefiting the most productive and inno-
vative firms, rooted in part in specific intangible 
assets—are behind at least some of the overall rise in 
market power.
9For further details on the relationship between markups and size, 
see Díez, Fan, and Villegas-Sánchez (forthcoming).
Top decile ﬁrms
Rest of ﬁrms
Top decile ﬁrms
Rest of ﬁrms
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Lerner
TFP
Intangibles
3. Differences in Performance, by Firm Groups
 (Index, rest of ﬁrms = 1)
Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Firms are sorted by their average markups over the sample period into two 
groups: top decile and the rest. Panel 1 plots, for each group, year ﬁxed effects 
from regressions of markups that also include country ﬁxed effects to account for 
entry and exit to/from the sample. The regressions are weighted by ﬁrms’ 
operating revenue. The bars in panel 2 show the share of total revenue accounted 
for by ﬁrms in the top decile as a whole (left bar); the larger ﬁrms within the top 
decile (10 percent largest ﬁrms within top decile, middle bar); smaller ﬁrms within 
the top decile (90 percent smallest ﬁrms within top decile, right bar). Each bar in 
panel 3 plots the average value of the Lerner index/TFP/intangibles ratio for the 
ﬁrms in the top decile of the markup distribution and for the other ﬁrms. The values 
for the rest of the ﬁrms were normalized to one. TFP = total factor productivity.
Markup increases have been largely concentrated in the top 10 percent of the markup 
distribution; most of these ﬁrms are small, but the larger ones account for most 
of the group’s revenue; ﬁrms in the top decile tend to be more proﬁtable, more 
productive, and make relatively more intensive use of intangibles than other ﬁrms.
Figure 2.5.  Disconnect between Firms in the Top Decile and 
the Rest
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
2000
02
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Top decile
Larger ﬁrms
Smaller ﬁrms
2. Share of Total Revenue Accounted for by the Top Decile;
 Total, Larger, and Smaller Firms
 (Percent)
Of which:
04
06
08
10
12
14
15
1. Evolution of Markups, by Firm Groups
 (Index, 2000 = 1)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
62
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Macroeconomic Implications of Rising 
Market Power
What are the implications of rising market power 
for growth and the distribution of income? To assess 
the former, this section examines the impact of rising 
markups on key firm- and industry-level drivers of 
growth, namely innovation (as proxied by individual 
patents) and physical capital investment. This analysis 
relies on cross-country firm- and industry-level regres-
sions that include a rich set of fixed effects and account 
for other potential drivers of innovation and invest-
ment. In an attempt to identify the causal effect of 
rising markups on these outcomes, markups are lagged 
and instrumental variable strategies are pursued—using 
as instruments markups in other firms in the same 
country and industry. A similar approach then explores 
whether markup increases have contributed to the 
downward trend in the labor share of income—the 
share of national income paid in wages, including ben-
efits, to workers—in recent decades. This matters for 
income distribution, given that capital ownership tends 
to be concentrated among top incomes (Wolff 2010).
The empirical exploration of the growth impact 
of markup increases is complemented by the use of 
a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model that 
also sheds light on implications for inflation, interest 
rates, and monetary policy in the euro area and in 
the United States. There are other macroeconomic 
trends of the past two decades that coincide with rising 
markups. Box 2.1 shows that rising corporate saving 
across advanced economies is closely linked to greater 
concentration in corporate sales and assets and to 
increased markups. Other trends that could reflect in 
part rising markups, but are not directly explored here, 
include declining business and labor market dynamism 
and rising wage inequality, among others.10
Innovation
Market power has ambiguous effects on firms’ 
decisions to innovate, reflecting two opposing forces.11 
On one hand, firms need to expect some degree of 
market power (and profitability) to invest in innovative 
products and processes. On the other hand, greater 
10For a more detailed description of these trends and the possible 
contribution of rising markups, see Davis and others (2007); De 
Loecker and Eeckhout (2017); Van Reenen (2018); and Autor and 
others (2017a, 2017b).
11See, for example, Shapiro (2012) for a review of the literature on 
competition and innovation.
competition—that is, less market power—incentivizes 
firms to try to escape their competitors through inno-
vation. A synthetic view of these two forces argues for 
a hump-shaped relationship: starting from low levels, 
stronger market power will first increase innovation 
but, beyond a certain point, additional market power 
will weaken the desire to innovate.12
The empirical analysis explores whether there is a 
hump-shaped relationship between market power and 
innovation at both industry and firm levels across the 
full sample of 27 countries. Innovation is measured 
by (various alternative indicators of) firms’ patent-
ing activity and is linked to market power, measured 
either by firm-level markups or industry-level average 
markups and Lerner indices. The analysis consists of 
a (Poisson) regression in which the number of patents 
depends on the lagged (logarithm of the) markup and 
its square, controlling for a rich set of fixed effects 
and using instrumental variable techniques to address 
potential reverse causality—that is, innovation may 
affect markups. Specifically, all firm-level regressions 
control for firm size, firm fixed effects, and alterna-
tively (four-digit NACE) country-industry-year fixed 
effects or country-year and industry-year fixed effects. 
These fixed effects ensure that results are not driven 
by other, omitted drivers—for example, consumer 
demand. To address reverse causality concerns, besides 
lagged markup values, some specifications use, as an 
instrumental variable, the median markup of all firms 
(except that of the firm being instrumented) in a given 
country-industry-year. The industry-level regressions 
use the lagged (logarithm of the) markup or the Lerner 
index and country-year and industry-year fixed effects 
(see Online Annex 2.3A for further details).
There is strong and robust evidence that higher mark-
ups increase patents at both industry and firm levels 
when markup levels are low, but have the opposite effect 
when markups are high. At the industry level, more 
than 80 percent of the observations were located before 
the turning point (the red line in Figure 2.6) over the 
sample period, implying that, for most country-industry 
pairs, higher markups led to more innovation.13 How-
ever, the fraction of observations located beyond the 
turning point increased from roughly 15 percent in 
12This hypothesis, which goes back at least to Scherer (1967) and 
Kamien and Schwartz (1976), was further modeled and tested on 
British firm data by Aghion and others (2005).
13Comparable results are obtained when using, as a measure of 
market power, the Lerner index rather than the markup, with almost 
85 percent of observations located before the turning point.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
63
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
2000 to 21 percent in 2015. A similar pattern emerges 
at the firm level. Under this approach, the share of 
firms located beyond the turning point is still small, at 
about 7.5 percent in 2015, implying that past markup 
increases may have been associated with higher innova-
tion for most firms. However, that share increased by 
50 percent during the sample period. 
The analysis implies that, while the overall impact 
of rising market power on the pace of innovation may 
have been marginally positive so far, it could become 
increasingly negative if high-markup firms—in par-
ticular—further strengthen their market power in the 
future. Firms in the top decile of the markup distribu-
tion are (on average) already beyond the turning point 
of the estimated hump-shaped firm-level relationship. 
This is a potential cause for concern, given that those 
are the firms whose markups have risen sharply over 
the past two decades. As an example, if across the 
sample, markups rose as much during 2015–30 as they 
did during 2000–15, the predicted patent stock of 
high-markup firms would be almost 4 percent lower 
than if markups were stable, and the overall patent 
stock would be more than 0.3 percent lower, taking 
the empirical estimates at face value (Figure 2.7). 
Investment
Private fixed investment has declined by about 
25 percent, on average, across advanced economies 
since the global financial crisis, compared with its 
precrisis trend (Chapter 2 of the October 2018 WEO). 
This has happened despite a large and persistent fall 
in borrowing costs, higher rates of corporate profit, 
and higher expected returns on capital (Tobin’s Q). 
Although weak economic growth since the crisis has 
played a role (Chapter 4 of the April 2015 WEO), 
other possible factors include credit constraints or 
Figure 2.6.  Patents and Markups: A Hump-Shaped
Relationship
There is a hump-shaped relationship between markups and patents. Starting from 
low markup levels, an increase leads to more patents. Beyond the red line, further 
markup increases lead, instead, to fewer patents.
Markups
0
1
2
3
4
5
Patents
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Sources: Orbis; PATSTAT (Worldwide Patent Statistical database); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure plots the effects of markups on the predicted average number of 
patents by country-sector. Predicted patents normalized to 1 for markups = 1.
2015–30
2015–30
2000–15
2. Top Decile
2000–15
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
1. Overall Sample
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Past overall increases in markups are estimated to have had a marginally positive 
effect on patents. However, if markups continue to rise at the same rate, patents 
are predicted to fall, mostly driven by ﬁrms in the top decile of the markup 
distribution.
Figure 2.7.  Implied Relationship between Higher Markups 
and Patents
(Percent change in patents)
Sources: Orbis; PATSTAT (Worldwide Patent Statistical database); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The 2000–15 bars show the implied predicted percent change in patents 
resulting from the markup increase in 2000–15, weighted by operating revenue. 
The 2015–30 bars show the implied predicted change if markups increase in 
2015–30 at the same rate as in 2000–15. Panel 1 makes use of the whole sample; 
panel 2 uses information only from the top decile of the markup distribution.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
64
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
shifts in the composition of investment toward (pos-
sibly undermeasured) intangibles, but also increased 
market power (Gutiérrez and Philippon 2017).14 As 
a firm’s market power increases, it can—at any given 
marginal cost—increase its profits by charging a higher 
price and reducing its output. This, in turn, leads the 
firm to reduce its demand for capital and, therefore, 
its investment.15 Over the long term, inasmuch as the 
return on capital and labor supply remain unchanged, 
firms’ lower desired output will also translate into a 
lower capital-to-output ratio. However, only a few 
studies explore empirically the link between mark-
ups and investment, and they focus primarily on the 
United States and publicly listed firms.16
14See more details on the possible drivers of low invest-
ment in Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017); Hall (2017); Crouzet 
and Eberly (2018); and Chapters 4 and 2, respectively, of the 
April 2015 and October 2018 WEOs.
15Online Annex 2.3C provides a more detailed discussion of the 
mechanism through which higher market power reduces investment 
in the short term and the capital-to-output ratio over the long term.
16See Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017); De Loecker, Eeckhout, 
and Unger (2018); Díez, Leigh, and Tambunlertchai (2018); and 
Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold (2018).
Empirical analysis finds that rising markups have 
contributed to some reduction in firms’ physical 
capital investment since the early 2000s. Cross-country 
firm-level analysis is performed for the same set of 
countries and firms used in the previous subsection. A 
firm’s net investment rate in tangible assets is explained 
by its lagged markup, controlling for other firm-level 
drivers of investment and the rich set of fixed effects 
considered in the innovation analysis.17,18 Similar 
instrumental variable techniques are also used to 
address risks of reverse causality and omitted variable 
bias. The main finding is that a 10 percentage point 
increase in a firm’s markup is associated with a statis-
tically significant 0.6 percentage point decrease in its 
physical capital investment rate. Figure 2.8 illustrates 
that, for the overall sample, the average increase in 
firms’ markups since 2000 is associated with a 0.4 per-
centage point decrease in the investment rate, whereas 
for the sample of top decile firms, the average increase 
in markups is associated with a 2 percentage point 
decrease in the investment rate. 
The results imply that if markups had remained 
stable since 2000, the overall capital stock today would 
be about 3 percent, and output about 1 percent, above 
current levels in the average advanced economy. The 
broad country- and firm-level coverage of the data 
set used in the analysis makes it possible to gauge the 
implications of higher markups for aggregate invest-
ment, capital, and output. Specifically, the path of 
each firm’s net tangible asset stock during 2000–15 is 
simulated under a (counterfactual) scenario in which 
the firm’s markup is set at its 2000 level—or, for new 
firms, its initial level—using the estimated impact on 
investment shown in Figure 2.8. The calculated capital 
gaps between the actual and counterfactual scenarios 
can then be aggregated to obtain an aggregate estimate 
of the capital shortfall for each economy. For the group 
of advanced economies in the sample, this exercise 
yields a 3 percent larger physical capital stock in 2015 
in the average advanced economy under constant 
markups; that would have translated into an output 
gain of about 1 percent, assuming an elasticity of 
17The net investment rate in tangible assets is calculated as the 
ratio of the change in the stock of tangible assets to value added. For 
more details, see Online Annex 2.3B.
18One difference from the innovation analysis is that the 
relationship between investment and markups is assumed to be 
monotonic, in line with investment theory. Additional (unreported) 
analysis could not find robust evidence of a nonlinear (for example, 
hump-shaped) relationship.
Figure 2.8.  Markups and Physical Capital Investment
(Percentage point change in investment rate)
For the overall sample, the average increase in ﬁrms’ markups is associated with a 
0.4 percentage point decrease in the physical capital investment rate. For the ﬁrms 
in the top decile of the markup distribution, the (larger) average increase in ﬁrms’ 
markups is associated with a decrease in the investment rate of 2 percentage points.
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
Overall sample
Top decile
Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Average changes in markups across ﬁrms are weighted by operating revenue.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
65
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
output to capital of about one-third.19 However, these 
estimates do not factor in (growth-enhancing) techno-
logical or organizational improvements that may have 
enabled firms to raise their markups in the first place. 
Furthermore, it reflects only a within-firm effect—as 
a firm’s markup increases, it tends to decrease its own 
physical investment rate—leaving aside any possible 
between-firm effect stemming from the reallocation 
of capital between firms with different markup levels. 
Additional analysis suggests that any such effects, how-
ever, have typically been small.20
Higher markups may not only reduce firms’ own 
capital and output, but may also spill over to other 
firms through domestic and international supply-chain 
links. Adverse international spillovers may arise because 
domestic firms that raise their markups may reduce 
their demand for foreign inputs (demand channel) or 
raise the price of the goods they sell as inputs to for-
eign firms (input channel). These channels are analyzed 
by regressing a country-industry’s (logarithm of) value 
added on the weighted average of its foreign buyers’ 
markups (demand channel) and the weighted average 
of its foreign suppliers’ markups (input channel), con-
trolling for domestic firm links and a rich set of fixed 
effects (see Online Annex 2.3E for details). Weights 
reflect the importance, for each country-industry con-
sidered, of each foreign country-industry as a source 
of demand and as an input provider. The results point 
to moderate negative international spillovers of higher 
markups through the input channel. For example, for a 
hypothetical industry in an emerging market economy 
that imports 40 percent of its value added, a 10 per-
centage point markup increase across all its foreign 
suppliers is found to reduce output by 0.3 percent, 
all else equal.
The upshot of the analysis is that higher markups 
have been associated with somewhat lower investment 
and capital in advanced economies over the past two 
decades. This has been mostly driven by the small 
fraction of firms whose markups increased sharply. 
19This magnitude in the predicted loss in physical capital is 
somewhat below, but close to, that obtained when simulating the 
macroeconomic model of the next subsection. See also Gutiérrez, 
Jones, and Philippon (2019) for the US economy.
20See Online Annex 2.3B. In addition, to check whether this 
decrease in physical investment may have been replaced with 
increased investment in intangibles, as some suggest (Crouzet and 
Eberly 2018), the same empirical analysis is rerun with the net 
intangible asset investment rate as the dependent variable. The 
estimated relationship between markups and intangible investment is 
found to be economically insignificant.
Higher markups in advanced economies may have also 
entailed mild adverse spillovers to emerging markets. 
Together with the mixed impact of higher markups 
on innovation—which the previous analysis suggests 
may be negligible so far, but would turn increasingly 
negative with increased market power of high-markup 
firms—these macroeconomic implications of rising 
market power should be a cause for policy concern.
Economic Slack, Interest Rates, and Inflation
By reducing investment, rising markups can gen-
erate economic slack that may offset their immediate 
inflationary effect and may also imply a trade-off for 
monetary policy. These issues are explored through 
an estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium 
model of the euro area and the United States (see 
Online Annex 2.3C for details). The model is calibrated 
to match the within-firm component of the observed 
trend in markups since 2000 in each of the two areas 
documented in the section titled “The Rise of Corpo-
rate Market Power.” Considering only the within-firm 
rise in markups, rather than the total increase, aligns 
more closely with the model’s setup and focus on 
rising market power within firms. Rising markups are 
modeled as a decline in the substitutability between the 
goods and services produced by different firms (Jones 
and Philippon 2016; Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold 
2018). In this setup, a sustained, unexpected rise in 
markups is inflationary as firms raise prices. There is 
an offsetting contractionary force, however: firms with 
greater market power face more inelastic demand for 
their products and cut output and investment to earn 
higher profits—as confirmed by the empirical analysis. 
These declines, and the resulting fall in employment, 
are magnified by the failure of wages and prices to 
adjust immediately, due to nominal rigidities.
Model simulations suggest that the trend rise in 
markups may have raised inflation somewhat, pro-
duced some slack, and slightly reduced natural interest 
rates in advanced economies, starting from at least the 
early 2000s. Under rising markups, inflation is higher 
and potential output growth is lower, and so the 
natural interest rate—the interest rate that arises absent 
wage and price rigidities—is also lower than it would 
be under stable markups. For the euro area and the 
United States as a group, the output gap might have 
been about 0.3 percentage point wider, inflation about 
0.2 percentage point higher, and the natural inter-
est rate about 10 basis points lower by 2015 than if 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
66
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
markups had stayed at their 2000 level—all else equal; 
that is, abstracting from the impact of the 2008 finan-
cial crisis (Figure 2.9). The focus of the model-based 
analysis on weaker investment is qualitatively—and 
quantitatively—consistent with the empirical results, 
which highlight higher markups’ harm on investment 
and their broadly neutral effect on innovation. 
Because a trend rise in markups fosters some eco-
nomic slack and slightly lowers the natural interest 
rate, it can deepen a recession when other macroeco-
nomic shocks bring the policy interest rate down to 
its effective lower bound. Following the 2008 financial 
crisis, this may have either marginally amplified the 
recession, pushed central banks to rely even more on 
unconventional monetary policies, or both.
The impact of rising market power on the respon-
siveness of inflation to economic conditions—the 
so-called Phillips curve, which has flattened over the 
past two decades (Chapter 3 of the April 2013 WEO 
and Chapter 3 of the October 2016 WEO)—is less 
clear and depends on how firms (re)set prices, among 
other factors. On one hand, greater market power 
could weaken firms’ incentives to keep prices close to 
those of their competitors for fear of losing market 
share; they might then be more inclined to adjust their 
prices after a shock, in which case inflation would 
become more responsive to economic conditions. On 
the other hand, if a firm incurs a cost from chang-
ing its price, it will adjust less frequently when it has 
more market power because its demand—and profit 
margin—is less sensitive to shocks. Model simulations 
suggest that in either case, the implied change in the 
responsiveness of inflation to economic conditions has 
been small, largely because the increase in markups has 
not been large enough to make a major difference, at 
least so far (Online Annex 2.3C).
Income Distribution
After remaining largely stable for decades, the 
share of national income paid to labor has fallen since 
the 1980s across many advanced economies, by an 
average of about 2 percentage points (Chapter 3 of 
the April 2017 WEO). The four most widely studied 
explanations for this decline are technological change, 
including the associated decline in the relative price of 
capital; globalization and offshoring; measurement dif-
ficulties associated with the rise of intangible capital or 
increased depreciation of physical capital; and weaker 
worker bargaining power.21 In particular, Chapter 3 of 
the April 2017 WEO highlights the role of technology 
and globalization in reducing labor shares in advanced 
and emerging market and developing economies. A 
fifth possible driver, which has gained recent attention, 
could be increased corporate market power and the 
associated rise in economic rents accruing to firm own-
ers (Barkai 2017; De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger 
2018; Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold 2018).
Empirical analysis finds that rising markups have 
compressed firms’ labor income shares. Similar to 
the approach taken to explore the effects of higher 
markups on investment, cross-country firm-level 
regressions explain the labor share within each firm 
by its markup—instrumented to address endogeneity 
concerns (Online Annex 2.3D)—as well as firm-level 
control variables and a rich set of fixed effects. The 
results imply that an increase in markups of 10 per-
centage points is associated with a statistically signifi-
cant 0.3 percentage point decrease in the labor share, 
21Regarding the first three explanations, see Chapter 3 of the April 
2017 WEO and references therein. Regarding labor market dereg-
ulation, worker bargaining power, and labor shares, see Ciminelli, 
Duval, and Furceri (2018) and its references.
Net investment rate
Natural interest rate
Figure 2.9.  Markup Increases, Investment, and the Natural 
Interest Rate
(Percentage point change; index, 2000 = 0)
The trend rise in markups since 2000 may be associated with a 0.1 percentage 
point reduction in the net investment rate and a 10 basis point reduction in the 
annual natural interest rate by 2015.
–0.12
–0.08
–0.04
0.00
0.04
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
15
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Interest rates are annualized.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
67
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
measured as the ratio of the firm’s wage bill to value 
added. Figure 2.10 illustrates that, for the overall 
sample, the average increase in firms’ markups since 
2000 is associated with a 0.2 percentage point decrease 
in the labor share, whereas for the sample of top decile 
firms, the average increase in markups is associated 
with a 1 percentage point decrease in the labor share. 
Taken at face value, the empirical estimates imply 
that rising markups have accounted for at least 
10 percent of the trend decline in the labor share in 
the average advanced economy. Without any markup 
increases since 2000, the average labor share across the 
sample of advanced economies might have been at least 
0.2 percentage point higher today; this compares with 
an average fall in the labor share of about 2 percentage 
points over the past two decades. Because the under-
lying empirical analysis estimates only the labor share 
impact of rising markups within firms, it is likely to 
underestimate the overall effect on the aggregate labor 
share in countries where resource reallocation between 
firms also accounts for some of the rise in markups. 
In the United States, in particular, high-markup 
firms have gained market share at the expense of 
low-markup firms (see “The Rise of Corporate Market 
Power” section). Given that the former tend to have 
lower labor shares than the latter, the aggregate labor 
share falls through a composition effect—even leaving 
aside any markup increase and its labor share impact 
within those firms.22 Indeed, when considering both 
the within- and between-firm components of the rise 
in markups in the empirical analysis—by removing the 
firm fixed effects from the regression—the estimated 
impact of markups on the labor share becomes larger. 
This tentatively suggests that the within-firm contri-
bution may underestimate the overall impact of rising 
markups on the aggregate labor share (see Online 
Annex 2.3D for details).
Although analyzing the full income and wealth 
distribution implications of market power is beyond 
the scope of this chapter, the uneven rise in markups 
across firms that is documented here may have been 
accompanied by greater earnings inequality between 
22Autor and others (2017a, 2017b) and Kehrig and Vincent 
(2018) find that this contribution of resource reallocation between 
firms overshadows that of rising markups within firms in account-
ing for the aggregate fall in the US labor share. Both studies link 
this large, between-firm component to the growing weight in the 
economy of high-productivity firms at the expense of those with 
low productivity—which tend to have lower markups and higher 
labor shares.
workers. Recent evidence shows that earnings inequal-
ity between firms—as opposed to within firms—has 
been the main driver of the overall rise in earnings 
inequality in recent decades, at least in the United 
States (Song and others 2019). One factor, among 
others, might be that only a small fraction of high-pay 
workers has been able to capture a share of their firms’ 
growing economic rents.
Summary and Policy Implications
Over the past two decades, a generally moderate but 
broad-based rise in corporate market power has been 
observed across advanced economies, driven primar-
ily by a small fraction of firms. The analysis in this 
chapter finds that the macroeconomic implications, 
including for the worrisome trends documented in 
Figure 2.1, have been rather modest so far. However, 
they would become increasingly negative if the market 
power of high-markup firms, in particular, were to 
continue to rise in the future—investment would 
weaken, innovation could slow, labor income shares 
would fall further, and monetary policymakers might 
For the overall sample, the average increase in ﬁrms’ markups is associated with 
a 0.2 percentage point decrease in the labor share. For the ﬁrms in the top decile 
of the markup distribution, the average increase in ﬁrms’ markups is associated 
with a decrease in the labor share of 1 percentage point.
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
Overall sample
Top decile
Sources: Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Average changes in markups across ﬁrms are weighted by operating revenue.
Figure 2.10.  Markups and Labor Income Shares
(Percentage point change in labor shares)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
68
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
find it even more difficult to stabilize output in the 
event of major downturns. Unlike in advanced econ-
omies, market power seems to have remained broadly 
stable in emerging market economies, possibly because 
of their greater distance to the technological frontier, 
smaller service sectors—where markup increases have 
been concentrated globally—and weaker competition 
to start with.
Several findings in this chapter tentatively suggest 
that technology-driven changes in the structure of 
many product markets have underpinned at least 
some of the rise in market power in advanced econ-
omies. First, the rather broad-based nature of the 
rise in markups across countries and industries, and 
the role played by a small fraction of firms in most 
cases, point to common underlying forces, rather than 
country- or industry-specific drivers related to anti-
trust policy or product market regulation.23 Although 
markups increased more in the United States than 
in other countries, this also seems to reflect in part 
a growth-enhancing reallocation of resources away 
from low-markup, low-productivity firms toward 
high-markup, high-productivity counterparts. Sec-
ond, and on a related note, in most countries and 
industries, only a small fraction of firms raised their 
markups, and these were typically the most dynamic—
more productive and innovative—firms. This hints at 
winner-takes-most dynamics, rooted in part in specific 
intangible assets (technological, managerial, or other), 
network effects, and economies of scale in driving 
some of the overall rise in markups. Third, there is 
little direct evidence that pro-competition policies 
have weakened across advanced economies so far. On 
the contrary, tariff and nontariff barriers to trade and 
behind-the-border barriers have been vastly reduced 
across advanced economies and emerging market 
economies alike over the past three decades (see, for 
example, Koske and others 2015; and Duval and 
others 2018). These policies strengthened, rather than 
weakened, product market competition in manufac-
turing and service industries, although some firms 
23For example, EU countries have undergone major product 
market deregulation since the early 1990s, and the combination of 
country-level and EU-level competition law and policy is widely seen 
as stringent in international comparison (Bergman and others 2010; 
Alemani and others 2013); yet the analysis above finds that markups 
and market concentration have increased across the European Union 
(see also Calligaris, Criscuolo, and Marcolin 2018; Bajgar and 
others, forthcoming).
may well have done better than others at seizing the 
opportunities that liberalization offered.
Other factors may have also played some role, 
however—possibly magnifying the impact of techno-
logical changes. Winner-takes-most outcomes and the 
associated increase in winners’ market power may be 
more likely when competition policy fails to adapt or 
becomes less stringent, for example, when it comes to 
merger enforcement or exclusionary conduct by domi-
nant firms.24 Over the broad sample of firms analyzed 
in this chapter, the evidence shows that mergers and 
acquisitions have been followed by significantly higher 
markups (Box 2.2). That said, whether the loss to 
consumers from such increases has been typically more 
than offset by gains from cost and price reductions due 
to economies of scale and scope, or by other efficiency 
gains, is an open question that warrants investigation. 
Another related concern, and a lesson from economic 
history, is that firms that have, so far, achieved market 
dominance primarily through innovative products and 
business practices, may attempt to entrench their posi-
tions by erecting barriers to entry going forward—for 
example, potential competitors may find it hard to enter 
markets where incumbents’ success is underpinned by 
hard-to-reproduce (or hard-to-buy) intangible assets, 
such as large proprietary consumer databases.25
The possibility of successful firms discouraging the 
entry and growth of competitors, and the increasingly 
negative association between rising market power 
within firms and key macroeconomic outcomes, 
such as investment or innovation documented in this 
24For example, debate is ongoing regarding the extent to which 
rising market concentration, markups, and profits in the United 
States might reflect a weakening of antitrust enforcement, notably 
starting with the revision in 1982 of the 1968 merger guidelines that 
discouraged increases in concentration only in already highly con-
centrated markets. Khan (2017) and Kwoka (2017) argue that these 
changes should be reconsidered, while Peltzman (2014) uncovers a 
rising concentration trend since then. So, too, do Grullon, Larkin, 
and Michaely (2018) and Gutiérrez and Philippon (2018), which 
highlight the implications of this rise in concentration for profits, 
market power, and the macroeconomy. By contrast, Rossi-Hansberg, 
Sarte, and Trachter (2018) cautions against the use of concentration 
data, especially at the national rather than local level. So does Sha-
piro (2019), which nevertheless identifies some scope for improve-
ment in current US competition policy.
25For example, in a study of US firms, Bessen (2017) finds a 
significant role of proprietary information technology systems in 
entrenching market power. At the same time, rising barriers to 
entry may not necessarily lead to higher aggregate markups. This is 
because they enable less productive, lower-markup firms to survive 
more easily, which, all else equal, should lead to lower concentra-
tion and a possibly unchanged aggregate markup relative to an 
unchanged-barriers scenario (Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu 2018).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
69
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
chapter, call for structural reforms to keep product 
market competition strong in the future. This need 
for reform applies particularly to nonmanufacturing 
industries. It is an agenda that remains unfinished in 
advanced economies, and even more so in emerging 
market economies, despite major deregulation in past 
decades. Regardless of the drivers of rising corporate 
market power, strengthening market contestability by 
cutting domestic regulatory barriers to entry (such as 
administrative burdens on start-ups or regulatory pro-
tections of incumbents) and further openness to trade 
and foreign direct investment would make markets 
more contestable by increasing the threat of entry and, 
so, help to spur growth (Chapter 3 of the April 2016 
WEO; Duval and Furceri 2018). This is even more 
relevant for emerging markets than for advanced econ-
omies, given that emerging markets face larger barriers 
to domestic and foreign competition.26
Strong competition law and policy are key comple-
ments to product market deregulation—just as financial 
supervision is a key complement to financial liberal-
ization. More research is needed to determine whether 
competition policies have contributed to rising market 
power and, if so, the possible remedies. Depending on 
the jurisdiction, a case might be made for strengthening 
some aspects of competition law and policy to ensure 
that they remain supportive of strong market contest-
ability, firm entry, and rivalry—including in two-sided 
markets, such as digital platforms, which raise new 
challenges that may require guidelines for competi-
tion policy to be redrawn (Tirole 2017). In general, 
competition authorities should have ample resources 
to investigate mergers in detail and assess whether they 
will benefit consumers. Anticompetitive behavior may 
be deterred more effectively if competition authorities 
also have the ability to undertake market examinations 
and—when evidence of anticompetitive behavior is 
found—enforce strong remedies, including directing 
firms to divest assets if deemed necessary. An open 
question is whether authorities should have the power 
to investigate, and pay greater attention to, issues of 
potential loss of competition when a large incumbent 
firm acquires a small—but potentially large in the 
future—competitor, as has happened regularly in the 
high-tech sector. Figuring out the counterfactual—
whether the small target could become a large com-
26Product market regulations and barriers to trade and foreign 
direct investment remain comparatively more stringent, and com-
petition policy enforcement weaker, in emerging market economies 
(Koske and others 2015; WB 2017).
petitor if not acquired—is difficult ex ante, calling for 
caution; the argument for such action will increase 
according to the size and persistence of the incumbent 
firm’s market power. Finally, competition policy may 
also need to take a dynamic perspective: the larger and 
more persistent an industry’s profits, the more likely 
there are barriers to entry, and the greater the need for 
close examination of the industry.
The concentration of markup increases among 
a small set of high-productivity firms suggests that 
easing obstacles to technological catch-up by lagging 
firms could also strengthen competition. Examples of 
helpful policies on this front include well-calibrated 
intellectual property rights that keep on incentivizing 
groundbreaking innovation without undermining 
technological diffusion,27 and competition-neutral data 
governance regimes.
Finally, rising market power may further strengthen 
the case for corporate taxation reform. A regular 
corporate income tax system taxes not only the excess 
returns on capital derived from market power—
so-called economic rents—but also normal returns.28 
An efficient corporate tax, however, would exempt 
normal returns and focus on economic rents only. This 
can be achieved through cash flow taxes, which allow 
investment to be expensed, or, alternatively, by provid-
ing some allowance for corporate equity (a deduction 
from regular corporate profit taxation equal to the 
normal return on equity). Innovation, which often 
generates economic rents, can be encouraged efficiently 
through incentives, such as research and development 
tax credits (Chapter 2 of the April 2016 Fiscal Mon-
itor). The destination-based version of these taxes—
which tax corporate income based on the location of 
final consumption, rather than the origin of profits—
has the further advantage of being able to withstand 
profit shifting by multinational firms (Auerbach and 
others 2017). In this way, it also helps level the playing 
field between large firms—which are typically better 
equipped to shift profits across jurisdictions—and their 
smaller, current, or potential competitors.
27For example, this might require that intellectual property rights 
protect disruptive innovations better than those that are incremen-
tal (Acemoglu and Akcigit 2012). Also, patent pools—agreements 
between different firms to jointly market licenses of a group of indi-
vidual patents they own regarding a particular technology—should 
be designed to facilitate, rather than hinder, the use of new technolo-
gies and firm entry (see, for example, Lerner and Tirole 2004).
28In the case of monopolies, achieving an efficient output level 
would also require combining high profit taxes with output subsidies 
(Paulsen and Adams 1987).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
70
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The past two decades have witnessed a broad-based 
increase in corporate saving across major advanced 
economies (see, for example, Chen, Karabarbounis, 
and Neiman 2017; Dao and Maggi 2018).1 This box 
presents new firm-level evidence that shows that the 
rise in the corporate saving rate is closely linked to 
increased concentration in corporate sales and assets—
which has occurred alongside rising markups and 
profitability, as discussed in “The Rise of Corporate 
Market Power” section in Chapter 2.
Among publicly traded firms, the average saving rate 
across narrowly defined (four-digit NACE (Nomen-
clature statistique des activités économiques dans les 
Communauté européenne)) industries in Group of 
Seven (G7) countries appears to comove strongly over 
time with the average share of sales by the largest four 
firms in an industry, with a correlation coefficient of 
0.8 (Figure 2.1.1).2 Uncovering the drivers of this 
comovement could shed light on several issues, includ-
ing the drivers of current account imbalances, whose 
dynamics largely reflect the evolution of corporate 
saving in advanced economies (IMF 2017). 
Analysis using data for listed firms in the G7 coun-
tries reveals four key findings:
•• Most of the increase in aggregate corporate saving 
reflects higher saving by incumbent firms rather 
than compositional changes driven by entry of new 
firms, exit, or market share reallocation among 
incumbent firms.
•• Incumbent firms have been increasing their saving 
rates more in industries where concentration (or 
markups) has risen more (Figure 2.1.2), consis-
tent with the time series correlation shown in 
Figure 2.1.1.3
The authors of this box are Mai Chi Dao and Nan Li, based 
on Dao and others (forthcoming).
1The corporate saving rate here refers to total gross saving 
(undistributed gross profits) as a share of gross value added.
2All the results presented here hold when the average firm 
markup is used as a measure of market concentration. Firm 
markups are defined and calculated in the same way as in the 
rest of the chapter.
3This finding is confirmed in a more detailed panel regression, 
which is estimated using Worldscope data for 1996–­2014:  
​s​ ijct​  =  ​β​ 0​ + ​β​ 1​ CR4​ jt​ + ​β​ 2​ ​X​ ijct​ + ​γ​ ct​ + ​δ​ i​ + ​ε​ ijct​,​  
where ​s​ ijct​ =​ ​  Grosssavings 
____________ 
 
Grossvalueadded ​ is the saving rate of firm ​i​ in industry ​
j​, country ​c​, at time ​t​; CR4 is market concentration, measured 
as the fraction of total sales (or assets) accrued to the four largest 
firms in an industry ​j​; ​X​ ijct​ is a vector of other firm-specific 
controls, such as age, and ​γ​ ct​ and ​δ​ i​ are country-year and firm 
fixed effects, respectively. Coefficient ​β​ 1​ is found to be positive 
and statistically significant.
•• Rising pretax profits (gross operating surplus) as a 
share of corporate value added are the main source 
for this increase in corporate saving in concentrat-
ing industries. Despite their rising profitability, 
firms in industries with larger increases in concen-
tration have not significantly raised their dividends 
or tax payments.4
•• The within-firm rise in saving has been driven by 
large firms, with the top 1 percent (by size) showing 
the largest increases.
4Again, this finding is based on a similar regression specifi-
cation, with profits, dividends, and tax payments (as a share of 
value added) as the dependent variables.
CR4
Corporate saving rate (right scale)
Figure 2.1.1.  Comovement between Average 
Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving 
in Group of Seven Countries
(Percent)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: This ﬁgure reports the movements of the average 
ﬁrm’s saving and average concentration (at four-digit 
industry level) across countries and industries. The set of 
countries includes Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, 
the United Kingdom, and the United States. Utility and 
ﬁnancial sectors are excluded due to regulation; agriculture 
and other services are excluded because of poor coverage. 
CR4 = total market share of the four largest ﬁrms in an 
industry.
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
1998 2000
04
02
06
08
10
12
14
Box 2.1. The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
71
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The drivers of the relationship between rising 
concentration (or markups) and increasing corporate 
saving are not yet fully understood. One possible fac-
tor, explored in Dao and others (forthcoming), is the 
trend decline in global real interest rates (and corpo-
rate tax rates) over the past couple of decades. Given 
that larger firms are less financially constrained and 
able to leverage more, lower interest rates benefit them 
disproportionately. As a result, they are better able to 
exploit opportunities to invest in high-return projects 
(because, for example, of network effects or increas-
ing returns to scale). When liquidity is constrained 
and firms must put away investment funds for future 
projects, larger firms save disproportionately more for 
these high-return projects.
Figure 2.1.2.  Change in Industry 
Concentration and Change in Saving Rates
(Percentage points)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The distributions of concentration and saving rate 
changes were divided into 50 equally sized bins. Each point 
in the ﬁgure represents the average change in concentration 
within a bin (CR4 at four-digit industry level, absorbing 
country-industry ﬁxed effects), plotted against the 
corresponding (bin) average change in saving rates 
(conditional on ﬁrm ﬁxed effects). CR4 = total market share 
of the four largest ﬁrms in an industry.
Change in corporate saving rate
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Change in CR4
Box 2.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
72
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Renewed debate about the economic welfare 
implications of mergers and acquisitions has preoc-
cupied many economists and policymakers in recent 
years.1 Mergers and acquisitions can enhance efficiency 
through economies of scale and scope, thereby reduc-
ing production costs and prices or improving product 
quality. At the same time, however, the consolidation 
of firms can leave an economy with fewer and larger 
firms that eventually use reduced competitive pressure 
to raise prices or offer consumers lower product variety 
or quality. This box investigates whether acquiring 
firms’ price markups have increased following mergers 
and acquisitions across the large cross-country sample 
of firms considered in this chapter. To this end, the 
extensive firm-level data set on markups is combined 
with transaction-specific data on mergers and acquisi-
tions.2 The main finding from this box is that mergers 
and acquisitions are followed by markup increases by 
acquiring firms.3
The total number of worldwide mergers and 
acquisitions deals has grown steadily since 2000 (Fig-
ure 2.2.1). Among these, the value share of horizontal 
deals—those in which acquirer and target firms are 
in the same industry—has recovered to its pre–global 
financial crisis average of about one-third. The pickup 
in mergers and acquisitions activity raises the question 
of its economic effects.
Mergers and acquisitions have been generally 
accompanied by markup increases by acquiring firms. 
To assess the change in the markup of acquirers against 
The author of this box is Wenjie Chen.
1For recent examples regarding the United States, see 
Peltzman (2014); Khan (2017); Kwoka (2017); Grullon, Larkin, 
and Michaely (2018); Gutiérrez and Philippon (2018); and 
Shapiro (2019).
2The mergers and acquisitions data are collected by Zephyr 
and come from governmental regulatory filings, media reports, 
and reporting arrangements with investment banks. Therefore, 
the resulting data set on mergers and acquisitions theoretically 
includes data for the universe of mergers and acquisitions trans-
actions. One shortcoming is the underreporting of deal values, 
which are missing for about one-half of reported transactions. 
Hence, while some descriptive statistics are included using 
existing deal values—bearing in mind the underreporting issue—
the main empirical analysis in this box abstracts from using 
deal values.
3The analysis builds on, and is consistent with, recent research 
on firms in the United States. Blonigen and Pierce (2016) 
finds that mergers and acquisitions in the US manufacturing 
industry are associated with increases in average markups for the 
acquired plant; in addition, they find little evidence of increased 
plant-level productivity.
that of nonacquirers, a simple ordinary least squares 
regression is run that explains the markup by a dummy 
variable that takes a value of 0 for all firms in 2000 and 
switches to 1 starting from the year of the mergers and 
acquisitions. To address the risk that the relationship 
between mergers and acquisitions and markups may be 
obscured by confounding factors, the analysis controls 
for firm and country-industry-year (four-digit NACE 
(Nomenclature statistique des activités économiques 
dans les Communauté européenne)) fixed effects, as well 
as for the firm’s size (operating revenue), efficiency (total 
factor productivity), and profitability (earned income 
before interest and taxes divided by total assets). Stan-
dard errors are clustered at the firm level. The results 
show a sizable and statistically significant association 
between mergers and acquisitions and the subsequent 
change in a firm’s markup, on the order of 1.1 per-
centage points, on average, and 1.2 percentage points 
for horizontal mergers and acquisitions (Figure 2.2.2, 
rows 1 and 2).
In a counterfactual exercise that attempts to control 
for unobserved factors that could drive a firm to seek 
a merger or acquisition and also increase its markups, 
Horizontal deal share of total value (percent)
Number of deals worldwide (thousands, right scale)
Figure 2.2.1.  Total Number of Deals and 
Share of Horizontal Deals
Sources: Zephyr; and IMF staff calculations.
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14 15
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Box 2.2. Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
73
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
the same regression estimation is performed using a 
sample of mergers and acquisitions deals that were 
announced but then aborted. This set of announced 
acquirers with ultimately withdrawn deals should share 
similar characteristics, observed and unobserved, with 
acquirers in completed deals. The result yields a (sta-
tistically insignificant) negative relationship between 
markups and the (counterfactual) post–mergers and 
acquisitions period, controlling for the same variables 
and including the same set of fixed effects as before. 
The sample size is much smaller for this set of counter-
factual mergers and acquisitions, and there could be 
specific reasons behind the failure of these announced 
mergers and acquisitions that also negatively affect 
markup rates. Bearing these caveats in mind, the 
results suggest that when mergers and acquisitions are 
not completed, the markups of aspiring acquirers do 
not increase following the mergers and acquisitions 
announcement, while they do for firms that succeed in 
completing the deals.
More detailed analysis is required to establish a 
causal link between mergers and acquisitions activity 
and increasing markups, and to assess its impact on 
productivity and other measures of economic efficiency 
that can benefit consumers. Ultimately, a comparison 
of these two effects is needed before implications for 
welfare and competition policy can be drawn.
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
Withdrawn
Horizontal
Completed
***
**
Figure 2.2.2.  Impact of Mergers and 
Acquisitions on Acquirer Firm’s Markups, 
by Deal Type
(Percentage points)
Sources: Orbis; Zephyr; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 5 and 
1 percent conﬁdence levels, respectively.
Box 2.2 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
74
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Ufuk Akcigit. 2012. “Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights Policy, Competition and Innovation.” Journal of 
the European Economic Association 10 (1): 1­−42.
Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. 2015. 
“Identification Properties of Recent Production Function 
Estimators.” Econometrica 83 (6): 2411–451.
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kiliç 
Çelik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 
2017. “Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Grif-
fith, and Peter Howitt. 2005. “Competition and Innovation: 
An Inverted-U Relationship.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
120 (2): 701­−28.
Alemani, Enrico, Caroline Klein, Isabell Koske, Cristiana Vitale, 
and Isabell Wanner. 2013. “New Indicators of Competi-
tion Law and Policy in 2013 for OECD and non-OECD 
Countries.” OECD Economics Department Working Paper 
1104, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment, Paris.
Auerbach, Alan, Michael Devereux, Michael Keene, and John 
Vella. 2017. “Destination-Based Cash Flow Taxation.” Saïd 
Business School Research Paper 17/01, Oxford.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Pat-
terson, and John Van Reenen, 2017a. “Concentrating on 
the Fall of the Labor Share.” American Economic Review 107 
(5): 180−85.
———. 2017b. “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of 
Superstar Firms.” NBER Working Paper 23396, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bajgar, Matej, Giuseppe Berlingieri, Sara Calligaris, Chiara 
Criscuolo, and Jonathan Timmis. Forthcoming. “Industry 
Concentration in Europe and North America.” OECD 
Science, Technology and Industry Department Working 
Paper, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment, Paris.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2017. “Productivity 
and Misallocation in General Equilibrium.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 24007, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Barkai, Simcha. 2017. “Declining Labor and Capital Shares.” 
Unpublished.
Bergman, Mats, Malcom Coate, Maria Jakobsson, and Shawn 
Ulrik. 2010. “Comparing Merger Policies in the European 
Union and the United States.” Review of Industrial Organiza-
tion 36 (4): 305−31.
Bessen, James. 2017. “Information Technology and Industry 
Concentration.” Boston University School of Law & Eco-
nomics Paper 17−41, Boston, MA.
Blonigen, Bruce, and Justin Pierce. 2016. “Evidence for the 
Effects of Mergers on Market Power and Efficiency.” NBER 
Working Paper 22750, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier 
Gourinchas. 2017. “Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Pre-
mia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns 
on Capital, Earning Yields, and Factor Shares.” American 
Economic Review 107 (5): 614−20.
Calligaris, Sara, Chiara Criscuolo, and Luca Marcolin. 2018. 
“Markups in the Digital Era.” OECD Science, Technology 
and Industry Working Paper 18/10, Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Calvo, Guillermo. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a 
Utility-Maximizing Framework.” Journal of Monetary Econom-
ics 12 (3): 383–98.
Chen, Peter, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Brent Neiman. 2017. 
“The Global Rise of Corporate Saving.” Journal of Monetary 
Economics 89 (C): 1−19.
Ciminelli, Gabriele, Romain A. Duval, and Davide Furceri. 
2018. “Employment Protection Deregulation and Labor 
Shares in Advanced Economies.” IMF Working Paper 18/186, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Crouzet, Nicolas, and Janice Eberly. 2018. “Intangibles, Invest-
ment, and Efficiency.” American Economic Review, Papers and 
Proceedings 108: 426–31.
Dao, Mai Chi, Isabel Hanisch, Callum Jones, and Nan Li. Forth-
coming. “The Granularity of Corporate Saving.” IMF Working 
Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Dao, Mai Chi, and Chiara Maggi. 2018. “The Rise in Corporate 
Saving and Cash Holding in Advanced Economies: Aggregate 
and Firm Level Trends.” IMF Working Paper 18/262, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Davis, Steven. J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier 
Miranda. 2007: “Volatility and Dispersion in Business 
Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” 
in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006 (21): 107–80. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market 
Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
———. 2018. “Global Market Power.” NBER Working 
Paper 24768, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
———, and Gabriel Unger. 2018. “The Rise of Market Power 
and the Macroeconomic Implications.” Unpublished.
De Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski. 2012. “Markups and 
Firm-Level Export Status.” American Economic Review 102 
(6): 2437−471.
Díez, Federico, Jiayue Fan, and Carolina Villegas-Sánchez. 
Forthcoming. “Global Declining Competition.” IMF Work-
ing Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Díez, Federico, Daniel Leigh, and Suchanan Tambunlertchai. 
2018. “Global Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Impli-
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
75
CHAPTER 2 
The Rise of Corporate market power and its macroeconomic effectS
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
cations.” IMF Working Paper 18/137, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Duval, Romain, and Davide Furceri. 2018. “The Effects of 
Labor and Product Market Reforms: The Role of Macro-
economic Conditions and Policies.” IMF Economic Review 
66 (1): 31−69.
———, Bingjie Hu, Joao Jalles, and Huy Nguyen. 2018. “A 
Narrative Database of Major Labor and Product Market 
Reforms in Advanced Economies.” IMF Working Paper 
18/19, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2018. 
“How Costly Are Markups?” NBER Working Paper 24800, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold. 
2018. “Kaldor and Piketty’s Facts: The Rise of Monopoly 
Power in the United States.” NBER Working Paper 24287, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gal, Peter. 2013. “Measuring Total Factor Productivity at the 
Firm Level Using OECD-ORBIS.” OECD Economics 
Department Working Paper 1049, Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Galí, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business 
Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework. Princ-
eton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gopinath, Gita, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, 
and Carolina Villegas-Sánchez. 2017. “Capital Allocation and 
Productivity in South Europe.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
132 (4): 1915–967.
Grullon, Gustavo, Yelena Larkin, and Roni Michaely. 2018. “Are 
US Industries Becoming More Concentrated?” Unpublished.
Gutiérrez, German, Callum Jones, and Thomas Philippon. 
2019. “Entry Costs and the Macroeconomy.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 25609, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Gutiérrez, German, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. 
“Investment-less Growth: An Empirical Investigation.” Brook-
ings Papers on Economic Activity, Washington, DC.
———. 2018. “How EU Markets Became More Competitive 
than US Markets: A Study of Institutional Drift.” NBER 
Working Paper 24700, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hall, Robert E. 2017. “The Anatomy of Stagnation in a Modern 
Economy.” Economica 84 (333): 1–15.
Inklaar, Robert, and Marcel P. Timmer. 2014. “The Rela-
tive Price of Services.” Review of Income and Wealth 60 
(4): 727–46.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2017. External Sector 
Report. Washington, DC.
Jones, Callum, and Thomas Philippon. 2016. “The Secular 
Stagnation of Investment?” Unpublished.
Kalemli-Özcan, Şebnem, Bent Sorensen, Carolina 
Villegas-Sánchez, Vadym Volosovych, and Sevcan Yesiltas. 
2015. “How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm 
Level Data from the ORBIS Global Database.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 21558, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Kamien, Morton, and Nancy Schwartz. 1976. “On the Degree 
of Rivalry for Maximum Innovative Activity.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 90 (2): 245−60.
Kehrig, Matthias, and Nicolas Vincent. 2018. “The Micro-Level 
Anatomy of the Labor Share Decline.” NBER Working 
Paper 25275, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Khan, Lina. 2017. “Amazon’s Antitrust Paradox.” Yale Law 
Journal 126 (3): 710−804.
Koske, Isabell, Isabelle Wanner, Rosamaria Bitetti, and Omar 
Barbiero. 2015. “The 2013 Update of the OECD’s Database 
on Product Market Regulation: Policy Insights for OECD 
and non-OECD Countries.” OECD Economics Depart-
ment Working Paper 1200, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Kwoka, John. 2017. “US Antitrust and Competition Policy amid 
the New Merger Wave.” Washington Center for Equitable 
Growth, Washington, DC.
Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole. 2004. “Efficient Patent Pools.” 
American Economic Review 94 (3): 691−711.
Melitz, Marc J., and Sašo Polanec. 2015. “Dynamic Olley-Pakes 
Productivity Decomposition with Entry and Exit.” RAND 
Journal of Economics 46 (2): 362–75.
Paulsen, Jim, and Roy Adams. 1987. “Optimal Taxation of a 
Monopoly.” National Tax Journal 40 (1): 121−25.
Peltzman, Sam. 2014. “Industrial Concentration under the Rule 
of Reason.” Journal of Law and Economics, 57 (S3): 101−20.
Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas 
Trachter. 2018. “Diverging Trends in National and Local 
Concentration.” CEPR Discussion Paper 13174, Center for 
Economic and Policy Research, Washington, DC.
Rotemberg, Julio. 1982. “Sticky Prices in the United States.” 
Journal of Political Economy 90 (6): 1187−211.
Scherer, Fredrick. 1967. “Market Structure and the Employment 
of Scientists and Engineers.” American Economic Review 57 
(3): 524−31.
Shapiro, Carl. 2012. “Competition and Innovation: Did Arrow 
Hit the Bull’s Eye?” in The Rate and Direction of Inventive 
Activity Revisited, edited by Josh Lerner and Scott Stern. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 2019. “Antitrust Policy in a Time of Populism.” Inter-
national Journal of Industrial Organization, in press, available 
online February 27, 2019.
Song, Jae, David Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and 
Till Von Wachter. 2019. “Firming Up Inequality.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 134 (1): 1–50.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2015. “New Theoretical Perspectives on the 
Distribution of Income and Wealth among Individuals: 
Part I—The Wealth Residual.” NBER Working Paper 21189, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
76
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Tirole, Jean. 2017. Economics for the Common Good, Chapter 14. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Van Reenen, John. 2018. “Increasing Differences between Firms: 
Market Power and the Macroeconomy.” CEPR Discussion 
Paper 1576, Center for Economic and Policy Research, 
Washington, DC.
Wolff, Edward. 2010. “Recent Trends in Household Wealth in 
the United States: Rising Debt and the Middle Class Squeeze: 
An Update to 2007.” Levy Economics Institute Working 
Papers Series 159, Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY.
World Bank (WB). 2017. A Step Ahead: Competition Policy for Shared 
Prosperity and Inclusive Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
77
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Over the past three decades, the price of machinery and 
equipment has fallen dramatically relative to other prices in 
advanced and emerging market and developing economies 
alike. Could rising trade tensions, a slowing pace of trade 
integration, and sluggish productivity growth threaten 
this potential driver of investment going forward? This 
chapter sets out to answer this question by documenting 
key patterns in the price of capital goods, its drivers, and 
its impact on real investment rates. Worldwide, investment 
growth has slowed considerably since the global financial 
crisis of 2008–09. Yet, when compared with its levels in the 
early 1990s, real investment in machinery and equip-
ment as a share of real GDP has increased significantly. 
The chapter finds that the decline in the relative price 
of tradable investment goods has provided sizable impe-
tus to the rise in real investment rates in machinery and 
equipment over the past three decades. The broad-based 
decline in the relative price of machinery and equipment, 
in turn, has been driven by faster productivity growth 
in the capital-goods-producing sector and rising trade 
integration. Yet, emerging market and developing econo-
mies still face higher relative prices of tradable investment 
goods, consistent with their higher policy-induced trade 
costs and lower productivity in the tradable goods sector. 
Taken together, the chapter’s findings provide an additional, 
often overlooked, argument in support of policies aimed 
at reducing trade barriers and reinvigorating interna-
tional trade. The analysis also highlights the importance 
of continued technological progress to maintain the pace of 
decline in relative capital goods prices, which has provided 
an important tailwind to investment around the world.
Introduction
The investment needs of most emerging market 
and developing economies remain substantial. These 
economies still have only a small fraction of the capital 
available in advanced economies, even though their 
investment rates have increased significantly over the 
The authors of this chapter are Weicheng Lian, Natalija Novta, 
Evgenia Pugacheva, Yannick Timmer, and Petia Topalova (lead), with 
support from Jilun Xing and Candice Zhao, and contributions from 
Michal Andrle, Christian Bogmans, Lama Kiyasseh, Sergii Melesh-
chuk, and Rafael Portillo. The chapter benefited from comments and 
suggestions by Andrei Levchenko and Maurice Obstfeld.
past three decades, with a near doubling of real invest-
ment rates in machinery and equipment (Figure 3.1, 
panels 1–2). Meeting the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals would require a sizable boost to 
investment in many low-income developing countries 
(Gaspar and others 2019). High investment rates have 
been a key reason for significantly higher growth in 
emerging market and developing economies than in 
advanced economies since the early 2000s, which has 
helped narrow income gaps. The assumption of con-
tinued strength in investment in emerging market and 
developing economies underpins the projection that 
they will grow faster than advanced economies in the 
medium term (Figure 3.1, panels 3–4).1
The capital deepening in emerging market and 
developing economies over the past three decades has 
coincided with sizable declines in the price of investment 
goods and, in particular, of tradable capital goods, such 
as machinery and equipment, relative to other prices 
in the economy (Figure 3.1, panels 5–6).2 Economists 
have long hypothesized that the relative price of invest-
ment is one of the key drivers of investment rates and 
therefore economic development.3 The decline in relative 
investment prices, in turn, is often attributed to faster 
1Advanced economies experienced a similar increase in real 
investment rates in machinery and equipment until the 2008 global 
financial crisis. For an analysis of the investment slump in these 
economies in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, see Chapter 
3 of the April 2015 World Economic Outlook (WEO).
2In this chapter, the relative price of investment refers to the ratio 
of the price of investment to the price of consumption. All stylized 
patterns and findings are qualitatively similar if the price of investment 
is instead compared with the overall GDP price level. The capital deep-
ening also occurred in the context of improved macroeconomic policy 
and institutional frameworks, a synchronized pickup in economic activ-
ity until the global financial crisis, and falling global real interest rates.
3See, for example, DeLong and Summers (1991, 1992, 1993); 
Sarel (1995); Collins and Williamson (2001); Hsieh and Klenow 
(2007); Armenter and Lahiri (2012); and Mutreja, Ravikumar, 
and Sposi (2018). The relative price of investment goods tends 
to be inversely related to investment or per capita growth (Jones 
1994; Sarel 1995; Restuccia and Urrutia 2001), and high relative 
investment prices likely serve as a headwind to the structural trans-
formation many low-income developing countries need to converge 
to advanced economies’ income levels. High tariffs on imported 
equipment, part of many developing economies’ import-substitution 
growth strategies in the 1970s and 1980s, have often been cited as 
an important impediment to development (Taylor 1998a; Sen 2002; 
Estevadeordal and Taylor 2013; Johri and Rahman 2017).
THE PRICE OF CAPITAL GOODS: 
A DRIVER OF INVESTMENT UNDER THREAT?
3
CHAPTER
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
78
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Overall
Machinery and 
equipment (right scale)
Investment
Private consumption
Government consumption
Net exports
Inventories
Total
Investment
Private consumption
Government consumption
Net exports
Inventories
Total
Coefﬁcient
10-year precrisis trend
95% conﬁdence interval
Coefﬁcient
95% conﬁdence interval
0
2
4
6
8
1990
95
2000
05
10
15
17
1. Real Investment-to-Real GDP Ratio in EMDEs
 (Median and interquartile range)
0
17
33
50
67
83
100
Total
Structures
Machinery
Transport
Other
2. EMDE Capital Stock in US dollars per Capita, 2014
 (Median EMDE as percent of median AE; AE = 100)
0
2
4
6
8
1990
95
2000
05
10
15
20
23
3. Contribution to Real GDP Growth: AEs
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
1990
95
2000
05
10
15
20
23
4. Contribution to Real GDP Growth: EMDEs
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
5. Relative Price of Overall Investment
 (Percent change relative to 1990)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Capital
goods sectors
All tradable
Tradable,
not capital goods
Nontradable
7. Backward Participation in GVCs
 (Percent of exports, foreign value added)
1990
95
2000
05
10
15 18
6. Relative Price of M&E
 (Percent change relative to 1990:Q1)
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
10
12
14
10
–6
–4
–2
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
Sources: Eora Multi-Region Input-Output (MRIO) database; Haver Analytics; Penn World Table (PWT) 9.0; World Economic Outlook (WEO) database; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the median and interquartile range of the overall real investment-to-GDP ratio (from WEO) and real investment in machinery and equipment
to real GDP ratio (from PWT 9.0). Panels 3 and 4 show contributions to real GDP growth for advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies, 
respectively, based on WEO historical data and projections. In panels 5 and 6, the solid line plots year (quarter) ﬁxed effects from a regression of log relative prices 
on year (quarter) ﬁxed effects and country ﬁxed effects to account for entry and exit during the sample period and level differences in the overall investment price 
relative to the price of consumption. Year (quarter) ﬁxed effects are normalized to show percent change from the relative investment prices in 1990 (1990:Q1). 
Shaded areas indicate 95 percent conﬁdence intervals. The relative price of investment is obtained by dividing the investment deﬂator by the consumption deﬂator. 
For further details, see Online Annex 3.1. The ﬁgure in panel 6 is based on quarterly data from select advanced economies, including: Australia, Canada, Germany, 
Hong Kong SAR, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom, United States. Panel 7 depicts the median and interquartile range of the sector’s backward global 
value chain participation (deﬁned as the foreign value added in exports) across all economies in the Eora MRIO database deemed to have sufﬁcient data quality at the 
sectoral level during 1995–2015. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; GVCs = global value chains; M&E = machinery 
and equipment.
Real investment-to-real GDP ratios increased substantially in emerging market and developing economies over the past three decades, but capital stocks per capita 
remain very low. The rise in real investment-to-real GDP ratios coincided with large declines in the price of machinery and equipment relative to the price of 
consumption, with production of machinery and equipment being strongly embedded in global value chains.
Figure 3.1.  Capital Stock, Investment, and the Relative Price of Capital Goods
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
79
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
growth in the productivity of sectors that produce capital 
goods than in sectors producing consumption goods 
and services, linked in part to advances in information 
technology. Efficiency gains from globalization and the 
associated specialization of production around the world 
have also supported the downward trend in capital 
goods prices because the production of machinery and 
equipment is strongly embedded in global value chains 
(Figure 3.1, panel 7). As emerging market and develop-
ing economies have become increasingly integrated into 
the world economy and have reduced barriers to trade, 
they have been able to benefit from, and contribute to, 
this engine of economic expansion, thus further reducing 
the relative prices of tradable capital goods.
Could this potential driver of investment come under 
threat going forward? The slowdown in global trade, 
the potential maturation of global value chains, and the 
waning pace of trade liberalization since the mid-2000s, 
as discussed in Chapter 2 of the October 2016 WEO, 
may limit further declines in the price of investment. 
Even more immediate is the threat from higher trade 
barriers in some advanced economies, which could 
jeopardize the benefits from free trade—taken for 
granted for so long in these economies. Hikes in tariffs 
and nontariff barriers could disrupt cross-border supply 
chains and, by making production less efficient, slow or 
even reverse the downward trend in capital goods prices. 
Even if not directly involved in the current trade ten-
sions, many emerging market and developing economies 
stand to lose if the disputes escalate. As net importers 
of capital goods, they may face higher prices of machin-
ery and equipment and, more broadly, diminished 
opportunities to benefit from the cross-border spread of 
knowledge and technology brought on by globalization 
(see Chapter 3 of the April 2018 WEO).
Sluggish productivity growth in advanced 
economies—a concern even before the global financial 
crisis—poses another threat to further declines in capital 
goods prices. Productivity in the world’s leading capital-­
goods-producing economies has slowed further, with the 
global financial crisis leaving lasting scars on research 
and development spending and technology adoption (see 
Adler and others 2017 and Chapter 2 of the October 
2018 WEO). Aging and the rise of market power in 
some of the main capital-goods-producing economies 
(see Chapter 2 of the April 2019 WEO) also cast a 
shadow on the innovation and continued technological 
advances that may be needed to spur further decline in 
the price of investment goods. The pace of decline in the 
relative price of machinery and equipment has already 
slowed considerably in advanced economies in the past 
decade, potentially exerting an additional drag on these 
economies’ lackluster investment since the global finan-
cial crisis (Figure 3.1, panel 6).
With this backdrop in mind, the chapter examines 
several interrelated questions.4
•• How have prices of investment goods evolved over 
time and across countries? Do lower-income countries 
face higher capital goods prices, in absolute terms 
and/or relative to other prices in the economy?
•• What drives the price of tradable capital goods over 
time, and which factors explain differences across 
countries? How much have technological advances 
and trade integration contributed to the relative 
decline in the prices of machinery and equipment? 
To what extent are capital goods prices shaped by 
policy choices, particularly barriers to trade?
•• How responsive is investment in machinery and 
equipment to the price of these assets? How much 
have changes in capital goods prices contributed to 
capital deepening over the past three decades?
The chapter’s main findings are as follows:
•• The relative price of tradable investment goods, 
namely machinery and equipment, has declined 
across advanced, emerging market, and developing 
economies over the past three decades. The declines 
have been significant and have been driven by faster 
productivity growth in capital goods production and 
deepening trade integration.
•• Yet, the most recently available data on the price of 
comparable baskets of machinery and equipment 
across countries suggest that, in 2011, emerging mar-
ket and developing economies faced higher machin-
ery and equipment prices, both in absolute terms and 
especially relative to the price of consumption. The 
higher relative prices of machinery and equipment 
reflect these economies’ lower relative efficiency in 
producing investment goods and tradable goods more 
broadly, and significantly higher trade costs, such as 
those arising from higher tariffs.
•• Finally, model simulations and empirical evidence 
suggest that the relative price of investment goods is 
an important driver of real investment rates. There 
has been a slowdown in investment worldwide since 
the global financial crisis. Yet, over the past 30 years, 
4In this chapter, unless otherwise noted, the terms tradable capital 
goods, tradable investment goods, and machinery and equipment are 
used interchangeably to denote tangible tradable investment goods—
namely, machinery, equipment, and transportation capital goods.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
80
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
real investment in machinery and equipment as a 
share of real GDP has increased significantly in both 
advanced as well as emerging market and developing 
economies. A nontrivial share of this increase can 
be attributed to the decline in the relative prices of 
machinery and equipment.
Taken together, the findings of this chapter provide 
an additional, often overlooked, argument in support of 
policies aimed at reducing trade costs and reinvigorating 
international trade. Many emerging market and devel-
oping economies still maintain trade barriers that raise 
the relative price of capital goods for domestic investors. 
An effort to remove these barriers would provide further 
impetus for investment in tradable capital goods and 
support the capital deepening needed in many of these 
economies, helping to counterbalance headwinds from 
abroad. Advanced economies, whose real investment—
recent weakness notwithstanding—has been similarly 
supported by declining prices of capital goods, should 
also guard against protectionist measures that raise trade 
costs. For both groups of economies, reviving the pro-
cess of trade liberalization, which has slowed down sig-
nificantly since the mid-2000s, is vital for maintaining 
the pace of decline in relative capital goods prices. The 
impetus this would provide to real investment would 
come on top of the well-known welfare and productiv-
ity gains from international trade (for a discussion, see 
IMF/WB/WTO 2017).
The analysis in this chapter also highlights the 
importance of continued technological advances and 
innovation in capital goods production in advanced 
and emerging market and developing economies alike. 
Such advances, by lowering the relative price of invest-
ment goods, could generate dividends beyond their 
effect on aggregate productivity growth. As discussed 
in Adler and others (2017) and Chapter 2 of the April 
2016 Fiscal Monitor, policies that stimulate research 
and development, entrepreneurship, and technology 
transfer, alongside continued investment in education 
and public infrastructure, can help.
The Price of Capital Goods: Key Patterns
Over Time
Since the 1990s, capital goods prices relative to con-
sumption prices have displayed two key patterns.5
5See Online Annex 3.1 for country coverage, data sources, and 
variables definitions. All annexes are available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​WEO.
First, the relative prices of the four main types 
of fixed capital assets—structures, machinery and 
equipment (excluding transportation), transportation 
equipment, and intellectual property products—have 
evolved quite differently (Figure 3.2, panels 1–4). 
According to data in the Penn World Table version 
9.0 across 180 countries, the prices of machinery 
and equipment and transportation equipment have 
declined significantly since the early 1990s when 
compared with the consumption deflator.6 On one 
hand, the relative price of machinery and equipment 
fell by about 60 percent in advanced and 40 percent 
in emerging market and developing economies. The 
price of residential and nonresidential structures, on 
the other hand, has more closely tracked consumption 
prices and, in advanced economies, has even increased 
since the mid-2000s in relative terms. The price of 
other investment, which consists mostly of intellectual 
property products, such as research and development 
and computer software and databases, has also come 
down, although more modestly than for tangible trad-
able investment goods. Finally, the dramatic decline 
in the relative prices of computing equipment (such 
as computer hardware, whose prices fell by 90 percent 
since 1990) and, to a lesser extent, communications 
equipment (whose prices fell by almost 60 percent), 
within the machinery and equipment asset type 
(Figure 3.2, panels 5–7), supports the hypothesis that 
advances in information technology have played an 
important role in driving down the relative price of 
investment.7 Zooming in on the price of green capital 
goods, Box 3.1 documents large declines in the cost of 
installing and operating low-carbon electric generation 
capacity for some renewable energy sources over the 
past decade. 
6The pace of decline in the relative price of tangible tradable 
capital goods accelerated significantly in the 1990s, especially for 
the emerging market and developing economy country group, as 
discussed in Online Annex 3.2. Recent data from 10 advanced 
economies suggest that the rate of decline in the relative price of 
machinery and equipment has slowed since the global financial crisis. 
Online Annex 3.2 provides additional stylized facts on the evolution 
of investment rates across types of fixed capital assets and country 
groups and the composition of investment across types of capital.
7Measuring changes in the prices of goods that undergo sub-
stantial quality improvements, such as computers, communications 
equipment, and so on, is a daunting task because of the difficulty of 
comparing products with very different attributes (Schreyer 2002). 
Statistical offices make substantial efforts to accurately reflect these 
changes in price indices, although methodologies likely differ signifi-
cantly across countries. The chapter relies on the data provided by 
national authorities and compiled in Penn World Table 9.0.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
81
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
AEs
EMDEs
AEs
EMDEs
AEs
EMDEs
AEs
EMDEs
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
Figure 3.2.  Dynamics of Relative Prices across Types of Capital Goods and Broad Country Groups
(Percent change relative to 1990)
1. Structures
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
2. Machinery and Equipment (excluding Transportation)
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
3. Transportation Equipment
4. Other Investment
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
5. Communications Equipment
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
6. Computing Equipment (IT)
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
1990
95
2000
05
10
14
7. Other Machinery and Equipment
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
The decline in the relative price of investment was driven by a broad-based decline in the relative price of machinery and equipment. Within tangible tradable capital
goods, computing and communications equipment experienced the largest price declines.
Sources: EU KLEMS; Penn World Table 9.0; World KLEMS; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 1–4 use data from the Penn World Table 9.0 capital detail ﬁle, while panels 5–7 use data from the EU and World KLEMS databases. The relative price of 
investment (for each type of capital good) is obtained by dividing the relevant investment deﬂator by the consumption deﬂator. The solid line plots year ﬁxed effects 
from a regression of log relative prices on year ﬁxed effects and country ﬁxed effects to account for entry and exit during the sample period and level differences in 
relative prices. Year ﬁxed effects are normalized to show percent change from the relative investment prices in 1990. Shaded areas indicate 95 percent conﬁdence 
intervals. Other investment incudes intellectual property investment, such as research and development. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and 
developing economies. IT = information technology.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
82
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Second, the decline in the relative price of tangible 
tradable investment goods (namely, machinery and 
capital equipment and transportation equipment) is 
widespread. Compared with the early 1990s, by 2014, 
the price of machinery and equipment has declined 
relative to the consumption deflator in all advanced 
economies, 87 percent of emerging market economies, 
and 68 percent of low-income developing countries. 
In contrast, trends in the relative price of structures are 
very different across broad country groups.
Across Countries
Despite the broad-based decline in the relative price 
of tradable capital goods over time, the prices of these 
goods vary substantially across countries, especially 
relative to the price of consumption. According to 
the latest data from the International Comparison 
Program (ICP), which collects prices of comparable 
baskets of goods and services across countries, the 
absolute price of machinery and equipment in 2011 
was inversely related to countries’ development levels, 
with lower-income countries facing slightly higher 
prices than advanced economies. The same basket of 
machinery and equipment costs about 8 percent more 
in the median low-income country than in the median 
advanced economy. The difference between advanced 
economies and lower-income countries is particularly 
striking for the price of machinery and equipment 
relative to the countries’ consumption price level, with 
the price in the median low-income country being 
2.7 times the price in the median advanced economy 
(Figure 3.3).8 Online price data from a global retailer 
of electronic goods, such as computers, cellular phones, 
and tablets, across a sample of 27 advanced and 
emerging market economies, reveal a similar pattern, as 
discussed in Box 3.2.
The dramatic and widespread changes in the relative 
prices of capital goods over the past three decades, 
against a backdrop of large cross-country differences in 
these relative prices at a particular point in time, raise 
a number of questions. How significant is the relative 
price of capital goods for countries’ real investment 
rates? What are the drivers of the relative prices of 
tradable investment goods? What is required for the 
downward trend in these prices to continue? And, if 
the relative price of capital goods is indeed important 
for real investment, what can lower-income countries 
8Comparable cross-country data on the price of capital goods are 
extremely scarce. The key source is the ICP, which collects detailed 
price data through cross-country surveys every 5–10 years. Using 
data from the 1985 and 1996 ICP rounds, Eaton and Kortum 
(2001) and Hsieh and Klenow (2007) find a strong negative correla-
tion between relative investment prices and the level of development, 
similar to findings in this chapter. At the same time, they find little 
correlation between absolute prices of capital goods and per capita 
GDP. As argued by Alfaro and Ahmed (2009), the absence of a cor-
relation may be attributed to data quality issues, which were largely 
addressed by methodological improvements in the 2011 ICP round 
(Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer 2015; Deaton and Aten 2017). 
Mutreja and others (2014) demonstrate that the smaller dispersion 
in absolute prices does not necessarily imply the absence of large 
trade costs.
AEs
EMs
LICs
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Log GDP per capita in 2011 PPP international dollars
1. Absolute Price
y = –0.025***x + 1.46
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Log GDP per capita in 2011 PPP international dollars
2. Relative Price
y = –0.54***x + 7.30
Relative to the price of consumption, the prices of machinery and equipment are 
signiﬁcantly higher in emerging market and developing economies than in 
advanced economies. Lower-income countries also face marginally higher 
absolute prices of machinery and equipment.
Figure 3.3.  Absolute and Relative Prices of Machinery and 
Equipment across Countries in 2011
(Ratio)
Sources: International Comparison Program (ICP) 2011; World Economic Outlook; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The absolute price of machinery and equipment is the price level of 
machinery and equipment relative to its US level, derived by the ICP using a similar 
basket of products across countries. The relative price is the price of machinery and 
equipment relative to the price of consumption. See Online Annex 3.1 for a detailed 
description of country coverage, data sources, and methodology. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging market economies; LICs = low-income countries; 
PPP = purchasing power parity. ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
83
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
do to bring down the price of capital goods relative to 
the price of consumption in their economies?
The Relative Price of Capital Goods:  
A Simple Framework
Theoretically, the importance of the relative price 
of investment in investment decisions is not hard to 
establish. As economic agents decide how to allocate 
their limited resources between consuming today 
and investing in machinery and equipment that will 
increase their future output, the price at which they 
can trade consumption goods for capital goods will be 
among the key influences of that choice (see, for exam-
ple, Sarel 1995 and Restuccia and Urrutia 2001 for a 
simple theoretical framework). All else equal, a decline 
in the price of capital goods relative to other prices in 
an economy would make it more attractive for agents 
to invest than to consume and hence lead to higher 
real investment rates (in other words, a higher ratio 
of real investment to real output).9 Of course, invest-
ment decisions, which hinge on a comparison between 
the user cost of capital and its marginal product, are 
influenced by many other factors, such as expectations 
of economic prospects, the availability and cost of 
finance, the quantity of capital already in use relative 
to the desired capital stock, the rate of depreciation of 
capital goods, agents’ impatience, and the like.
The relative price of capital goods, in turn, is shaped 
by several factors. Of prime importance is the effi-
ciency with which an economy can produce machinery 
and equipment (or other tradable goods that it can 
exchange for investment goods) compared with the 
efficiency in other sectors.10 In countries that import 
a significant fraction of investment goods (as in many 
emerging market and developing economies), the 
relative price of machinery and equipment also reflects 
prices that international suppliers charge for these 
goods and other factors that drive a wedge between 
international and domestic prices. These factors include 
9In a closed economy, where investment goods are produced only 
domestically, the relationship between the relative price of capital 
goods and investment is less clear cut, as discussed in Foley and 
Sidrauski (1970).
10Hsieh and Klenow (2007) presents a simple two-sector model 
that delivers these patterns for relative prices, under the assumption 
that markups, factor intensities, and factor prices are equal across 
sectors. The relative productivity in the production of capital goods 
across countries is conceptually tightly linked to countries’ relative 
efficiency in the production of all tradable goods, including tradable 
consumer goods (the well-known Balassa-Samuelson effect).
transportation costs, the efficiency of the domestic 
distribution sector, import tariffs, customs regulations, 
and the time and cost associated with the logistics 
of importing goods. Tax policies, such as accelerated 
depreciation, investment tax credits, and subsidies, as 
well as the extent of corruption (see Chapter 2 of the 
April 2019 Fiscal Monitor), also influence the relative 
investment price.11
Guided by this simple framework, the chapter 
proceeds to examine empirically the key sources of dif-
ferences in the relative prices of tradable capital goods 
across countries and the factors underpinning the dra-
matic declines in the relative price of machinery and 
equipment over time. In the subsequent section, the 
importance of changes in the relative prices of capital 
goods for real investment rates and output is quanti-
fied using model simulations and empirical analysis of 
country and sectoral data.
Drivers of Relative Investment Prices
Across Countries
Determining which factors explain the observed dif-
ferences in the absolute and relative prices of tradable 
capital goods in the 2011 ICP data is a daunting task. 
Because price levels of capital goods that bear compar-
ison across countries are available only at one point in 
time, it is difficult to disentangle the causal contribu-
tion of various potential drivers. The chapter examines 
each potential source of differences in capital goods 
prices across countries—namely, the prices charged by 
key exporters, trade costs, and relative efficiency in the 
production of tradable goods—and relates these to the 
relative price of capital goods from the 2011 ICP data.
To assess whether differences in prices charged by key 
capital goods exporters can explain the higher relative 
prices of capital goods observed in emerging market and 
developing economies (compared with advanced econ-
omies), the chapter examines highly disaggregated data 
on trade in capital goods. Given that a small number 
of countries account for the bulk of global exports of 
machinery and equipment (Figure 3.4, panels 1–2), and 
given that most emerging market and developing econo-
11See Estevadeordal and Taylor (2013) for the role of tariffs; Sarel 
(1995) for the role of taxes; and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tamba-
lotti (2011) for investment-specific technology shocks that would 
affect relative sectoral productivity. Cross-country differences in the 
relative prices of capital have been emphasized as an important factor 
explaining the lack of capital flows from rich to poor economies, as 
discussed in Caselli and Feyrer (2007).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
84
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
mies import a significant proportion of these goods, unit 
values of various types of machinery and equipment 
from five of the largest capital goods exporters—the 
United States, China, Germany, France, and Japan—are 
compared across importing countries.12 This approach, 
which builds on Alfaro and Ahmed (2009), ensures 
the cross-country comparability of capital goods, given 
that quality differences within such narrowly defined 
products sourced from the same exporter are likely 
minimal.13 It also permits isolating the differences in 
the price charged by exporters from other sources of 
cross-country price variation that are reflected in the 
ICP data, such as trade, transportation, delivery, and 
installation costs paid by buyers and discounts that may 
be available to them. 
The analysis uncovers little systematic correlation 
between the price of capital goods and the per capita 
income of the importing country when trade data from 
the five large capital goods exporters are pooled (Fig-
ure 3.4, panel 3). Trade costs, on the other hand, exhibit 
a clear pattern: they tend to be much lower for advanced 
economies.14 Despite significant progress in liberalizing 
the international exchange of goods and services and 
reducing trade costs, emerging markets, and especially 
low-income developing countries, still have significantly 
higher policy-related barriers to trade than advanced 
economies, in addition to their larger natural trade bar-
riers (Figure 3.5). They tend to be located farther from 
capital goods exporters and are less connected to global 
shipping networks. They impose significantly higher tar-
iffs on imports of capital goods, and the time and cost 
associated with the logistics of importing goods—such 
as documentary and border compliance and domestic 
transportation—are substantially higher. Countries with 
higher trade costs in any of these measures tend to have 
higher absolute prices of machinery and equipment in 
the 2011 ICP data (Figure 3.6, panel 1).
12While exports of capital goods continue to be concentrated in 
a few countries, emerging market and developing economies have 
gained significant market share, accounting for about one-third 
of global exports in 2016, up from 5 percent in 1990. China has 
played a particularly prominent role, with its share in global exports 
rising from 1–2 percent in the 1990s to 18 percent in 2017.
13In particular, the analysis relates the unit value of each prod-
uct to the importing country’s per capita GDP, controlling for 
exporter-product-year fixed effects, similar to Schott (2004), Alfaro 
and Ahmed (2009), and Manova and Zhang (2012). See Online 
Annex 3.3 for details on the specification and findings.
14Data limitations prevent examination of the potential contribu-
tion of tax policies, such as accelerated depreciation or investment 
tax credits.
United States
Other AEs
Japan
China
Germany
Other EU
France 
Other EMDEs
AEs
EMs
LICs
Sources: Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database; Eurostat; Ministry of Finance of 
Japan; UN Comtrade database; US Census Bureau; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the cross-country distribution of the average 2010–15 
production of capital goods as percent of GDP, using Eora sectors 9 and 10 to 
identify capital goods. The horizontal line inside each box represents the median; 
the upper and lower edges of each box show the top and bottom quartiles; and the 
black markers denote the top and bottom deciles. Panel 2 uses Comtrade SITC 
Revision 2, sector 7, to plot overall capital goods exports of the identiﬁed 
countries. Panel 3 uses export data for major capital goods exporters. For more 
details on data sources and methodology, see Online Annex 3.3. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging market economies; EMDEs = emerging market and 
developing economies; EU = European Union; LICs = low-income countries.
Advanced economies
Emerging markets
Low-income countries
3. Capital Goods Price Index against GDP per Capita, 2011
2. Capital Goods Exports
 (Trillions of US dollars)
6
7
8
y = –0.011x + 0.08 
Log GDP per capita
9
10
11
12
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Price of capital goods relative to
average country
1990
95
2000
05
10
15
17
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
A relatively small number of advanced economies and China account for a large 
share of global production and exports of capital goods. Unit values of capital 
goods exports by ﬁve major exporters are not systematically correlated with the 
per capita income of the importing country.
Figure 3.4.  Unit Values of Tradable Capital Goods across 
Countries
1. Capital Goods Production, 2010–15 Average
 (Percent of GDP)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
85
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Trade costs are higher in emerging market and developing economies.
Sources: CEPII, GeoDist database; Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database; 
Feenstra and Romalis (2014); Fraser Institute; United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (UNCTAD); World Bank, Doing Business Indicators; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Distance to exporters of machinery and equipment is calculated as the 
weighted average of a country’s distance to all other countries, where the weights 
are equal to the partner countries’ exports of capital goods as a share of global 
capital goods exports. The UNCTAD liner shipping connectivity index captures how 
well countries are connected to global shipping networks based on ﬁve 
components of the maritime transport sector: number of ships, their 
container-carrying capacity, maximum vessel size, number of services, and 
number of companies that deploy container ships in a country’s port. The Fraser 
Institute’s Freedom to Trade Internationally index is based on four different types 
of trade restrictions: tariffs, quotas, hidden administrative restraints, and controls 
on exchange rate and the movement of capital. The cost and time indicators 
measure the cost (excluding tariffs) and time associated with three sets of 
procedures—documentary compliance, border compliance, and domestic 
transport—within the overall process of importing a shipment of goods. 
AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market economies; 
LICs = low-income countries.
AEs
EMs
LICs
1. Distance to Machinery
 and Equipment Exporters
 (Thousand kilometers)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
AEs
EMs
LICs
2. Liner Shipping
 Connectivity
 (Index)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
AEs
EMs
LICs
3. Freedom to Trade
 Internationally
 (Index)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
AEs
EMs
LICs
4. Tariffs on Capital Goods
 (Percent)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
AEs
EMs
LICs
5. Costs to Import
 (Thousands of US dollars
 a container)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
AEs
EMs
LICs
6. Time to Import
 (Days)
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 3.5.  Trade Costs in 2011
(Median and interquartile range)
Tradable productivity relative to nontradable productivity
Trade barrier
Residual
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 depicts the percent change in the 2011 International Comparison 
Program (ICP) absolute price of machinery and equipment associated with a one 
standard deviation increase in alternative measures of trade costs, based on 
estimates in Online Annex Table 3.4.1. In panel 2, the cross-country variation in 
the 2011 ICP price of machinery and equipment relative to consumption is 
decomposed into the share explained by differences in the labor productivity in the 
tradable goods sectors relative to the nontradable goods sectors, and alternative 
measures of trade costs, based on estimates in Online Annex Table 3.4.2. See 
notes to Figure 3.5 for deﬁnitions and sources of trade costs. M&E = machinery 
and equipment.
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.
1. Change in the Absolute Price of Capital Goods from a One
 Standard Deviation Increase in Trade Costs
 (Basis points)
2. Cross-Country Variation in the Relative Capital Goods Price
 Explained by Relative Productivity and Trade Costs
 (Percent)
The absolute price of machinery and equipment in 2011 was higher in countries 
with larger trade costs. Trade costs and labor productivity in the tradable versus 
the nontradable sector can together explain a signiﬁcant share of the 
cross-country variation in the relative price of machinery and equipment.
Figure 3.6.  Trade Costs, Relative Productivity, and the Price 
of Capital Goods in 2011
0
2
4
6
***
*
*
***
*
**
Distance
to M&E
exporters
Liner shipping
connectivity
Freedom
to trade
internationally
Tariffs on
capital goods
Cost
to import
Time
to import
Time to import
Costs to import
Tariffs on capital goods
Freedom to trade internationally
Liner shipping connectivity
Distance to M&E exporters
–2
–4
0
20
40
60
80
100
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
86
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Putting all the pieces together as outlined in the 
conceptual framework, the chapter next examines the 
contribution of efficiency in the production of trad-
able goods relative to efficiency in the nontradable 
sector, as well as alternative measures of trade costs’ 
contribution to the cross-country variation in the 
relative prices of capital goods.15 As shown in panel 
2 of Figure 3.6, relative productivity differences in 
the production of tradable goods and trade costs can 
together explain up to 60 percent of the cross-country 
variation in the relative price of machinery and 
equipment, depending on which measure of trade 
cost is used.16 Interestingly, policy-related trade bar-
riers, such as tariffs and cost and time of importing, 
are a more powerful predictor of relative prices than 
are natural barriers to trade, such as distance and 
connectivity. While causal interpretation is difficult 
in the cross-country setting and, in light of the likely 
relationship between relative productivity and trade 
barriers, these findings are consistent with the idea 
that the relative prices of capital goods are higher in 
emerging market and developing economies due both 
to higher trade barriers and lower productivity in 
the production of capital goods and tradable goods 
more broadly.17
15The chapter estimates a simple ordinary least squares regression 
of the log of the relative price of machinery and equipment (using 
ICP 2011 data) on the log of the relative labor productivity in 
the tradable-goods-producing sectors and alternative measures of 
trade costs, which are included one at a time. In a second step, the 
regression estimates are used to decompose the variation in the log of 
relative prices into the variance that can be explained by the relative 
productivity measure versus trade costs. Given the cross-sectional 
nature of the data, this analysis is purely illustrative. As elaborated 
in the next section, relative productivity and trade costs are not 
independent of one another, complicating the interpretation of 
their estimated contribution to the variation in relative prices. The 
relative productivity in the tradable goods sector may be affected 
by trade barriers, as production of tradable goods likely relies on 
imported inputs. Furthermore, policy-related trade barriers may be 
erected with the goal of protecting low-productivity tradable goods 
sectors. See Online Annex 3.4 for further details on the specification 
and findings.
16Given the high correlation among different components of trade 
costs, including all of the measures considered in the same regression 
does not significantly increase the share of variation in relative prices 
that can be explained by trade costs.
17Sposi (2015) similarly argues that trade barriers play an import-
ant role in explaining the relative price of tradable goods and services 
across countries, noting that removing trade barriers would eliminate 
more than one-half of the observed gap in relative prices between 
rich and poor countries.
Over Time
While cross-country variation in relative capital 
goods prices has been the focus so far, this section aims 
to shed light on the drivers of the big declines in the 
relative prices of tradable capital goods seen in most 
countries over the past 30 years. The analysis attempts 
to disentangle the roles of technological progress—
which may have boosted productivity of the capital 
goods sectors—and deepening trade integration. To 
do so, it follows a two-step approach. First, sectoral 
producer price data across 40 advanced and emerging 
market economies during 1995–2011 from the World 
Input-Output Database are analyzed to estimate the 
elasticity of producer prices to changes in sectoral labor 
productivity and exposure to international trade (as 
measured by import penetration—the ratio of imports 
to domestic value added). The analysis controls for all 
factors that affect prices equally across sectors within 
a country in a particular year (such as exchange rate 
fluctuations and policies, commodity price changes, 
aggregate demand and productivity shocks, and 
the like) and all time-invariant differences in prices 
across countries and sectors.18 Given the endogenous 
nature of trade exposure, the analysis isolates changes 
in import penetration that were triggered by policy 
choice, by using import tariffs as an instrument.19 
Second, the estimated elasticities are combined with 
the change in relative labor productivity and trade 
exposure of the capital goods sector to estimate how 
much each factor can account for the decline in the 
relative prices of machinery and equipment during 
2000–11. Recognizing that exposure to foreign compe-
tition affects relative domestic prices indirectly through 
its impact on sectoral productivity, the decomposition 
attempts to separate out the contributions made by 
trade-related changes in labor productivity and changes 
in productivity due to other factors (such as sectoral 
technological advances) in the decline in the sectoral 
price of machinery and equipment.20
18See Online Annex 3.5 for further details. The analysis relies on 
producer prices due to their availability for a wide range of sectors 
and countries. All sectoral variables are measured relative to their 
economy-wide equivalent.
19While widely used in the literature, the choice of tariffs as an 
instrument for trade integration does not fully address endogeneity 
concerns as policymakers may set tariff rates in response to various 
political economy considerations.
20For evidence on the productivity-enhancing effects of trade 
reforms, see, among others, Amiti and Konings (2007); Topalova 
and Khandelwal (2011); and Ahn and others (2019).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
87
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The econometric analysis (details of which can be 
found in Online Annex 3.5 and Table 3.1) confirms 
that both greater exposure to trade and faster pro-
ductivity growth lead to lower domestic producer 
prices. A 1 percent increase in the import ratio, which 
can be achieved by a 0.7 percentage point cut in 
tariffs, reduces the sectoral producer price by about 
0.5 percent. Changes in labor productivity also have a 
significant impact on producer prices, with a 1 per-
cent increase in sectoral labor productivity reducing 
producer prices by about 0.3 percent. Confirming 
findings of other studies, the analysis also uncovers 
a strong positive effect of policy-induced changes in 
import penetration on labor productivity at the sector 
level (Table 3.1, column 4). Labor productivity of the 
capital-goods-producing sector is particularly sensitive 
to deepening trade integration—a finding consistent 
with the larger reliance on global value chains for the 
production of these goods (Figure 3.1, panel 7).21
Figure 3.7 decomposes the decline in the relative 
price of the machinery and equipment producing 
sectors relative to the price of consumption between 
2000 and 2011 into four parts: (1) the direct effect 
of deepening trade integration; (2) the effect of trade 
integration through higher labor productivity; (3) the 
effect of higher labor productivity, which is not due to 
21These results suggest that, if low-income countries were to bring 
capital goods tariffs to the level of those in advanced economies (in 
other words, they reduce tariffs by roughly 8 percentage points), 
the price of investment goods would decline by about 16 percent 
(with roughly 40 percent of the decline coming from the direct trade 
integration effect and the rest coming from higher productivity in 
the capital goods sector due to greater import competition).
Table 3.1. Sectoral Producer Prices
Dependent Variables:
Relative Producer Prices
Relative Productivity
OLS
OLS
IV
IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Relative Import Penetrationt – 1
–0.135***
–0.107***
–0.574***
1.363***
(0.033)
(0.037)
(0.163)
(0.363)
Difference for Capital Goods Sectors
–0.191**
0.033
1.407**
(0.081)
(0.322)
(0.671)
Relative Productivityt – 1
–0.316***
–0.314***
–0.328***
(0.035)
(0.035)
(0.032)
Number of Observations
16,077
16,077
16,077
16,077
R 2
0.62
0.62
0.56
0.91
Relative Import Penetration for
–0.298***
–0.541*
2.770***
Capital Goods Sectors
(0.071)
(0.287)
(0.564)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: All regressions include country-year and country-sector fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the country and sector level are in parentheses. 
Difference for capital goods sectors refers to the interaction term between import penetration and a dummy indicating whether a sector produces capital 
goods. IV = instrumental variable; OLS = ordinary least squares. See Online Annex 3.5 for details.
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.
Trade integration through direct effects
Trade integration through productivity
Productivity not due to trade integration
Other factors
Total
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
All
AEs
EMDEs
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure combines the estimated elasticities of producer prices to trade 
integration and relative labor productivity from Table 3.1 and changes in these 
factors for the capital goods sector between 2000 and 2011 to compute their 
contribution to the observed change in the producer price of capital goods relative 
to the price of consumption. See Online Annex 3.5 for a detailed description of 
country coverage, data sources, and methodology. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 3.7.  Contributions to Changes in Relative Producer 
Prices of Capital Goods: 2000–11
(Percent)
The decline in the price of capital goods relative to the price of consumption has been 
supported by faster labor productivity growth and deepening trade integration.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
88
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
deepening trade integration; and (4) a residual. Deep-
ening trade integration accounts for the bulk of the 
decline in relative prices of machinery and equipment, 
both through its direct effect on producer prices and, 
indirectly, through higher labor productivity of domestic 
capital goods producers. Productivity gains in the cap-
ital-goods-producing sectors, which cannot be directly 
linked to trade integration, are also a significant factor. 
The empirical exercise also suggests that a nontriv-
ial portion of the decline in the price of investment 
goods, especially in emerging market and developing 
economies, can be attributed to other factors. These 
could include the downward trend in world interest 
rates, financial liberalization, and the emergence of 
China as a key supplier of tradable investment goods 
over this period (see Figure 3.4, panel 2 and Online 
Annex 3.3).22
Macroeconomic Implications of Shocks to the 
Price of Capital Goods
The last section of this chapter aims to quantify the 
relevance of relative investment prices for macroeco-
nomic outcomes. How much does the relative price 
of capital goods matter for a country’s real investment 
rate? What share of the dramatic increase in machin-
ery and equipment investment over the past 30 years 
can be attributed to the decline in the relative price of 
these goods? To answer these questions, the analysis 
relies both on model-based explorations and on empir-
ical evidence.23
As discussed in Box 3.3, analysis of the macroeco-
nomic effects of the relative price of investment within 
a structural model is insightful as it captures the aggre-
gate effect of exogenous changes in relative investment 
prices in a general equilibrium environment, which 
accounts for all feedback mechanisms in the economy. 
Moreover, given that relative prices within an economy 
are endogenously determined, model simulations make 
it possible to isolate changes in these prices that are 
driven by specific exogenous shocks. As a result, their 
22Capital-goods-producing sectors tend to be more capital inten-
sive than other sectors in developing economies. Hence, easier access 
to financing may benefit capital goods production more than other 
sectors, contributing to a decline in the relative price of investment.
23As discussed in the conceptual framework, investment decisions 
are shaped by numerous factors. A comprehensive analysis of the 
relative importance of all potential factors is beyond the scope of this 
chapter. The goal of the analysis is to zoom in on the relative price 
as a potential driver of real investment rates and attempt to provide 
suggestive evidence of its quantitative importance.
effects on investment rates and other macroeconomic 
outcomes can be credibly traced. Using the IMF’s 
Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal model, the anal-
ysis reveals that both shocks to the relative productivity 
of the investment-goods-producing sector and tariff 
cuts that permanently lower the price of capital goods 
imports lead to sizable and long-lasting increases in the 
real investment rate in a representative emerging market 
economy. Shocks that result in a 1 percent decline in 
the price of investment relative to consumption lead 
to a roughly 0.8 percent increase in the ratio of real 
investment to real GDP in the medium term.24 Guided 
by these findings, the empirical analysis sets out to 
examine whether the model predictions are reflected in 
the historical relationship between the relative prices of 
machinery and equipment and real investment rates, at 
both the country and sectoral levels.
Cross-Country Empirical Evidence
The cross-country analysis relies on over 60 years of 
data across 180 advanced and emerging market and 
developing economies from the latest release of the 
Penn World Table database. Using a reduced-form 
framework, the analysis relates real investment in 
machinery and equipment as a share of a country’s 
real output and the price of machinery and equipment 
relative to the price of consumption. The analysis con-
trols for all global shocks (for example, global financial 
conditions, commodity price changes, uncertainty, and 
world economic prospects), all time-invariant country 
characteristics, and a host of other country-specific 
and time-varying factors shown by economic theory 
and previous studies to shape investment rates. These 
include proxies for the availability and cost of finance 
within each country, the strength of economic pros-
pects, exposure to global markets and commodity price 
fluctuations, and the quality of institutions and infra-
structure. The estimation is based on five-year averages 
to smooth out cyclical fluctuations and approximate 
more closely the medium-term relationship between 
the relative price and investment rate uncovered in the 
structural model simulations.
Estimation results, detailed in Online Annex 3.6, 
confirm that real investment rates are shaped by 
24For an average emerging market and developing economy with 
a ratio of real investment to real output of about 22 percent, this 
finding would imply that a 1 percent decline in the relative price 
of investment would lead to an increase in the investment rate to 
22.2 percent.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
89
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
a variety of factors. Although estimates are often 
imprecise, a stronger regulatory environment, higher 
trade and financial integration, lower-cost finance, 
and greater financial development—as well as better 
infrastructure—are all associated with a higher ratio of 
real investment in machinery and equipment to real 
output. Importantly, the analysis reveals a strong and 
statistically significant negative relationship between real 
investment in machinery and equipment and its relative 
price (Table 3.2). The findings are robust to alternative 
specifications, focusing on the post-1990 period, exam-
ining the sample of emerging market and developing 
economies only, and using alternative instrumental vari-
able strategies to correct for the negative bias that may 
arise from potentially correlated measurement errors 
in the real investment rate and its price. A 1 percent 
decline in the relative prices of tradable capital goods 
is associated with a 0.3–0.5 percent increase in the real 
investment rate over a five-year period. It is important 
to note that these empirical estimates likely represent 
an upper bound of the true effect of changes in relative 
price on real investment rates. As discussed above, rela-
tive investment prices are endogenous and reflect many 
factors, including changes in policies that could have a 
direct impact on investment rates. 
Sectoral Empirical Evidence
A sectoral perspective can complement the 
cross-country analysis in an important way. The 
relative price of capital goods is but one of the con-
siderations that shape investment decisions. While 
the cross-country analysis attempts to control for 
many factors, the estimated relationship between real 
investment rates and prices could be biased due to the 
omission of factors that may correlate with relative 
prices but are not properly captured in the estimation. 
Sectoral analysis makes it possible to isolate the rela-
tionship between real investment rates and the price 
of investment across different sectors while properly 
accounting for the role of all factors that affect overall 
investment within a country in a particular year. These 
include financial conditions, economy-wide growth 
prospects, quality of regulations that affect investment 
returns, exchange rate fluctuations and policies, inter-
national capital flows, availability of complementary 
public infrastructure, and the like.
The analysis relies on EU and World KLEMS 
data covering 18 (mostly advanced) economies over 
1971–2015 to construct measures of real investment 
in machinery and equipment and the relative prices 
of these capital goods specific to 15 broad economic 
sectors.25 As in the cross-country analysis, the baseline 
estimation relates machinery and equipment invest-
ment as a share of sectoral real value added to relative 
prices, using five-year averages. The estimated elasticity, 
according to which a 1 percent decline in the relative 
price of machinery and equipment is associated with a 
0.2–0.5 percent increase in the real investment rate in 
these capital goods, is comparable to those uncovered 
in the cross-country analysis. Further, as in the model 
simulations presented in Box 3.3, declining investment 
25See Online Annex 3.7 for details.
Table 3.2 Real Investment Rate and the Relative Price of Machinery and Equipment
Dependent Variable:
Log Real Investment-to-GDP Ratio
Cross-Country Regressions
Sectoral Regressions
All
Post-1990
EMDEs
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Log Relative Price
–0.377***
–0.292*
–0.491***
–0.326***
–0.528***
(0.116)
(0.171)
(0.161)
(0.078)
(0.068)
Number of Observations
658
553
457
971
971
Number of Countries
127
127
93
18
18
R 2
0.41
0.36
0.38
0.94
0.93
First Stage F-Statistic
118.80
81.81
64.04
644.60
728.80
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The dependent variable is log real machinery and equipment investment-to-GDP ratio. Regressions are estimated with data averaged over 
nonoverlapping five-year windows using instrumental variable regressions, where the main independent variable—log price of machinery and 
equipment relative to consumption—is instrumented with its lagged value. All cross-country panel regressions in columns (1)–(3) control for 
country and period fixed effects, and a set of other determinants of investment-to-GDP ratios. Sectoral regression in column (4) is estimated 
with country-period and country-sector fixed effects, and in column (5) with period and country-sector fixed effects, where period refers to the 
nonoverlapping five-year windows. Standard errors clustered at the country level are in parentheses. See Online Annexes 3.6 and 3.7 for details. 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
90
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
prices are linked to higher output in the sector and 
marginally higher labor productivity. Analysis of 
firm-level data from Colombia further confirms that 
lower capital goods prices resulting from a sizable tariff 
cut following trade reform in 2011 prompted firms to 
boost investment (see Box 3.4).
Figure 3.8 compares the findings across the 
structural model, cross-country, and sectoral anal-
yses, revealing a consistent pattern. Across all three 
approaches, the evidence that the relative price of cap-
ital goods matters for investment decisions is strong. 
It is challenging to obtain an unbiased estimate of the 
elasticity of real investment with regard to prices, given 
the endogenous nature of relative price changes and 
problems with measurement. With those difficulties in 
mind, Figure 3.9—as a purely illustrative exercise—
uses the estimated elasticity from the cross-country 
analysis (Table 3.2) and the post-1990 change in 
the relative price of capital goods in each country to 
decompose the change in the real investment rate. 
These changes comprise the parts attributable to (1) 
the decline in real investment prices; (2) the change in 
relevant policies; (3) other factors, such as global trends 
in investment, convergence, and growth expectations; 
and (4) the residual. Improvements in policies and 
policy frameworks have contributed significantly to the 
rise of real investment in machinery and equipment in 
both advanced as well as emerging market and devel-
oping economies. The dramatic decline in the relative 
prices of tradable capital goods that occurred along-
side can also explain a sizable share of the increase 
in investment in tradable capital goods in advanced 
and emerging market and developing economies. The 
anecdotal evidence presented in Box 3.1 on the rapid 
Model simulations and empirical evidence deliver broadly consistent estimates of 
the elasticity of the real investment-to-real GDP ratio to the relative price of capital 
goods.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
GIMF technology
shock
GIMF capital goods
tariff
Cross-country
regression
Sectoral
regression
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars depict the simulated/estimated elasticity of the real 
investment-to-GDP ratio to the price of capital goods relative to the price of 
consumption. See Box 3.3 for details on the model, and Online Annexes 3.6–7 
for details on the empirical analyses. GIMF = Global Integrated Monetary and 
Fiscal model.
Figure 3.8.  Elasticity of Real Investment-to-GDP Ratio to 
Relative Price of Capital Goods: Model Simulations versus 
Empirical Evidence
(Percent)
Relative price
Policies
Other controls
Residual
Total
Between 1990–94 and 2010–14, real investment-to-real GDP ratios in machinery 
and equipment grew by approximately 60 percent. A signiﬁcant portion of this 
increase can be explained by the precipitous fall in the relative price of machinery 
and equipment.
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
All
AEs
EMDEs
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure presents the contribution to the observed increase in real 
machinery and transport equipment investment-to-GDP ratios between 1990–94 
and 2010–14 from the relative price of machinery and transport equipment, 
various policies, and other controls. See Online Annex 3.6 for a detailed 
description of the estimated model. Black square indicates the total change in real 
machinery equipment investment-to-real GDP ratios. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 3.9.  Contributions of Relative Prices to Increases in 
Real Investment in Machinery and Equipment, 1990–94 to 
2010–14
(Percent)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
91
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
rise in investment in low-carbon technologies with 
steeper declines in production costs—and firm-level 
evidence from Colombia on the investment effects 
of arguably exogenous changes in the price of capital 
goods, discussed in Box 3.4—also point to relatively 
high price-elasticity of investment. 
Summary and Policy Implications
The strengthening of investment in emerging market 
and developing economies over the past three decades 
was supported by their improved macroeconomic 
policy and institutional frameworks, the synchronized 
pickup in economic activity until the global financial 
crisis of 2008–09, and falling global real interest rates. 
But it also coincided with dramatic declines in the 
relative price of tradable capital goods, likely reflecting 
efficiency gains from international trade and advances 
in information and communications technology that 
led to more efficient production of capital goods. 
Could rising trade tensions, slower trade integration, 
and sluggish productivity growth threaten this poten-
tial driver of investment going forward?
This chapter sets out to answer this question by (1) 
examining whether declines in the relative prices of 
machinery and equipment have historically provided 
a quantitatively important boost to investment rates, 
and (2) shedding light on the drivers of the precipitous 
fall in the price of tradable investment goods relative to 
other prices in the economy.
Using both structural model simulations and 
empirical evidence, the chapter finds that the rela-
tive price of investment goods is an important driver 
of real investment rates in both advanced as well as 
emerging market and developing economies. The 
global financial crisis left lasting scars on investment 
worldwide. However, from a long-term perspective, 
real investment rates in machinery and equipment have 
increased significantly in both groups of economies. 
While exact quantification is challenging, empirical 
evidence suggests that a nontrivial share of the rise in 
the real investment rates in machinery and equipment 
in both groups of economies can be attributed to the 
dramatic fall in the relative price of these goods over 
the past three decades. The chapter’s sectoral analysis 
of relative producer prices reveals that the significant 
decline in the price of machinery and equipment, in 
turn, was driven by faster productivity growth in the 
capital-­goods-producing sector and deepening trade 
integration, which has bolstered price competition in 
domestic markets and improved the efficiency of pro-
duction processes in the investment goods sector.
Taken together, the chapter’s analyses suggest that 
the slowing pace of trade liberalization since the 
mid-2000s, and especially the possibility of its reversal 
in some advanced economies, could interfere with the 
tailwind to machinery and equipment investment gen-
erated by the falling price of capital goods. This finding 
provides an additional, often overlooked, argument in 
support of policies aimed at reducing trade costs and 
reinvigorating international trade.
Many emerging market and developing econo-
mies still maintain tariff and other trade barriers that 
significantly raise the relative price of investment paid 
by domestic investors.26 Effective import tariffs on 
capital goods in 2011 were about 4 percent in emerg-
ing market and 8 percent in low-income developing 
countries, compared with close to zero in advanced 
economies (Figure 3.5, panel 4). Fully implementing 
commitments under the World Trade Organization’s 
Trade Facilitation Agreement could reduce non-tariff 
barriers by an equivalent of a 15-percentage point tariff 
cut in less-developed economies (WTO 2015).
In advanced economies, which have similarly 
benefited from declining capital goods prices over the 
past three decades, avoiding protectionist measures and 
resolving disagreements without raising trade costs, 
will be crucial to prevent further weakening of the 
lackluster investment growth since the global financial 
crisis of a decade ago.27 For all economies, reviving 
trade liberalization, reducing trade costs from both 
tariff and other barriers, and addressing areas most 
relevant for continued integration in the contempo-
rary global economy—such as regulatory coopera-
tion, e-commerce, and leveraging complementarities 
between investment and trade—would help maintain 
the pace of decline in relative capital goods prices and 
further spur investment. These benefits would comple-
ment the better-known welfare and productivity gains 
26While the vast majority of emerging market and developing 
economies still have large investment needs, other countries (such as 
China) face the complex task of rebalancing growth models toward 
consumption and services, after decades of investment-led stimulus 
and policy interventions aimed at strengthening capital goods 
production and exports. Policy challenges are also different in some 
low-income developing countries where import tariffs represent a sig-
nificant source of government revenue, and tariff reform would need 
to be accompanied by measures to compensate for revenue losses.
27Cavallo and Landry (2018) find that the rise in capital imports 
in the United States has added 5 percent to its output per hour since 
the 1970s, and that the imposition of tariffs on capital goods could 
lead to sizable productivity losses over the next decade.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
92
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
from international trade (for a discussion, see Chap-
ter 2 of the October 2016 WEO).
The analyses in this chapter also highlight the impor-
tance of continued technological advances and inno-
vation in the capital-goods-producing sector in both 
advanced as well as emerging market and developing 
economies. By lowering the relative price of investment 
goods, these generate dividends beyond the effect of 
such advances on aggregate productivity growth. As 
discussed in Adler and others (2017) and Chapter 2 
of the April 2016 Fiscal Monitor, policies that encour-
age research and development, entrepreneurship, and 
technology transfer more broadly, could also help the 
capital-goods-producing sector, as would continued 
investment in education and public infrastructure.
The economic benefits of declining capital goods 
prices notwithstanding, policymakers need to be mind-
ful of their distributional consequences and potential 
for job disruptions. As discussed in Chapter 3 of the 
April 2017 WEO, the decline in the relative price of 
investment has eroded the share of economic output 
that goes to labor in economies where many jobs 
can be easily automated and performed by machines. 
Policies should be designed to help workers better 
cope with disruptions caused by technological progress 
and global integration, including through long-term 
investment in education, programs for skill upgrading 
throughout workers’ careers, and policies facilitating 
the reallocation of displaced workers to new jobs (see 
IMF/WB/WTO 2017).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
93
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Increasing use of renewable energy sources could 
help curb carbon emissions substantially—a necessary 
step to slow the pace of climate change, which threat-
ens the economic future of countries across the globe 
(Chapter 3 of the October 2017 World Economic Out-
look). Once considered uneconomical, in recent years, 
the cost of installing low-carbon electric generation 
capacity has declined dramatically for some renewable 
energy sources.1 Between 2009 and 2017, prices of 
solar photovoltaics and onshore wind turbines fell 
most rapidly, dropping by 76 percent and 34 percent, 
respectively—making these energy sources compet-
itive alternatives to fossil fuels and more traditional 
low-carbon sources (Figure 3.1.1). 
The authors of this box are Christian Bogmans and 
Lama Kiyasseh.
1This cost is typically measured by the so-called levelized cost 
of electricity, which measures the lifetime costs of building and 
operating a power plant divided by its lifetime energy produc-
tion, based on recently financed projects in countries where 
deployment took place.
Cost reductions, coupled with favorable policies, 
have indeed led to a substantial increase in global 
renewable energy capacity, which grew by about 
6.5 percent a year between 2000 and 2017 and 
captured more than two-thirds of global investment 
in new generation capacity in recent years. It is only 
in the past decade, however, with solar and wind 
emerging as cost-effective power sources, that total 
investment in renewable energy capacity accelerated, 
suggesting a strong link between investment and its 
relative price. While hydropower dominated renew-
able energy investment up to 2008, investment in 
wind technologies took the lead in 2009. With their 
relative price falling precipitously, solar photovolta-
ics became the most popular investment choice in 
2016 (Figure 3.1.2). In 2017, more was invested 
in solar photovoltaics than in all other low-carbon 
sources combined. 
However, not all low-carbon energy technologies 
declined in cost. Nuclear energy and hydropower 
costs rose by 21 percent and 9 percent, respectively, 
over this period. What explains these divergent price 
Wind: offshore
Wind: onshore
Solar
Hydropower
Nuclear
Figure 3.1.1.  Levelized Cost of Electricity of 
Low-Carbon Energy Sources
(US dollars a megawatt hour)
Sources: Bloomberg New Energy Finance; Federal Reserve 
Economic Data; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Levelized cost of electricity data has been deﬂated 
using GDP deﬂator and does not include subsidies and taxes.
50
350
100
150
200
250
300
17
2009
11
13
15
Wind: offshore
Wind: onshore
Solar
Hydropower
Nuclear
Figure 3.1.2.  Annual Additions to Global 
Electricity Capacity
(Thousand megawatts)
Sources: International Atomic Energy Agency; International 
Renewable Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Solar includes solar photovoltaics and concentrated 
solar power. Hydropower refers to renewable hydropower 
and excludes pumped storage.
17
2001
05
10
15
–20
180
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Box 3.1. The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
94
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
paths for energy technologies? The different trajec-
tories of prices of machinery and equipment and 
those of residential and nonresidential structures (see 
Figure 3.2) certainly played a role. Nuclear energy 
and hydropower share similarities with large-scale 
civil engineering projects, such as the construction 
of bridges and railroads. Potential cost reduction for 
these kinds of projects is limited by the lumpiness of 
investment, relatively little component standardization 
(Sovacool, Nugent, and Gilbert 2014), construction 
delays (Berthélemy and Rangel 2015), and increasingly 
stringent—though necessary—local environmental and 
safety concerns.
In contrast, research and development in solar and 
wind technologies, their standardization, and econ-
omies of scale (through larger manufacturing plants) 
have resulted in increasingly efficient solar photovoltaics 
modules and larger wind turbines, with millions of 
quasi-identical experiences leading to continuous cost 
reductions achieved through learning by doing (Kavlak, 
McNerney, and Trancik 2018). Significant cost reduc-
tions in those sectors bode well for prices of electric bat-
teries, whose production could become significantly more 
efficient with standardization and economies of scale and 
whose increased use could lastingly reduce carbon emis-
sions, particularly those from the transportation sector.
Box 3.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
95
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The International Comparison Project (ICP) has 
traditionally been the only data source for prices of 
comparable baskets of capital goods across countries. 
However, despite significant improvements, concerns 
about comparability across countries and methods of 
price collection remain. These potentially confound 
cross-country price comparisons (see, for example, 
Alfaro and Ahmed 2009; Deaton and Heston 2010; 
Inklaar and Rao 2017). A promising alternative is 
the use of big data, which allows the comparison of 
online prices of identical (capital) goods sold across 
the world. The newly available Billion Prices Project 
database (Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon 2014), used 
in this box, allows precisely that kind of comparison.
The analysis takes online price information for 674 
distinct Apple products across 27 economies, with a 
monthly frequency from 2009 to 2012.1 Normalized 
by US prices, the prices charged for each product sold 
within the same month across the 27 economies in the 
sample are compared.
Online retail prices of identical goods across 
countries differ because they include markups, local 
taxes and subsidies, transportation costs, and tariffs 
and other nontariff barriers. Across the 27, mostly 
advanced, economies for which data are available, 
significant differences are observed in absolute prices 
of Apple products, although no clear correlation with 
the countries’ per capita income is seen (Figure 3.2.1, 
panels 1 and 3). Relative to the overall GDP price 
level, however, the Billion Prices Project data confirm 
the regularity established with ICP data and reported 
in previous studies: the relative prices of capital goods 
tend to be significantly lower in richer countries (Fig-
ure 3.2.1, panels 2 and 4).
The author of this box is Jilun Xing.
1Product categories are, for example, MacBooks, iPhones, 
iPods, and cables and accessories. Product identifiers specify 
model, memory, storage, display size, and so on. The online price 
information from the Billion Price Project database is identical to 
the offline price of Apple products, except for shipping cost, local 
taxes, and store promotions (Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon 
2014). Although Apple products could be considered consumer 
goods, they are increasingly used as capital goods—for example, 
roughly half of all iPads are bought by corporate and government 
users (Goel 2016).
AEs median
90th percentile
EMs median
10th percentile
Figure 3.2.1.  Price of Apple Products and 
Income
(Percent)
Sources: Billion Prices Project; International Comparison 
Program; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Countries on the x-axis in panels 1 and 2 are sorted by 
real GDP per capita in purchasing-power-parity international 
dollars. Dots denote medians of log prices for each country. 
Solid lines in panels 3 and 4 denote product-level regression 
results at monthly frequency, with product-time ﬁxed 
effects, and standard errors clustered at the country level. 
Products sold on the website of Apple Inc. but not produced 
by Apple Inc. are excluded from the sample. Country labels 
in panels 1 and 2 use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging markets; PPP = purchasing 
power parity. ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.
8.5
4. Relative Price
and Income
3. Absolute Price
and Income
–0.519 ***
(0.112)
0.0124
(0.0247)
9.5
10.5
8.5
9.5
10.5
11.5
Log of PPP GDP per capita
11.5
Log of PPP GDP per capita
–0.2
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
PHL
IDN
CHN
THA
2. Relative Price across Countries
MEX
MYS
PRT
KOR
NZL
ESP
JPN
TWN
GBR
FRA
FIN
CAN
DEU
SWE
DNK
AUS
AUT
IRL
NLD
HKG
USA
NOR
SGP
PHL
IDN
CHN
THA
MEX
MYS
PRT
KOR
NZL
ESP
JPN
TWN
GBR
FRA
FIN
CAN
DEU
SWE
DNK
AUS
AUT
IRL
NLD
HKG
USA
NOR
SGP
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
1. Absolute Price across Countries
Box 3.2. Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
96
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The price of investment goods relative to other goods 
plays a significant role in capital accumulation. The 
price of investment goods in any country reflects mul-
tiple factors, such as the relative (1) price of investment 
goods in other, capital-goods-exporting, countries; (2) 
productivity of domestic investment-goods-producing 
sectors; (3) markups across sectors; and (4) incidence 
of tariffs and other trade costs. Although changes in 
any of these factors can affect the price of investment 
goods, and therefore trigger changes in capital accumu-
lation, the macroeconomic effects may vary, depending 
on the underlying source of variation.
A structural model helps to formalize and quan-
tify these possible differences. In this box, we use the 
IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal model 
to study the medium-term macroeconomic effects—in 
a small emerging market economy—of two scenarios 
where the relative domestic price of investment goods 
(relative to the consumer price index) decreases. In the 
first scenario, the emerging market economy becomes 
permanently more efficient at producing new capital, 
in the spirit of Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krussell 
(1997); in the second scenario, tariffs charged on 
imports of capital goods are permanently lowered.
The investment-specific technological change in the 
first scenario can be interpreted in several ways: greater 
international diffusion of technological know-how 
(possibly via global value chains) that disproportion-
ately affects the production of capital (or durables 
more generally); lower domestic costs incurred by 
firms in capital goods sectors (for example, thanks 
to improvements in the regulatory environment); 
improved organizational efficiency; and so on.1 In 
response, and assuming markups do not increase, 
firms in these sectors would lower their prices relative 
to the rest of the economy. The second scenario 
illustrates the effects of a decline in tariffs—or trade 
costs more broadly—on all imported capital. In this 
case, the decline in the overall investment price index 
reflects lower domestic prices of imported capital 
goods. Both simulations are normalized to obtain a 
1 percent decline in the relative price of capital in 
the long term. Given the model’s assumed share of 
capital goods imports in overall investment spending 
(about 33 percent), this requires a 4 percentage point 
The authors of this box are Michal Andrle and Rafael Portillo.
1It can be argued that there is greater scope for efficiency gains 
in capital goods sectors in emerging markets given the greater 
complexity of production.
permanent decline in investment goods tariffs in the 
second scenario, with a recurrent fiscal cost of about 
0.25 percent of annual GDP.2
The medium-term impact (10 years after the shock) 
is presented in Figure 3.3.1. In both scenarios, the 
same decline in capital goods prices increases the 
returns to capital by similar amounts, thus triggering a 
similar increase in investment. The effect on output is 
different, however (0.7 percent of GDP and 0.5 per-
cent of GDP, respectively). This difference is the result 
of a permanent increase in the efficiency of newly 
produced capital goods that expands the production 
possibility frontier of the local economy. As the econ-
omy becomes more productive, household income and 
consumption increase permanently.3
2The required decrease in tariffs also reflects the real exchange 
rate depreciation observed in this scenario.
3A 1 percent decrease in investment goods prices caused by 
a decrease in markups in the investment goods sector pro-
duces very similar effects to an increase in investment-specific 
productivity.
Capital goods tariff
Technology shock
Figure 3.3.1.  Model Simulations
(Deviation from the original steady state, percent)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: REER = real effective exchange rate.
REER
Consumption
Real
investment
rate
Real output
Real
investment
Relative
price of
investment
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Box 3.3. On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
97
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
In the case of the decline in the tariff, there is no 
such initial expansion in the production possibility 
frontier (in the capital-goods-producing sector). The 
incentives to capital accumulation that come from 
lower capital goods prices can instead be thought of as 
reflecting a subsidy. Although it becomes cheaper to 
invest in capital projects, the tariff revenue forgone leads 
to a government revenue shortfall, which is resolved by 
lowering public transfers to households. Lower public 
transfers generate a headwind to private consumption. 
From a balance of payments perspective, higher relative 
demand for imports puts pressure on the real effective 
exchange rate to depreciate, which means an additional 
headwind to consumption because the domestic con-
sumer basket becomes more expensive. As a result, there 
is little increase in consumption.
It is worth stressing that the supply-side effects 
in both scenarios are largely a result of lower invest-
ment costs. To illustrate this point, we also simulate a 
decrease in general tariffs equivalent in fiscal revenue 
terms to the investment-specific tariff decrease. In this 
case, there is no visible effect on the domestic relative 
price of investment. As a result, the increase in invest-
ment is much smaller (0.23 percent versus 1.34 per-
cent in the investment-specific tariff scenario), as is the 
effect on output (0.18 percent versus 0.5 percent).
As these results emphasize, lowering barriers that 
hamper trade in capital goods and promoting research 
and development that improve efficiency in the capital 
goods sectors are good for output, investment, and 
consumption in the long term, even if they entail 
some fiscal costs.
Box 3.3 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
98
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
This box uses data from Colombia to shed light on 
the effect of a reduction in the price of capital goods—
induced by cuts in capital goods tariffs—on firm-level 
investment. Given that capital goods prices within an 
economy are endogenously determined, it is difficult to 
pin down their causal effect on investment. Firm-level 
analysis helps overcome this issue by making use of dif-
ferential, and arguably exogenous, changes in the prices 
of capital and other goods triggered by a substantial tar-
iff reform in Colombia in 2011. The Colombian tariff 
reform aimed to simplify the tariff structure and boost 
economic growth (Torres and Romero 2013). Conse-
quently, between 2010 and 2011, the average tariff rate 
on imported goods declined by close to 4 percentage 
points, from 12.5 percent in 2010 to 8.7 percent in 
2011 (Figure 3.4.1). 
Using an event study analysis, this box examines two 
different channels through which trade liberalization 
The authors of this box are Sergii Meleshchuk and 
Yannick Timmer.
could affect firms’ investment decisions: (1) increased 
competition, and (2) enhanced access to cheaper and 
potentially higher-quality inputs, including capital goods. 
While several studies have examined the productivity 
effect of tariff cuts through these channels (see, for exam-
ple, Amiti and Konings 2007), evidence about their effect 
on investment is scant. The empirical approach relates the 
change in the firm-level investment rate before and after 
the tariff reform, which led to reductions in capital goods 
input tariffs, other input tariffs, and output tariffs. In 
particular, the following equation is estimated:
​ΔInvestmen ​t​ i​  =  α + ​β​ 1​ ΔCapital Input Tarif ​f​ s​(​i​)​​  
	
+ ​β​ 2​ ΔOther Input Tarif ​f​ s​(​i​)​​  
	
+ ​β​ 3​ ΔOutput Tarif ​f​ s​(​i​)​​ + ​ϵ​ i​,
in which ​Investmen​t​ i​ is defined as investment over 
total fixed assets for a given firm ​i​.1 Output Tariffs(i) 
1The data for investment are taken from Encuesta Anual 
Manufacturera, an annual survey of manufacturing firms in 
Colombia. The data on tariffs come from Felbermayr, Teti, and 
Figure 3.4.1.  Distribution of Tariff Changes 
between 2010 and 2011
(Percent)
Sources: Meleshchuk and Timmer (2019); and IMF staff  
calculations.
Note: The histogram shows the change in tariffs on the 
x-axis and the percent of imported goods affected by this 
tariff change on the y-axis.
–15
–10
–5
0
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Figure 3.4.2.  Effect on Investment from 
Cuts in Tariffs on Capital Goods Inputs, 
Other Inputs, and Output
(Percent)
Sources: Meleshchuk and Timmer (2019); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: ***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.
**
Other goods
***
Capital goods
Output tariffs
Input tariffs
–0.1
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Box 3.4. Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
99
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
is the simple average of most-favored-nation tariffs 
across Harmonized System six-digit products within 
the 33 sectors, ​s​(​i​)​, and is meant to capture the effect 
of higher competition on investment rates. ​Capital 
Input Tarif ​f​ s​(​i​)​​ and ​Other Input Tarif ​f​ s​(​i​)​​ are constructed 
following Amiti and Konings (2007) as weighted 
averages of output tariffs in all capital goods and other 
sectors, with weights reflecting the share of inputs 
from each of the sectors used in the production of the 
sector s output, based on the 2007 input-output table. 
The input tariff variables capture the effect of access 
to cheaper inputs. Unlike earlier studies, the analysis 
allows for a differential investment response to cuts in 
the tariffs on capital goods versus other inputs.
Figure 3.4.2 shows the estimated coefficients on the 
three types of tariffs. A 1 percentage point reduction in 
capital goods input tariffs is associated with a 0.4 per-
centage point increase in investment, a point estimate 
Yalcin (2018). Use of fixed input-output matrices at the sector 
level alleviates endogeneity concerns that arise when firm-level 
input-output matrices are employed.
that is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.2 A 
reduction in noncapital input tariffs leads to a smaller 
(0.15 percentage point) yet still statistically significant 
increase in investment. This finding echoes the results 
of model simulations discussed in Box 3.3, which sim-
ilarly uncover a much smaller investment response to a 
general tariff cut, compared with a cut in capital goods 
tariffs. The effect of a reduction in output tariffs is not 
associated with significant changes in firms’ investment 
decisions, at least in the short term.3
These findings present further evidence—from 
a recent trade reform in a large emerging market 
economy—that firms’ investment choices are sensitive 
to the price of capital goods.
2The coefficients on changes in input tariffs can be inter-
preted as the effects of changes in prices on investment rates 
under the assumption that tariffs are fully passed into the prices 
importers pay. If there is only partial pass-through, the estimated 
coefficients are attenuated toward zero relative to the true 
effect of prices.
3The results are robust to including standard controls, such as 
firm size or sales growth. The results are presented using a one-
year window, but are also robust to using a wider time window 
around the tariff cuts.
Box 3.4 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
100
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
References
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kilic Celik, 
Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Polawski-Ribeiro. 2017. “Gone 
with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF Staff Discussion 
Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ahn, JaeBin, Era Dabla-Norris, Romain Duval, Bingjie 
Hu, and Lamin Njie. 2019. “Reassessing the Productiv-
ity Gains from Trade Liberalization.” Review of Interna-
tional Economics, 27(1): 130–54.
Alfaro, Laura, and Faisal Z. Ahmed. 2009. “The Price of Capital: 
Evidence from Trade Data.” Harvard Business School Work-
ing Paper 07–073, Harvard Business School, Boston.
Amiti, Mary, and Jozef Konings. 2007. “Trade Liberalization, 
Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evidence from Indo-
nesia.” American Economic Review 97 (5): 1611–638.
Armenter, Roc, and Amartya Lahiri. 2012. “Accounting for 
Development through Investment Prices.” Journal of Monetary 
Economics 59: 550–64.
Berthélemy, Michel, and Lina Escobar Rangel. 2015. “Nuclear 
Reactors’ Construction Costs: The Role of Lead-Time, 
Standardization and Technological Progress.” Energy Pol-
icy 82: 118–30.
Calderón, César, Enrique Moral-Benito, and Luis Servén. 2015. 
“Is Infrastructure Capital Productive? A Dynamic Het-
erogeneous Approach.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 30 
(2): 177–98.
Caceres, Carlos, Yan Carriere-Swallow, Ishak Demir, and Ber-
trand Gruss. 2016. “US Monetary Policy Normalization and 
Global Interest Rates.” IMF Working Paper 16/195, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Caselli, Francesco, and James Feyrer. 2007. “The Marginal 
Product of Capital.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 
(2): 535–68.
Cavallo, Alberto, Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon. 2014. 
“Currency Unions, Product Introductions, and the Real 
Exchange Rate.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 
(2): 529–95.
Cavallo, Michele, and Anthony Landry. 2018. “Capital-Goods 
Imports and US Growth.” Bank of Canada Staff Working 
Paper, Bank of Canada, Ottawa.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2006. “What Matters for 
Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, 
and Interactions.” Journal of Development Economics 81 
(1): 163–92.
Collins, William J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2001. “Capital 
Goods Prices and Investment 1879–1950.” Journal of Eco-
nomic History 61 (1): 59–94.
DeLong, J. Bradford, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1991. “Equip-
ment Investment and Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 106: 445–502.
———. 1992. “Equipment Spending and Economic Growth: 
How Strong is the Nexus?” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity (2): 157–99.
———. 1993. “How Strongly Do Developing Economies 
Benefit from Equipment Investment?” Journal of Monetary 
Economics 32: 395–415.
Deaton, Angus, and Bettina Aten. 2017. “Trying to Understand 
the PPPs in ICP 2011: Why Are the Results So Different?” 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (1): 243–64.
Deaton, Angus, and Alan Heston. 2010 “Understanding PPPs 
and PPP-Based National Accounts.” American Economic 
Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4): 1–35.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2001. “Trade in Capital 
Goods.” European Economic Review 45: 1195–235.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. “Is the 
Washington Consensus Dead? Growth, Openness, and the 
Great Liberalization, 1970s–2000s.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 95 (5): 1669–690.
Feenstra, Robert, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel Timmer. 2015. 
“The Next Generation of the Penn World Tables.” American 
Economic Review 105 (10): 3150–182.
Feenstra, Robert, and John Romalis. 2014. “International Prices 
and Endogenous Quality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 
(2): 477–527.
Felbermayr, Gabriel, Feodora Teti, and Erdal Yalcin. 2018. “On 
the Profitability of Trade Deflection and the Need for Rules 
of Origin.” CESifo Working Paper Series 6929, CESifo 
Group, Munich.
Foley, Duncan K., and Miguel Sidrauski. 1970. “Portfolio 
Choice, Investment, and Growth.” American Economic Review 
60 (1): 44–63.
Gaspar, Victor, David Amaglobelo, Mercedes Garcia-Escribano, 
Delphine Prady, and Mauricio Soto. 2019. “Fiscal Policy and 
Development: Human, Social and Physical Investment for 
the SDGs.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 19/03, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Goel, Vindu. 2016. “Once Taunted by Steve Jobs, Compa-
nies Are Now Big Customers of Apple.” The New York 
Times, August 7.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krussell. 1997. 
“Long-Run Implication of Investment-Specific Technological 
Change.” American Economic Review 87 (3): 342–62.
Gruss, Bertrand, and Suhaib Kebhajz. 2019. “Commodity Terms 
of Trade: A New Database.” IMF Working Paper 19/21, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. 2007. “Rela-
tive Prices and Relative Prosperity.” American Economic 
Review 97: 562–85.
Inklaar, Robert, and D.S. Prasada Rao. 2017 “Cross-Country 
Income Levels over Time: Did the Developing World Sud-
denly Become Much Richer?” American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics 9 (1): 265–90.
International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade 
Organization (IMF/WB/WTO). 2017. “Making Trade and 
Engine of Growth for All: The Case for Trade and for Policies 
to Facilitate Adjustment.” Policy Papers for Discussion at the 
Meeting of G20 Sherpas, Frankfurt, March 23–24.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
101
CHAPTER 3 
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment Under Threat?
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Johri, Alok, and Md Mahbubur Rahman. 2017. “The Rise and 
Fall of India’s Relative Investment Price: A Tale of Policy 
Error and Reform.” Unpublished, McMaster University.
Jones, Chad. 1994. “Economic Growth and the Relative Price of 
Capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics 34: 359–82.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tam-
balotti. 2011. “Investment Shocks and the Relative Price of 
Investment.” Review of Economic Dynamics 14 (1): 102–21.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2013. “The Global 
Decline of the Labor Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
129 (1): 61–103.
Kavlak, Goksin, James McNerney, and Jessika E. Trancik. 2018. 
“Evaluating the Causes of Cost Reduction in Photovoltaic 
Modules.” Energy Policy 123: 700–10.
Lim, Jamus Jerome. 2013. “Institutional and Structural Determi-
nants of Investment Worldwide.” World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper 6591, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Manova, Kalina, and Zhiwei Zhang. 2012. “Export Prices across 
Firms and Destinations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
127: 379–436.
Magud, Nicolás, and Sebastián Sosa. 2017. “Corporate Invest-
ment in Emerging Markets: The Role of Commodity Prices.” 
Economía 18 (1): 157–95.
Meleshchuk, Sergii, and Yannick Timmer. 2019. “Trade Liber-
alization and Firm Investment: Evidence from Colombia.” 
Unpublished.
Mutreja, Piyusha, B. Ravikumar, Raymond Riezman, and 
Michael Sposi. 2014. “Price Equalization, Trade Flows, and 
Barriers to Trade.” European Economic Review 70: 383–98.
Mutreja, Piyusha, B. Ravikumar, and Michael Sposi. 2018. 
“Capital Goods Trade, Relative Prices, and Economic Devel-
opment.” Review of Economic Dynamics 27: 101–22.
REN21. 2018. Renewables 2018 Global Status Report. Paris: 
REN21 Secretariat.
Restuccia, Diego, and Carlos Urrutia. 2001. “Relative Prices 
and Investment Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics 47 
(1): 93–121.
Salahuddin, Mohammad, and Rabiul Islam. 2008. “Factors 
Affecting Investment in Developing Countries: A Panel Data 
Study.” The Journal of Developing Areas 42 (1): 21–37.
Sarel, Michael. 1995. “Relative Prices, Economic Growth and 
Tax Policy.” IMF Working Paper 95/113, International Mon-
etary Fund, Washington, DC.
Schott, Peter. 2004. “Across-Product versus Within-Product 
Specialization in International Trade.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 119 (2): 647–78.
Schreyer, Paul. 2002. “Computer Price Indices and International 
Growth and Productivity Comparisons.” Review of Income 
and Wealth 48 (1): 15–31.
Sen, Kunal. 2002. “Trade Policy, Equipment Investment and 
Growth in India.” Oxford Development Studies 30 (3): 317–31.
Shorrocks, A.F. 1982. “Inequality Decomposition by Factor 
Components.” Econometrica 50 (1): 193–211.
Sposi, Michael. 2015. “Trade Barriers and the Relative Price of 
Tradables.” Journal of International Economics 96 (2): 398–411.
Sovacool, Benjamin. K., Daniel Nugent, and Alex Gilbert. 2014. 
“Construction Cost Overruns and Electricity Infrastructure: 
An Unavoidable Risk?” The Electricity Journal 27 (4): 112–20.
Taylor, Alan M. 1998a. “On the Costs of Inward-Looking 
Development: Price Distortions, Growth, and Divergence in 
Latin America.” Journal of Economic History 58: 1–28.
———. 1998b. “Argentina and the World Capital Market: Saving, 
Investment, and International Capital Mobility in the Twentieth 
Century.” Journal of Development Economics 57: 147–84.
Topalova, Petia, and Amit Khandelwal. 2011. “Trade Liberaliza-
tion and Firm Productivity: The Case of India.” The Review of 
Economics and Statistics 93 (3): 995–1009.
Torres, Mauricio, and Germán Romero. 2013. “Efectos de la 
Reforma Estructural Arancelaria en la Protección Efectiva 
Arancelaria de la Economía Colombiana.” Cuadernos de 
Economía 32 (59): 265–303.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2015. World Trade Report 
2015: Speeding Up Trade: Benefits and Challenges of Imple-
menting the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement. Geneva.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
This page intentionally left blank 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
103
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
The presence of large and rising bilateral trade balances 
has raised concerns that asymmetric obstacles to trade 
may distort the international trade system. This chapter 
examines the drivers of bilateral trade balances, distin-
guishing between the roles of macroeconomic factors, the 
international division of labor, and bilateral tariffs. It 
also examines how, through their impact on the ways 
production is organized within and across countries, tariffs 
affect productivity, output, and employment. Three main 
findings emerge. First, the evolution of bilateral trade 
balances since the mid-1990s reflects mostly macroeco-
nomic forces known to determine aggregate trade balances 
at the country level. Second, changes in bilateral tariffs 
played a smaller role than macroeconomic conditions in 
explaining the evolution of bilateral trade balances over 
the past two decades, reflecting tariffs’ already-low levels in 
many countries and the fact that reciprocal tariff reduc-
tions had offsetting effects on bilateral trade balances. But 
other policy distortions—such as supply policies—may have 
played a role. Third, declining tariffs have lifted produc-
tivity by allowing greater international division of labor 
and further specialization by countries, including through 
participation in global value chains. The integrated nature 
of the current trade system suggests that a sharp increase in 
tariffs would create significant spillovers, leaving the global 
economy worse off. These findings support two main policy 
conclusions. First, the discussion of external imbalances (of 
which trade balances are the largest part for most coun-
tries) is rightly focused on the macroeconomic factors—for 
example, fiscal policy—which tend to determine trade and 
current account balances at the aggregate level. Targeting 
particular bilateral trade balances will likely only lead to 
trade diversion and offsetting changes in trade balances 
with other partners. Second, multilateral reductions in 
tariffs and other nontariff barriers will benefit trade and, 
over the longer term, improve macroeconomic outcomes.
 The authors of this chapter are Johannes Eugster, Florence 
Jaumotte (team leader), Margaux MacDonald, and Roberto Piazza, 
with contributions from Carlos Caceres, Diego Cerdeiro, Kyun Suk 
Chang, Swarnali Ahmed Hannan, Rui Mano, Sergii Meleshchuk, 
Rafael Portillo, and Marika Santoro, and support from Pankhuri 
Dutt, Chanpheng Fizzarotti, Menexenia Tsaroucha, and Ilse 
Peirtsegaele.
Introduction
In both advanced and emerging market economies, 
more than 80 percent of the public views trade in a 
positive light—yet, fewer than half of these people are 
convinced that trade benefits jobs, wages, or prices. 
This skepticism is particularly pronounced in advanced 
economies.1 These mixed views reflect the fact that the 
benefits of trade can come at a cost. On one hand, trade 
allows countries to specialize according to comparative 
advantage, enhances competition, and enables knowl-
edge and technology to flow across borders, boosting 
the productivity and income of all countries (see, for 
example, Chapter 4 of the April 2018 World Economic 
Outlook (WEO)). Lower trade barriers and efficiency 
gains from the globalization of production have also 
contributed to strong declines in the relative price of 
capital goods, thereby contributing to drive strong real 
investment and narrowing income gaps for emerging 
market and developing economies (Chapter 3 of the 
April 2019 WEO). And trade benefits consumers by 
widening the choice and lowering the price of goods 
and services, especially those that account for a large 
share of lower-income households’ consumption. On 
the other hand, there are serious concerns that trade 
can be associated with dislocations and involve costly 
adjustment for some groups of workers and communi-
ties. However, the overwhelming consensus of the large 
and still-growing empirical literature is that, on balance, 
open and fair trade, with lower or no tariffs or other 
obstacles to trade, can bring lasting net benefits to all 
involved if the right policies are in place to ensure that 
the gains are widely shared and those bearing the brunt 
of adjustment receive the help they deserve.2
In this context, the presence of large and rising bilat-
eral trade balances has come under scrutiny, raising the 
question of whether they may be a sign of asymmetric 
obstacles to trade and pose concerns for policymakers. 
If, however, bilateral trade balances reflect mostly the 
macroeconomic forces known to determine countries’ 
1Pew Research Center spring 2018 Global Attitudes Survey. In 
emerging market economies, slightly more than half of respondents 
agree with the statement “trade creates jobs.”
2See IMF (2017a) and IMF/WB/WTO (2017, 2018).
THE DRIVERS OF BILATERAL TRADE AND THE SPILLOVERS FROM TARIFFS
4
CHAPTER
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
104
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
aggregate trade balances—such as fiscal policy strength-
ening or a weakening of demand relative to what is 
produced domestically—the behavior of trade at the 
bilateral level would be of little relevance, and the focus 
should be on addressing possible macroeconomic policy 
distortions. At the same time, the analysis of bilateral 
trade patterns promises insights into the economic 
costs that obstacles to trade, such as tariffs, could 
have—beyond their impact on bilateral trade balances—
through their longer-term effect on the international 
division of labor, productivity, output, and employment.
With this in mind, the chapter aims to answer the 
following questions:
•• What drives bilateral trade balances—specifically, 
what is the role of macroeconomic factors compared 
with tariffs and other determinants that are more 
micro-structural in nature and impact comparative 
advantage and the international division of labor?3
•• What is the link between aggregate trade balances 
(and their drivers) and bilateral balances?
•• What are the consequences for countries involved 
when bilateral tariffs are raised? And what spillovers 
arise for others when accounting for the presence of 
global value chains?
The chapter starts by examining what drives changes 
in bilateral trade balances, using the gravity model 
for bilateral trade flows. Model estimates are used to 
explain changes observed in bilateral trade balances, 
disentangling the impact of trade costs (including 
tariffs), the international division of labor, and mac-
roeconomic factors. While the gravity model remains 
the workhorse model of the trade literature, it is 
worthwhile keeping certain limitations to this exercise 
in mind. First, the variables included in the gravity 
model do not capture completely all the time-invariant 
factors that determine the level of the trade balance 
between two countries. Hence, the chapter focuses 
on explaining changes in bilateral balances over time. 
Second, macroeconomic factors include all factors that 
determine aggregate supply and demand of a country. 
This includes macroeconomic policies and fundamen-
tal drivers, such as demographics, but also longer-term 
effects of large and persistent tariff changes and 
supply-side policies (for example, widespread subsidies) 
that are more difficult to measure systematically across 
3More specifically, trade can arise from the fact that trading 
partners have a different sectoral composition of supply and demand, 
which in part reflects the international division of labor according to 
comparative advantage.
countries. To give a more complete account of the role 
of policies, the chapter then takes a closer look at mac-
roeconomic factors and how they are shaped by macro-
economic policies and other measurable determinants.
The second part of the chapter examines the impact 
of tariff changes beyond bilateral trade balances, on 
measures of economic activity more closely related to 
welfare, such as output, employment, and productivity. 
It highlights the role of greater supply chain connec-
tions and estimates the impact of tariffs through several 
channels: protection for domestic producers, effects on 
producers up and down the supply chain, and trade 
diversion. Simulations of a hypothetical tariff war sce-
nario between the United States and China conclude 
the chapter, with different modeling approaches used 
to examine potential effects on the two economies and 
the spillovers on bystanders.
The findings of the chapter are as follows.
•• Overall trade balances matter more than bilateral 
trade balances. Changes in overall (that is, aggregate) 
trade balances tend to affect most bilateral trade 
balances while—absent changes in macroeconomic 
conditions—a change in a bilateral trade balance 
tends to be offset by changes in bilateral balances 
with other trading partners, with little or no impact 
on the overall trade balance.
•• The evolution of bilateral trade balances over the 
past two decades was, to a significant extent, driven 
by macroeconomic factors—specifically, the relative 
movement of aggregate demand and supply in both 
trading partners and their underlying drivers. These 
drivers included fundamental factors, such as demo-
graphics and the level of economic and institutional 
development; macroeconomic policies, in particular 
fiscal policy and credit cycles; and—in some cases—
exchange rate policies and domestic supply-side 
policies (for example, subsidies to production costs).
•• In contrast, changes in bilateral tariffs played a 
smaller role in the evolution of bilateral trade 
balances, reflecting their already-low starting levels 
in many countries and the fact that most countries 
reduced tariffs at the same time, creating offsetting 
effects on net trade. At the same time, however, the 
level of tariffs is an important part of bilateral trade 
costs, which help shape the international division of 
labor and, thereby, the way changing macroeconomic 
factors impact bilateral trade and trade balances.
•• For the same reason, tariffs have important effects 
on productivity, output, and employment over 
the longer term. The decline of tariffs to lower 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
105
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
levels enabled a greater international division of 
labor—including through global value chains—and 
enhanced competition and access to foreign inputs, 
resulting in strong productivity improvements. This 
suggests scope for significant positive spillovers from 
shifts to lower tariffs, but also negative spillovers 
from tariff wars. Increases in bilateral tariffs will hurt 
output, employment, and productivity, not only in 
the affected economies, but also in bystanders up 
and down value chains. While some countries may 
benefit from trade diversion, higher tariffs would 
leave the global economy worse off.
These findings suggest two main policy conclu-
sions. First, discussion of external balances is rightly 
focused on macroeconomic determinants of trade 
and current account balances. Changes in macroeco-
nomic policies (for example, fiscal policy) will affect 
all bilateral balances. An important implication is 
that, unless macroeconomic conditions are addressed, 
targeting a particular subset of bilateral trade balances 
will likely result only in trade diversion and offsetting 
changes in trade balances with other partners. Second, 
broad-based, multilateral reductions in tariffs and other 
nontariff barriers will benefit trade and, over the longer 
term, improve macroeconomic outcomes. Reductions 
in tariffs lead to efficiency and dynamic gains by allow-
ing countries to further specialize according to their 
comparative advantage, to integrate into supply chains, 
and improve access to foreign inputs. In contrast, 
higher tariffs on bilateral trade can come at significant 
economic cost, not only for the countries involved, but 
also for others. These effects are greatly amplified by 
global supply chains, which transmit spillovers from 
bilateral tariffs, affecting countries up and down the 
value chain. While some countries may benefit from 
trade diversion, negative confidence effects and tighter 
global financial conditions triggered by trade tensions 
would affect all countries negatively (Chapter 1 of the 
October 2018 WEO).
While these findings suggest that reducing barri-
ers to trade would benefit the global economy, there 
are valid concerns about the distributional effects of 
trade. It is important to put in place specific policies 
to ensure that the gains from trade are widely shared 
and that those left behind are adequately protected 
(IMF 2017a; IMF/WB/WTO 2017, 2018). Policies 
to help those harmed by structural adjustment or 
dislocations include enhancing social safety nets in 
affected economies—for example, with modern income 
support programs and unemployment assistance 
programs—policies to retrain and reintegrate the dislo-
cated groups into the labor market, and changes in tax 
and benefit policies to redistribute the gains from trade 
more evenly.
Stylized Facts
From the perspective of a single country, the overall 
trade balance is the sum of its bilateral trade balances, 
which in turn account for the difference between the 
values of exports and imports with each trading part-
ner. This suggests aggregate and bilateral balances are 
highly related—and, indeed, for countries with large 
overall trade imbalances, bilateral trade balances appear 
to be more one-sided, either on the positive side (for 
example, Germany) or on the negative side (for exam-
ple, the United States) (Figure 4.1). At the same time, 
a striking degree of variation of bilateral trade balances 
is apparent across trading partners: most countries have 
positive and negative bilateral trade balances, and even 
countries with small overall trade balances can have 
large (and offsetting) bilateral trade balances. Similar 
observations hold more broadly beyond the countries 
shown in the figure. 
These stylized facts suggest that bilateral trade 
balances are shaped by two broad forces: (1) macroeco-
nomic factors, more specifically countries’ imbalances 
between aggregate domestic supply and domestic 
spending, as captured by their overall trade balances; 
and (2) tariffs and more micro-structural factors that 
determine varying bilateral trade intensities between 
two countries.
The relationship between overall and bilateral trade 
balances is also evident at a global level (Figure 4.2). 
Measured in absolute value to highlight their sizes, 
global bilateral and overall trade balances have evolved 
broadly in parallel over the past two decades, increas-
ing strongly up to the 2008–09 global financial crisis 
and dipping during the crisis.4 However, some differ-
ences can be seen, too—for example, bilateral balances 
increased more than aggregate trade balances and did 
not decline as much as aggregate trade balances after 
the crisis. A few countries with large overall balances, 
such as China, the United States, Germany, Korea, 
and Japan, are also big contributors to global bilat-
4Specifically, global bilateral balances are measured by taking the 
sum of the absolute values of all countries’ bilateral balances. Simi-
larly, for global overall balances, the sum of the absolute value of all 
countries’ overall trade balances is calculated.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
106
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
eral balances. However, in all these cases, bilateral 
trade balances are significantly wider than the overall 
trade balances. 
Global trade integration has been crucial to all these 
developments and was fostered by a persistent fall in 
trade costs. The average bilateral trade intensity across 
country pairs, discussed later in the chapter, captures 
the relative size of impediments to trade attributable, 
at a first approximation, to the presence of trading 
costs (Figure 4.3). Higher trade intensity for a given 
pair suggests that trade between those countries is 
easier. Looking at the evolution between 1995–99 
and 2010–15, it is clear that, for most country pairs, 
trade has become relatively easier. This finding is not 
surprising, in light of the observation that barriers that 
hinder trade flows have fallen over time. Improvements 
in transportation technologies have reduced shipping 
costs over long distances. Policy changes have also been 
crucial, with the expansion of World Trade Organiza-
tion membership leading to a generalized decline in 
import tariffs. Reductions were particularly marked 
where tariffs were initially high, as in China and in 
other emerging market economies. At the same time, 
large variability of bilateral trade intensity is seen across 
country pairs. This reflects bilateral trade costs, such as 
tariffs and more micro-structural factors, and suggests 
some variation in the way macroeconomic factors 
affect the various bilateral trade balances of a country.
Another determinant of the bilateral intensity of 
trade between two countries is their international spe-
USA
CHN
JPN
TWN
GBR
KOR
CAN
MEX
IND
HKG
Others
(positive)
Others
(negative)
Total
USA
CHN
JPN
DEU
GBR
FRA
CAN
MEX
ESP
AUS
Others
(positive)
Others
(negative)
Total
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization of Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1Top three partners shown per year.
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1995
2015
1995
2015
1995
2015
1995
2015
1. Trade Balance by Partners
USA
DEU
CHN
JPN
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
1995
2015
1995
2015
1995
2015
1995
2015
2. Trade Balance by Partners
MEX
CAN
GBR
FRA
Figure 4.1.  Bilateral Trade Balances, by Major Partners1
(Percent of global GDP)
Bilateral trade balances
Overall trade balances
Bilateral trade balances
Overall trade balances
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1995
97
99
2001
03
05
07
09
11
13
15
0.0
CHN
USA
DEU
KOR
JPN
GBR
IND
MEX
TWN
SAU
ITA
FRA
AUS
RUS
CHE
CAN
SGP
NLD
BRA
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1. Overall and Bilateral Trade Balances
 (Percent of global GDP; sum of absolute values)
2. Trade Balances: Average Level 2013–15
 (Percent of global GDP; sum of absolute values)
Figure 4.2.  Global Trade Imbalances
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
107
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
cialization. As the cost of trading declined, countries 
tended to further specialize in what they were best at 
producing (their comparative advantage)—at least at a 
broad sectoral level—while importing other products 
from other countries—deepening the international 
division of labor and realizing further gains from trade. 
The country-specific demand and supply structures can 
generate complex multicountry trade patterns, whereby 
trade flows across countries occur because countries 
consume and produce specific goods with different 
intensities. Countries that had a revealed comparative 
advantage in manufacturing in 1995 reinforced their 
specialization in manufacturing—notably, China, 
Korea, Germany, Japan, and Mexico (Figure 4.4).5 
5Revealed comparative advantage is measured by the share 
of a sector in a country’s exports relative to the sector’s share in 
world exports.
Conversely, relative de-specialization in manufacturing 
exports took place in countries that had an initial com-
parative disadvantage in this sector, such as the United 
States and the United Kingdom. A similar pattern can 
be observed in services, where the United Kingdom, 
India, and the United States built on their initial com-
parative advantage. The evolution of these comparative 
advantages was also reflected in these countries’ manu-
Advanced economies
Emerging market economies
excluding China 
China
2010–15
1. Bilateral Trade Intensities1
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; World Bank, World Integrated Trade Solution database; 
and IMF staff calculations.
1Each dot represents a country pair. For a given pair of countries, the estimated 
trade intensity provides the impact on exports of the pair-speciﬁc bilateral and 
multilateral trading costs. To improve readability, pairs with intensity greater than 
two have been excluded.
2Averages are aggregated from the country-sector level using constant (2000) 
value-added shares as weights.
1995–99
0.0
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.0
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2. Average Tariff by Country Groups2
(Percent)
Average domestic protection
97
99
2001
03
05
07
09
11
13
15
1995
17
4
8
12
16
20
0
24
45-degree line
Figure 4.3.  Trade Intensity and Barriers to Trade
USA
CHN
JPN
KOR
DEU
GBR
CAN
MEX
IND
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.6
1.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1995
15
97
99
2001
03
05
07
09
11
13
1995
15
97
99
2001
03
05
07
09
11
13
1995
15
97
99
2001
03
05
07
09
11
13
2. Services
3. High-Tech Manufacturing
1. Manufacturing
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
1Values greater than 1 indicate a revealed comparative advantage in the sector.
Figure 4.4.  Revealed Comparative Advantage1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
108
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
facturing and services trade balances, with the United 
States, for example, increasing its surplus in services.
However, the evolution of comparative advantage 
is not determined by declining trade costs alone. 
Korea and China are examples of countries developing 
high-tech manufacturing sectors with a strong global 
trade impact despite a lack of (or in the case of Korea, 
modest) initial comparative advantage in this area. 
Other examples can be found at a more disaggregated 
level.6 These developments could reflect, among other 
6See Daruich, Easterly, and Reshef (2019) for a more detailed analysis 
of changes in specialization of countries at a more disaggregated level.
things, relatively higher productivity growth in certain 
sectors due to innovation. At the same time, there is 
much debate about the role of supply-side policies in 
helping build such comparative advantage.7
The development of global supply chains has also 
deepened the specialization of countries across and 
within sectors, amplifying multicountry trade patterns. 
A focus on the largest bilateral trade flows in 1995 
and 2015 suggests that global production is broadly 
organized around three poles, though with changing 
intensity (Figure 4.5): the North America pole (or “fac-
tory”) organized around the United States with Canada 
and Mexico; the European factory centered around 
Germany; and the Asian factory.8 There are also 
important links between the three production poles, in 
particular between the United States and Asia. While 
poles remained broadly intact from a regional perspec-
tive between 1995 and 2015, they changed within 
and intensified over time—with Asia experiencing the 
most notable changes. In 1995, Japan was at the center 
of factory Asia, whereas China now plays a central 
role, and some goods that Japanese firms used to ship 
directly to the United States are now first shipped to 
China for further processing. Greater participation in 
such global value chains should be expected to generate 
larger bilateral balances (measured by the sum of their 
absolute values) but not necessarily a larger overall 
trade balance.9 Indeed, data suggest a strong positive 
relationship between a country’s participation in global 
value chains and the size of its bilateral balances, while 
the relationship is much weaker when it comes to the 
size of the overall trade balance (Figure 4.6).
Another implication of these trends is that the 
difference between traditional gross trade measures and 
value-added measures (which capture the actual value 
added exchanged between two countries) has increased 
because the good sold incorporates value added from 
7Such policies could include, among other measures, sectoral 
subsidies, incentivization of innovation (for example, China’s patent 
promotion policy; see Chapter 4 of the April 2018 WEO), and 
technology transfer policies and practices. Supply-side policies are 
discussed later in the chapter.
8See Baldwin and Lopez-Gonzalez (2013) for a more detailed 
analysis of global patterns of supply-chain trade.
9For instance, consider a global value chain located in three 
countries and characterized by a flow of intermediate goods from the 
first country to the second, and from the second to the third. In this 
case, an intensification of the global value chain link would imply an 
increase in the trade deficit of the second country with respect to the 
first, and an increase in its surplus with respect to the third. See Ahn 
and others (forthcoming) for a discussion of the correlation between 
bilateral trade balances and participation in global value chains.
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Countries with largest export in year (>= 1 percent of world GDP in 1995 
and 2015, respectively), deﬂated by the US GDP deﬂator. The size of the bubbles 
represents the world share of a country’s GDP. Data labels use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 
1. 1995
2. 2015 
CAN
USA
AUT
DEU
NLD
FRA
GBR
CHN
JPN
TWN
KOR
MEX
ITA
GBR
DEU
FRA
CAN
USA
MEX
AUS
KOR
TWN
IND
JPN
CHN
Figure 4.5.  Largest Trade Flows, 1995 versus 2015
(Billions of US dollars)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
109
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
various countries along the value chain (Box 4.1).10 
This is particularly relevant and accounted for in the 
analysis of the impact of tariffs on value added and 
employment in the section titled “A Closer Look at 
Tariffs and Their Spillovers.”
Determinants of Bilateral Trade Balances
To understand and quantify the drivers of bilateral 
trade, this chapter uses the workhorse model of the 
trade literature, the so-called gravity model. A wide 
body of theoretical and empirical literature shows that 
this model does a good job of explaining bilateral 
exports as a function of trade costs, aggregate sup-
ply and demand of trade partners, and the sectoral 
composition of demand and supply. The estimated 
determinants of bilateral exports can then be mapped 
to estimated bilateral imports and to bilateral net trade 
patterns. This method allows bilateral trade balances 
to be broken down into the components that drive 
them—namely, specific trade policy actions and broad 
macroeconomic policies and conditions.11
The Gravity Model in a Nutshell
The gravity model explains bilateral exports as a 
function of three sets of determinants (see, among 
others, Anderson and van Wincoop 2003).
•• Macroeconomic factors: Specifically, bilateral exports 
increase with the aggregate supply (gross output) of 
the exporting country and the aggregate demand 
(gross spending) of the importing country, scaled 
by world output. The analysis uses gross output and 
spending (instead of value added and final spending) 
to account for growth in global-value-chain-related 
intermediates’ trade, which is included in 
export measures.
•• Trade costs: These include natural trade costs and 
man-made—or policy-related—trade costs. Two 
countries are more likely to trade with each other if 
they are in close geographic proximity, have histori-
cal ties, or have lower overt trade costs (lower tariffs, 
10See Johnson and Noguera (2012a, 2012b, 2017); and Koopman, 
Wang, and Wei (2014).
11See, for instance, Feenstra (2004); Silva and Tenreyro (2006); 
Baldwin and Taglioni (2011); Bacchetta and others (2012); and 
Yotov and others (2016) for a discussion of the estimation of the 
gravity model for bilateral exports. There is very little empirical 
literature that attempts to identify determinants of bilateral trade 
balances (for example, Davis and Weinstein 2002).
trade agreements).12 In addition to bilateral trade 
costs between the two countries, it is important 
to control for the average trade costs faced by the 
exporter across all trading partners and the average 
trade costs imposed by the importer to capture that 
the effect of bilateral tariffs is relative to trade costs 
with other partners. These factors capture the gen-
eral equilibrium effects of trade costs.13
12The model used here includes geographic distance between 
trading partners; bilateral tariffs; and dummy variables for a com-
mon border, a common language, common colonial history, and a 
common free trade agreement. The traditional gravity literature does 
not explicitly consider the role of exchange rate arrangements. For 
instance, common currency areas, such as the euro area, can help 
reduce real trade costs among participants by eliminating the need 
for currency hedging. In standard gravity regressions, such effects 
would be in part picked up, through collinearity, by the geographic 
proximity variables or the free trade agreement dummies.
13General equilibrium effects, include, for example, effects of 
trade costs of a third country on trade between the bilateral pair. The 
literature also speaks about multilateral trade costs as “multilateral 
Backward and forward participation in GVCs
(Percent of total gross exports)
1. Participation in GVCs versus Overall Trade Balances, 2015
Overall trade balances
(Absolute values; percent of GDP)
Backward and forward participation in GVCs
(Percent of total gross exports)
2. Participation in GVCs versus Bilateral Trade Balances, 2015
Bilateral trade balances
(Sum of absolute values; percent of GDP)
Figure 4.6.  The Role of Global Value Chains1
–5
30
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
70
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
70
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
y = 0.89x – 22.14
R 2 = 0.51
y = 0.27x – 7.01
R 2 = 0.19
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in Value 
Added database.
Note: GVCs = global value chains.
1Each dot represents a country.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
110
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
•• Sectoral composition of supply and demand: The 
sectoral composition of supply and demand—which 
reflects the international division of labor—will 
affect how much two countries trade in various 
sectors and, hence, how much they trade in the 
aggregate. For instance, if a country specializes in 
producing manufacturing goods, and its trading 
partner spends more on manufacturing goods than 
it produces, it will generate a larger trade flow 
between the two countries. Estimating the gravity 
model at the sectoral level and aggregating to the 
country level allows identification of the role of dif-
ferences in the sectoral structure of exporters’ supply 
and importers’ demand on bilateral trade flows.
It is important to recognize up front the limitations 
of this approach. First, while the gravity model clearly 
distinguishes between the principal drivers of bilateral 
trade, these can be more difficult to disentangle in 
practice. For example, as discussed, changes in tariffs 
do not only affect bilateral trade. Over the longer term, 
large and persistent changes in tariffs can also influ-
ence the international division of labor and, thereby, 
macroeconomic factors—an issue further investigated 
in the section titled “A Closer Look at Tariffs and Their 
Spillovers.” The results presented are thus best inter-
preted as partial-equilibrium effects and not necessarily 
as a reflection of the complete dynamic interaction of 
trade, macroeconomic factors, and tariffs over time. 
Second, macroeconomic factors capture all factors and 
policies that impact aggregate supply and demand, 
including fundamental factors (such as demographics 
or institutional development), macroeconomic policies, 
and supply-side policies. However, the latter are diffi-
cult to identify separately given the lack of consistent 
measures across countries—this is particularly true for 
measures of macroeconomic policy distortions, such as 
widespread export or production subsidies that distort 
trade similarly across all trading partners.14 The section 
titled “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors” explores 
in more detail these underlying drivers.
resistance” or, equivalently, as indices of market potential or access (see, 
for example, Head and Mayer 2014). In the empirical application, a 
common proxy for multilateral trade costs is the GDP-weighted trade 
costs against all trading partners.
14One example of concern over such distortionary policies is the 
Group of Twenty policymakers’ agreement to avoid market-distorting 
subsidies and other support measures that contribute to excess capac-
ity in steel production—see, for example, G20 (2018).
With these caveats in mind, the model of bilateral 
exports is estimated at the country and the sector lev-
els, using the Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development’s Trade in Value Added database. 
The database reports bilateral export data for 63 
countries at the International Standard Industrial 
Classification of All Economic Activities 3 level for 34 
sectors from 1995 to 2015. All variables are expressed 
in nominal US dollars. In line with the literature, 
the estimation is carried out over five-year periods 
to remove the short-term effect of nominal variables, 
such as nominal exchange rate movements.15 Online 
Annex 4.1 provides more details about the estimation 
and results.16
The estimated effects are consistent with other studies 
(see, for example, Bacchetta and others 2012; and 
Yotov and others 2016). They confirm that domestic 
aggregate supply of the exporter and aggregate demand 
of the importer are key determinants of bilateral 
export flows. Trade costs are estimated to be important 
barriers to trade, with the estimated elasticity implying 
that a 1 percent increase in gross ad valorem tariffs 
reduces gross bilateral exports by about 3–6 percent.17 
These country-level results are highly robust to the 
sector-level specification, which allows for introduction 
of the role of specialization in determining trade. As 
expected, important differences exist between services 
and non-services sectors, which can be observed only 
in sector-level data. For instance, although distance is a 
significant hindrance to both types of trade, it is more 
important for trade in services. Overall, the model 
explains bilateral exports (and imports) very well across 
all specifications.
15The traditional gravity model is therefore better interpreted as 
capturing the determinants of bilateral exports over the medium 
term. For instance, a sudden depreciation of the exporter’s currency 
would have neutral medium-term effects on the US dollar price of 
its exports. In fact, as time goes by, firms would compensate for 
the initial depreciation of the domestic currency by increasing their 
domestically denominated export prices. The gravity model also does 
not control for other relative price changes between the importer and 
exporter (such as those driven by commodity prices). However, add-
ing measures of exporter and importer price indices does not have 
a notable effect on the other coefficients and adds little explanatory 
power to the model.
16All annexes are available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.
17This approach focuses on the partial equilibrium effect of these 
variables, and the range of effects reflects the different sector- and 
country-level estimates reported in Online Annex 4.1. The section 
titled “A Closer Look at Tariffs and Their Spillovers” discusses some 
of the general equilibrium implications.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
111
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Decomposing Bilateral Trade Balances through the 
Gravity Lens
The model of bilateral exports (or imports) also 
provides information about the determinants of bilateral 
trade balances—defined as the difference between 
bilateral exports and imports. The gravity model loses 
explanatory power when applied to the level of bilateral 
trade balances, reflecting the difficulty in accounting for 
structural factors—beyond tariffs and broad sectoral spe-
cialization—that are time invariant and that determine 
the balance of trade between two countries (see Online 
Annex 4.1).18 This chapter therefore focuses on explain-
ing changes in bilateral trade balances.
An intuitive way to understand and quantify how 
trade costs, macroeconomic factors, and changes in 
sectoral composition explain an observed change 
in a bilateral trade balance over the sample period 
1995–2015 is to look at the estimated contribution 
of each explanatory variable in the model to that 
change (see Online Annex 4.1 for the derivation). The 
contributions to changes in the bilateral trade balances 
are presented for the major trading partners of three of 
the largest trading countries and manufacturing centers 
globally—the United States, China, and Germany 
(Figure 4.7).19 The figure highlights the prominent role 
that macroeconomic factors play in explaining changes 
in bilateral trade balances. Trade costs contribute, too, 
although to a lesser degree. Another observation is 
that the precise impact of macroeconomic factors on 
bilateral trade balances depends on the initial state of 
this relationship—in particular, whether the bilateral 
balance was large and positive or negative. Since trade 
18One possible candidate is the increasing international division 
of labor and integration of countries made possible by global value 
chains, which is only imperfectly captured by the standard gravity 
model. For example, Ahn and others (forthcoming) shows that, in 
a gravity equation estimated with country-time fixed effects, esti-
mation residuals increase over time and can be accounted for by the 
increasing participation of countries into global value chains. This 
is in line with the section titled “A Closer Look at Tariffs and Their 
Spillovers” and Box 4.4, which stress the importance of considering 
the key current role of global value chains when thinking about the 
role of tariffs. In addition, as indicated by Figure 4.6, panel 1, macro 
factors and global value chain participation are not significantly 
correlated and thus provide potentially independent information 
regarding the evolution of trade patterns.
19Panel 1 presents the macroeconomic, sectoral, and trade cost 
contributions on a net basis. Panel 2 separates these net contribu-
tions into their components as follows: macroeconomic factors into 
country net supply, partner net demand, and world output; sectoral 
composition into country sectoral composition and partner sectoral 
composition; and tariffs and other trade costs into bilateral tariffs, 
country multilateral trade costs, and partner multilateral trade costs.
Partner multilateral tariffs and
other trade costs
Country multilateral tariffs and
other trade costs
Bilateral tariffs2
World output
Partner sectoral composition
Country sectoral composition
Partner net demand
Country net supply
Residual3
Total
Tariffs and other trade costs2
Sectoral composition
Macroeconomic factors
Residual3
Total
Figure 4.7.  Contributions to Changes in Bilateral Trade 
Balances, 1995–20151
(Billions of US dollars)
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 1, 3, and 5 present the macroeconomic, sectoral, and trade cost 
terms on a net basis. Panels 2, 4, and 6 separate these net terms into their 
components as follows: macroeconomic factor into country net supply, partner net 
demand, and world output; sectoral composition into country sectoral composition 
and partner sectoral composition; and tariffs and other trade costs into bilateral 
tariffs, country multilateral trade costs, and partner multilateral trade costs. Data 
labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1Average value 2010–15 minus average value 1995–99.
2This includes tariffs and free or preferential trade agreements.
3The residual is the sum of the model residuals plus the approximation error.
CAN
JPN
MEX
CHN
(right
scale)
FRA
GBR
ITA
USA
–20
0
20
40
FRA
GBR
ITA
USA
–250
–200
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
–250
–200
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
–500
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
500
–500
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
500
–250
–200
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
–250
–200
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
250
–500
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
500
–500
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
500
CAN
JPN
MEX
CHN
(right
scale)
JPN
KOR
MYS
USA
(right
scale)
JPN
KOR
MYS
USA
(right
scale)
1. United States:
 Net Contributions
2. United States:
 Disaggregated
 Contributions
4. China:
 Disaggregated
 Contributions
3. China:
 Net Contributions
6. Germany:
 Disaggregated
 Contributions
5. Germany:
 Net Contributions
0
20
40
60
80
–40
–20
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
112
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
costs, along with other more micro-structural factors, 
determine countries’ comparative advantage and the 
international division of labor over the longer term, 
this suggest another way that tariffs can leave a mark 
on the path of bilateral trade balances over time.20 
Role of macroeconomic factors. Macroeconomic 
factors—both domestic and foreign—appear to be, 
by far, the largest contributors to changes in bilateral 
trade balances over the period of analysis. That both 
domestic and foreign macroeconomic conditions mat-
ter suggests that the relative evolution of the aggregate 
trade balances of the two trading partners has a role 
to play—a notion that is explored in the section titled 
“The Role of Macroeconomic Factors.”
•• Domestic macroeconomic conditions reflect the evolution 
of gross output and gross spending in a particular 
country. The magnitude of impact depends on the ini-
tial bilateral trade balance between the two countries, 
as determined by trade costs, the international division 
of labor, initial macroeconomic conditions, and other 
structural factors.21 For instance, over 1995–2015, US 
domestic macroeconomic factors had a negative effect 
on its bilateral trade balances across trading partners 
because US gross output was growing more slowly 
than spending. Put simply, the United States was, 
in the aggregate, spending more than it was produc-
ing, so it had to import more goods from its trading 
partners.22 In contrast, Germany’s domestic macro-
economic factors had a positive effect on its bilateral 
trade balances, reflecting faster growth of output than 
spending. Finally, output was also growing faster than 
spending in China over this period—in part reflect-
ing domestic supply-side policies, such as subsidies 
to the cost of production of manufactured (traded) 
goods (see, for example, IMF 2011, 2017b; and the 
2017 External Sector Report). Where China initially 
had a bilateral surplus (for example, with the United 
States), reflecting its strong comparative advantage in 
manufacturing goods, its faster growth of output than 
spending amplified the bilateral surplus. In contrast, 
for trading partners with which it maintained an 
initial trade deficit, such as Korea and Malaysia, the 
growth of spending, applied to much larger initial 
20Note, however, in the case of the US–China trade balance, that 
trade was relatively small in 1995 (see Figure 4.1).
21On a technical level, this is because of the multiplicative form 
in which the different determinants of bilateral trade interact 
with each other.
22The section titled “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors” takes a 
closer look at the drivers of these macroeconomic factors.
imports, had a larger impact than the growth of sup-
ply, amplifying the bilateral deficit.
•• Foreign macroeconomic factors are the contributions of 
the evolution of spending and output in partner coun-
tries. As with the contribution of domestic macroeco-
nomic factors, the initial structure of trade matters in 
the determination of the change in the bilateral trade 
balances. For instance, in the case of Germany, foreign 
macroeconomic factors contributed to its bilateral sur-
pluses, reflecting the faster growth of spending relative 
to output in partner countries and the initial surplus 
position that Germany held with its partners.
Role of sectoral specialization: Changes in the sec-
toral composition of aggregate demand and supply 
play a nontrivial role for many bilateral imbalances.23 
Overall, a positive effect on the bilateral trade bal-
ance indicates that the output share of sectors where a 
country had large initial exports rose (more than the 
spending share)—supporting the idea that countries 
build on existing production structures and comparative 
advantage—or that the spending share of sectors where 
the country had high initial demand fell (more than the 
output share). In the case of the United States, sectoral 
changes in its supply and demand seem to have con-
tributed positively to its bilateral balances with China, 
Germany, and Japan. The same holds true for Germany’s 
bilateral trade balances with Italy and the United States.
Role of trade costs: Although declines in bilateral tariffs 
contributed to growth in the level of gross trade (exports 
and imports), they had a more muted impact on trade 
balances (that is, “net” trade—the difference between 
exports and imports). This, in part, reflects the fact that 
tariffs were already low in the mid-1990s in many coun-
tries and that tariff reductions were reciprocal, with off-
setting effects on bilateral trade balances. For example, 
changes in bilateral tariffs contributed slightly positively 
to changes in US bilateral trade balances with Canada, 
China, and Mexico because these countries’ tariffs on 
US goods were falling faster than tariffs imposed by the 
United States on their goods (albeit from a higher level). 
All else equal, this mechanically promoted a greater rise 
in US exports to these countries than in their exports to 
the United States. For example, if Chinese tariffs on US 
goods had remained at their 1995 level, the estimation 
suggests that the US–China trade deficit would have 
been, on average, $30 billion (about 12 percent) larger 
23For a discussion of the relationship between sectoral specialization, 
asymmetric trade costs across sectors, and external balances, see Barat-
tieri (2014); Joy and others (2018); and Boz, Li, and Zhang (2019).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
113
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
over 2010–15. Of course, this would not have trans-
lated into an equal deterioration in the US overall trade 
balance, given that trade diversion effects would have led 
to larger US exports to other countries.
In many cases, changes in the average trade costs 
faced by countries across all their trading partners played 
a larger role during the sample period than changes in 
particular bilateral tariffs. As noted above, world output 
shares of emerging market economies, especially China, 
rose over time. For most countries, this resulted in 
additional trade with these emerging market economies, 
while reducing trade with some others. However, at the 
same time, trade patterns also adjusted to the fact that 
those rapidly growing countries happened to display 
higher tariffs than the typical advanced economy, which 
drove up average trade costs. All else equal, this increase 
in average trading costs made trade between lower-cost 
country pairs more attractive, contributing positively to 
trade intensity between many countries and amplifying 
bilateral trade balances—for example, widening US bilat-
eral deficits and increasing Germany’s bilateral surpluses.
Compared with macroeconomic factors, changes in 
bilateral tariffs played a smaller role in the evolution of 
bilateral balances, but their role should not be under-
estimated. As discussed further in the section titled “A 
Closer Look at Tariffs and Their Spillovers,” over the 
longer term, large and persistent changes in tariffs can 
have a significant impact on the international division of 
labor, productivity, and macroeconomic factors. Indeed, 
an increase in bilateral tariffs to prohibitive levels would 
cripple trade, whether at the bilateral or global level, 
with severe consequences for the economies involved.
The Role of Macroeconomic Factors
The previous section shows that changes in a country’s 
bilateral trade balances are, to a significant extent, driven 
by changes in the imbalance between gross production 
and the spending of each trading partner. This imbalance 
(in its unweighted form) is simply the country’s aggregate 
trade balance. Starting from this observation, this section 
provides a more detailed view of the role of macro-
economic factors by decomposing the aggregate trade 
balance into a set of specific macroeconomic drivers, 
including the effect of macroeconomic policies.
It is possible to manipulate the usual gravity equation 
to show more clearly that, under mild assumptions, any 
bilateral trade balance depends on the relative size of the 
two countries’ aggregate trade balance-to-GDP ratios, 
the two countries’ sizes relative to the world economy, 
and bilateral trade intensities. Box 4.2 discusses this 
relationship and illustrates how changes in the aggre-
gate trade balances of the United States and China can 
account for most of the evolution in their bilateral trade 
balance. In particular, once aggregate and bilateral trade 
balances are scaled in a theory-consistent way (that is, 
by taking into account the changing sizes of the trading 
partners), it becomes clear that the shrinking of the 
aggregate trade balances of the United States and China 
after the global financial crisis was matched by a corre-
sponding contraction in their bilateral trade balance.
The precise way a given change in a country’s aggre-
gate trade balance is reflected in its bilateral balances 
depends on a set of partner-specific trade intensities. A 
simple example illustrates this point: consider a ½ per-
centage point exogenous decrease in Germany’s overall 
trade balance—holding everything else constant, 
Germany’s bilateral trade balances with, among others, 
China, the Netherlands, and the United States would 
decline by about 0.1 percent of Germany’s GDP, while 
bilateral trade balances with the United Kingdom 
and France would decline by 0.05 percent of Germa-
ny’s GDP (Figure 4.8).24 A greater effect on bilateral 
balances reflects either a higher trade intensity with 
Germany (for example, in the case of the Netherlands) 
or a higher share in world output (for example, in the 
case of the United States).
From a policy perspective, it is important to under-
stand the factors behind the movement of aggregate 
trade balances over time. This question can be answered 
through the IMF’s External Balance Assessment (EBA) 
framework, which relates the current account of a 
country to macroeconomic policies and other drivers. 
Given that the current account of a country consists 
of the aggregate trade balance and net foreign incomes 
and transfers, the EBA model can also be applied to the 
trade balance directly (see Online Annex 4.2).25 The 
main EBA determinants fall into four broad groups:26
24This example considers only partial effects and does not include 
important general equilibrium responses.
25In the exercise presented here, countries’ aggregate trade 
balance-to-GDP ratios are regressed on the standard EBA drivers. 
As noted, given that the trade balance is just a subcomponent of the 
current account, the EBA drivers remain valid explanatory variables, 
but their quantitative role can change. The current account and the 
trade balance EBA regressions turn out to be quite consistent with 
each other (see Online Annex 4.2).
26The IMF’s EBA methodology, which has been in place since 
2013, estimates the level of the current account and exchange rate 
consistent with fundamentals and desired macroeconomic policies. 
The scope of the trade balance exercise presented here, instead, 
does not discuss desired policies. For this reason, and for ease of 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
114
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
•• Macroeconomic policies: Those included are fiscal pol-
icy (cyclically adjusted fiscal balance) and exchange 
rate policy (foreign exchange interventions). Macro-
economic policy distortions (for example, wide-
spread export or production subsidies that distort 
trade similarly across all trading partners) could also 
affect macroeconomic imbalances, however, these 
policies are difficult to measure systematically across 
countries and are not explicitly captured here.
•• Credit: This dimension is captured by detrended 
private credit to GDP.
•• Cyclical: This represents temporary factors of a 
cyclical nature, such as the output gap and the 
commodity terms of trade, capturing fluctuations in 
commodity prices.
•• Fundamentals: This includes such factors as demo-
graphics, the level of economic and institutional 
development, social safety nets, reliance on commodity 
exports, the country’s net foreign asset position, and the 
country’s role as a provider of safe and reserve assets.
Applying the EBA analysis to the United States, 
Japan, Germany, and China (as examples) highlights 
presentation, the EBA explanatory variables have been grouped in a 
somewhat different way than in the original EBA framework.
the role of macroeconomic policies and of financial 
variables in the evolution of external trade imbalances 
during 2010–17 (Figure 4.9). In recent years, financial 
conditions (captured by credit) have contributed to the 
reduction in external imbalances. This is the case in the 
United States, where the contribution of credit condi-
tions to the trade balance is now positive after the cor-
rection of the credit boom before the global financial 
crisis, and in China, where the credit expansion after 
the crisis led to an increase in domestic demand and to 
a reduction in the external surplus. Fiscal policies also 
matter. For example, a tight fiscal policy in Germany 
contributed to a large trade surplus while, in Japan, a 
relatively loose fiscal stance contributed to balancing 
the external trade position. In the United States, the 
relatively expansionary fiscal stance after the global 
financial crisis offset other improvements in the trade 
balance and, going forward, the recent fiscal stimulus is 
projected to further widen the trade deficit.27 Among 
27The fiscal contribution for China here is calculated under the 
official, legal-based, definition of the government sector. However, 
Figure 4.8.  Effect of a Deterioration of Germany’s Aggregate 
Trade Balance on Selected Bilateral Balances
(Percent of Germany’s GDP)
CHN
FRA
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes. The ﬁgure shows the effect on selected bilateral balances of a 
0.5 percentage point deterioration in Germany’s aggregate trade balance to GDP.
NLD
USA
–0.12
0.00
–0.10
–0.08
–0.06
–0.04
–0.02
GBR
Credit
Foreign exchange
intervention
Trade balance to
GDP ratio
Fundamentals
Cyclical
Fiscal
Residual
USA
JPN
DEU
CHN
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
1Contributions were obtained by regressing the countries’ trade balance-to-GDP 
ratio on the standard IMF External Balance Assessment variables.
Figure 4.9.  Contributions of Macroeconomic Drivers to 
Aggregate Trade Balances, Average 2010–171
(Percent of GDP)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
115
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
the other drivers, foreign exchange interventions have 
had only a limited impact on aggregate trade balances 
and, for China, have largely disappeared in recent 
years, while cyclical factors have provided, on aver-
age, a significant negative component in all countries, 
except Japan. Among the group of fundamental 
drivers, the level of development—a proxy for growth 
prospects and investment opportunities—is estimated 
to have made a positive contribution to the aggregate 
trade balance of advanced economies, and a nega-
tive contribution for China, consistent with the idea 
that goods and services should flow “downhill” from 
advanced to emerging market economies. Moreover, 
demographic variables make a negative contribution 
to the trade balance of countries in the late stage of 
the aging process.28 Finally, the unexplained residual 
is quantitively significant, but in line with the original 
EBA regression. The residual is likely to reflect, among 
other things, the role of macroeconomic distortions 
not directly accounted for by the EBA drivers. These 
include supply-side policies, such as production 
subsidies and regulatory policies that affect aggregate 
supply. Such policies have been pointed to in the case 
of China (see, for example, IMF 2011, 2017b; and the 
2017 External Sector Report).29
As a further cross-check of the role of aggregate 
macroeconomic factors in driving external imbal-
ances, Box 4.3 discusses the relationship between 
bilateral and overall trade balances during episodes of 
large trade deficit adjustments. It finds that empiri-
cally large changes in overall trade balances tend to 
go along with similar changes in a country’s bilateral 
trade relationships, while the opposite does not hold. 
That is, large adjustments in specific bilateral deficits 
under the IMF staff’s economic-based (“augmented”) definition of 
the general government sector, it would likely be negative.
28Goods and services are expected to flow “downhill” from 
advanced economies to raise investment by emerging market econo-
mies, which explains the sign of the contribution to the trade balance 
of the level of development driver. This result is in line with what 
is obtained in the original, current account-based EBA regression. 
Instead, while the original EBA finds that demographic variables 
make a positive contribution to the current account of countries in the 
late stage of the aging process, the contribution in the trade balance 
regression is negative. This is intuitive, given that aging is expected to 
boost the net income account of a country, stemming from the return 
on the net foreign assets previously accumulated abroad. At the same 
time, given that part of this income is later repatriated and consumed 
by an aging population, the trade balance deteriorates.
29More generally, the list of EBA drivers does not include tariffs. 
This choice is not particularly problematic as long as tariffs are 
relatively low. It is also important to recognize that macroeconomic 
policies directly captured in the EBA drivers may be devised as a 
response to other distortions that operate at the aggregate level.
do not necessarily lead to large adjustments in the 
overall trade balances (Figure 4.10), suggesting that, 
absent changes in macroeconomic conditions, large 
changes in one of the bilateral trade balances of a 
country tend to result in compensating adjustments 
in other bilateral balances. 
A Closer Look at Tariffs and Their Spillovers
The analysis so far finds that the direct impact of 
tariffs on trade balances is small relative to macroeco-
nomic factors. However, as discussed, in the longer 
term, large, sustained changes in tariffs can shape the 
international division of labor, as firms adjust domestic 
and international investment and production struc-
tures, including by organizing themselves into global 
value chains. Indeed, the reduction in tariffs and 
transportation and communications costs since the 
mid-1990s has gone hand in hand with a significant 
increase in complex global value chain participation, 
which—loosely speaking—is the share of exports that 
crosses at least two borders (Figure 4.11). Changes 
in tariffs can thus have important ramifications for 
During overall trade deﬁcit reversals 
Outside overall trade deﬁcit reversals 
2.0 percent
Minimum reduction in bilateral trade deﬁcit-to-GDP ratio required to qualify as
a large bilateral trade deﬁcit reversal
2.5 percent
3.0 percent
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Source: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics database.
Note: See Box 4.3 for deﬁnition of large overall and bilateral trade deﬁcit reversals. 
There are 92 overall trade deﬁcit reversals.
Figure 4.10.  Bilateral Trade Deﬁcit Reversal Episodes
(Number of episodes)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
116
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
productivity, output, and employment.30 For instance, 
Amiti and others (2017) finds that China’s tariff 
reductions—associated with its accession to the World 
Trade Organization—lowered the cost of inputs, 
boosted Chinese firms’ productivity, and, in conjunc-
tion with reduced US tariff uncertainty, expanded 
export participation to the United States.
 Increased global integration of production through 
global value chains creates scope for specialization and 
productivity improvement—but, at the same time, it 
increases the risk of international spillovers, including 
from increases in tariffs and trade wars.31 As firms use 
intermediate inputs from other sectors and countries, 
tariffs imposed in those sectors and countries can affect 
30The question of the empirical effects of tariffs on economic 
outcome variables relates to a vast literature (for example, Amiti and 
Konings 2007; Topalova and Khandelwal 2011; Ahn and others 
2016; and Furceri and others 2018); see Online Annex 4.3 for a 
discussion. Criscuolo and Timmis (2017) provides a discussion of 
the relationship between global value chains and productivity.
31It takes time for firms to change their production structure 
to minimize the consequences of tariff increases. These short-term 
costs can be magnified by policy uncertainty, which delays firms’ 
investment decisions.
their cost of production. The effect of tariffs up the value 
chain (that is, tariffs on direct or indirect suppliers of 
inputs) is most direct if intermediate inputs are imported. 
However, effects can also arise indirectly through other 
sectors and countries. What holds for tariffs upstream 
also applies to tariffs down the value chain (that is, tariffs 
imposed by direct or indirect users of the country’s out-
put). The firm selling intermediate goods to a sector or 
country that imposes a new tariff can be affected through 
reduced demand from customers. Finally, it is possible 
that tariffs have effects even on countries not directly 
related to the two parties involved. Relative prices impact 
trade at all levels, and so do relative tariffs. A change in 
the tariffs imposed on competitors can therefore affect a 
firm’s international competitiveness and demand for its 
output; this is similar to the idea of trade diversion, when 
imposing tariffs on a trading partner’s goods leads to a 
switch of demand to another trading partner’s goods on 
which there are no tariffs.
Measuring Spillovers from Tariffs
What is the impact of tariffs on production, employ-
ment, and productivity, accounting for how firms oper-
ating in a global value chain context are affected, both 
domestically and internationally? To capture the various 
effects of tariffs, four measures are constructed:32
•• The upstream tariff is the average cumulative tariff 
applied to the intermediate inputs as a share of the 
sector’s output. It captures the average effect tariffs 
have on the cost of production. It is calculated using 
the global input-output matrix, in which individual 
elements are scaled by the relevant sectoral output.
•• The domestic protection tariff captures the average 
tariff (import-weighted) imposed on imports that 
compete with the output of the domestic sector. Its 
level will most directly affect domestic demand for 
the sector’s output.
•• The downstream tariff is the average cumulative 
tariff the sector’s output faces when exported 
either directly or indirectly through other 
(intermediate-output-using) sectors and countries. 
Just as for the upstream tariff, it is calculated using 
a global input-output matrix, scaled by the sector’s 
output. Its level affects the international demand for 
the sector’s output.
32The construction of upstream and downstream tariffs relies on 
Vandenbussche, Connell, and Simons (2017) for a theoretical justifi-
cation and follows Rouzet and Miroudot (2013) in terms of practical 
implementation. See Online Annex 4.3 for further details.
Average GVC participation
Average tariffs (right scale)
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Trade in 
Value Added database; World Bank, World Integrated Trade Solution database; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: GVC participation is the backward and forward participation in GVCs as a 
percent of total exports. Tariffs are for agriculture, mining, and manufacturing 
sectors. GVC = global value chain. 
12012–15 extrapolated based on Trade in Value Added database (2018).
30
35
40
45
50
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
1995
97
99
2001
03
05
07
09
11
13
15
Figure 4.11.  Tariffs and Global Value Chain Participation1
(Value added-weighted average over countries and sectors; percent)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
117
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
•• The diversion tariff captures the weighted average 
tariff that partner countries impose on all other 
suppliers except the country-sector in question. The 
relative weights are a function of the importance of 
the exporter and importer countries.
The empirical analysis—from a large panel data set 
of 35 countries and 13 manufacturing sectors, con-
trolling for country-specific macroeconomic changes 
and country-industry characteristics—suggests that 
tariffs have significant and economically sizable effects 
both along the value chain and horizontally on real 
value added, employment, and productivity (Table 4.1; 
Online Annex 4.3). 
Two main conclusions emerge. First, tariffs up and 
down the value chain matter for output and productiv-
ity generally much more than domestic protection of 
the given sector. Upstream and downstream tariffs have 
statistically significant negative effects on value added, 
consistent with the idea that either they increase input 
costs (upstream tariff) or reduce international demand 
for the sector’s output (downstream tariff). Both labor 
productivity and total factor productivity are also sig-
nificantly reduced by higher upstream or downstream 
tariffs because they either make foreign inputs more 
expensive or reduce the ability to benefit from returns 
to scale by participating in international markets. In 
contrast, tariffs aimed at increasing protection for 
domestic producers do not appear to have significant 
effects, except for a small negative effect on employ-
ment. This may reflect a rough offset of negative effects 
of reduced competition by a larger market share of 
domestic suppliers. Second, there is evidence of trade 
diversion. The diversion tariff is positive and statisti-
cally significant for value added and employment, con-
sistent with the idea that firms, and therefore sectors, 
can benefit from a tariff imposed on competitors. The 
effect, however, does not extend to labor productivity 
and total factor productivity, for which the diversion 
tariff is insignificant.
Illustrative Simulations of Tariff Changes
Simulations can illustrate the economic significance 
of the estimated effects and how a given tariff change 
affects different countries through different channels. 
In line with the empirical model discussed above, the 
simulations illustrate partial equilibrium effects and do 
not include channels other than the direct trade effects 
(for example, policy uncertainty, confidence effect, and 
financial conditions).33 A different approach using gen-
eral equilibrium models is discussed later in this chapter.
Impact of Greater Integration on Tariff Spillovers
Closer integration into global value chains has 
increased the sensitivity of the upstream and down-
stream tariffs to nominal tariff changes, amplifying 
their effect. A 1 percentage point tariff increase by all 
countries would have a larger negative effect today 
than in 1995 (Figure 4.12).34 The effect of a nomi-
nal tariff hike on real value added has become more 
negative for all countries, but to varying degrees. For 
countries such as Germany and Korea and, to a slightly 
lesser extent, China and Japan, whose manufacturing 
sectors are both rather big and particularly integrated 
33The inclusion of the different fixed effects in the estimated 
model helps make a precise identification of the tariff effect by 
controlling for country-specific macroeconomic changes or constant 
characteristics of a given country-industry. The related caveat is that, 
by absorbing those, the estimated coefficients show partial equilib-
rium effects. For example, general equilibrium effects of widespread 
tariff increases on the exchange rate would not be captured by the 
model. Historically, changes in relative tariffs were predominantly 
due to tariff declines. In principle, a tariff increase could have a 
different effect from a tariff decline, even over the medium to long 
term, but this potential asymmetry is not explored here.
34Given data requirements and infrequent data releases, 2011 was 
the most recent year for which the simulation could be carried out. 
This is, however, a good approximation of today’s links as most of 
the increase in global value chain integration took place before 2011 
(see Figure 4.11). The simulations use the coefficients estimated 
over the entire sample. Changes in the effects thus reflect changes in 
weights, notably closer integration of production, as captured by the 
global input-output matrix.
Table 4.1. Sign and Significance of Tariff Effects on Economic Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Real Value Added
Number Employees
Labor Productivity
Total Factor Productivity
Upstream Tariff
–
–
–
–
Domestic Protection
+
–
–
+
Downstream Tariff
–
–
–
–
Diversion Tariff
+
+
+
–
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dependent variables are expressed in natural logarithm. Errors are clustered at the country-sector level. Pattern coding: white is not significant at the 
10 percent level; light color is significant at the 10 percent level; medium color is signifcant at the 5 percent level; full color is significant at the 1 percent 
level; green for positive coefficients; red for negative ones.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
118
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
into global value chains, the effects in terms of overall 
GDP are larger. For Canada and the United States, 
whose manufacturing sectors are smaller and have 
evolved less in terms of global integration, the effects 
tend to be smaller. 
Spillovers from Bilateral Tariffs
When tariff changes are more discriminatory and less 
generalized across countries, the relative importance of 
the different tariff measures changes, and trade diver-
sion becomes a relevant force for third countries. This 
becomes apparent when the 1 percentage point tariff 
increase is limited to trade between China and the 
United States (see Figure 4.12). China and the United 
States are the countries most affected and are both hurt 
by the move.35 For China, the effects of the downstream 
and—to a slightly lesser extent—upstream tariffs dom-
inate. For the United States, upstream tariffs are more 
important because intermediate imports from China play 
a relatively bigger role. This underlines how tariffs can be 
harmful to the countries imposing them when they tar-
get those with which they are closely integrated through 
supply chains. For third countries, trade diversion offsets 
negative spillovers from value chain links with China and 
the United States. Japan and Korea, which supply inputs 
to China, are affected by downstream tariffs, but also 
benefit from trade diversion. For Canada, the relative 
importance of trade diversion is most pronounced, and 
the overall effect is most likely to be positive.
The analysis so far has focused on small, first-round 
sectoral effects of tariffs, abstracting from, among other 
things, the additional domestic and international effects 
that stem from resulting aggregate changes in productiv-
ity, employment, or output. For a better understanding of 
the global general equilibrium effects, a hypothetical, large 
US–China trade dispute is simulated using three different 
modeling approaches that each emphasize different trans-
mission channels (Box 4.4). China and the United States 
are found to suffer the largest losses from their reciprocal 
tariff increases, due to the collapse in bilateral trade—with 
only partial substitution from other sources—and lower 
returns to capital, reflecting tariff distortions. Trade diver-
sion leads to substitution of China’s exports to the United 
States: Mexico and Canada benefit most, reflecting their 
close proximity to, and strong trade relations with, the 
United States; east Asia also benefits to some extent. At 
the same time, these countries increase imports of inter-
mediates from China and from other countries. While 
the level of bilateral trade between China and the United 
States is much reduced, there is no economically signif-
icant change in either country’s aggregate trade balance. 
Overall, macroeconomic spillover effects in third coun-
tries are modest in size, but sectoral spillovers are larger 
as global value chains are repositioned. In particular, over 
the long term, sizable shifts in manufacturing capacity 
away from China (and the United States) toward Mexico, 
Canada, and east Asia would occur (Figure 4.13). These 
sectoral shifts would imply sizable job losses in specific 
sectors, especially in China and the United States. 
The trade diversion effects—found both in the 
sectoral empirical analysis and in the general equilib-
rium simulations—suggest that attempts to target one 
35The smaller cost on the United States in percent of GDP reflects 
the relatively smaller weight of the US manufacturing sector in US 
GDP; the change in manufacturing value added itself is actually 
somewhat larger for the United States than for China.
Diversion tariff
Domestic protection
Downstream tariff
Upstream tariff
Total
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
1The ﬁgure shows the change in the simulated tariff spillovers between 1995 and 
2011, the last year for which such an exercise is possible given data constraints. 
2011 is a good approximation of current global value chain links because most of 
the growth in global value chain integration took place before 2011.
Figure 4.12.  Illustration of the Effect of Tariff Changes on
Real Value Added
(Percent of GDP)
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
CAN
CHN
DEU
FRA
GBR
ITA
JPN
KOR
USA
–0.25
–0.20
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
CAN
CHN
DEU
FRA
GBR
ITA
JPN
KOR
USA
1. Increased Effect of a 1 Percentage Point Generalized Tariff
 Increase1
2. Effect of 1 Percentage Point Reciprocal Tariff Increase
 between China and the United States 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
119
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
bilateral trade balance through tariffs or other distortions 
will likely be met with offsetting changes in the trade 
balances with other partners. Under given macroeco-
nomic conditions, changes in bilateral trade balances are 
unlikely to translate into sustained changes in the overall 
trade balance. Finally, while some third countries may 
benefit from trade diversion, a trade war between China 
and the United States would also trigger increased 
uncertainty, negative confidence effects, and a tightening 
of global financial conditions, with negative effects on 
most countries (Chapter 1 of the October 2018 WEO). 
Therefore, most countries are likely to be worse off, even 
those that benefit from trade diversion.
Conclusion
The findings in this chapter strongly suggest that aggre-
gate imbalances tend to be reflected at the bilateral level, 
while bilateral imbalances are of little consequence for 
the aggregate—indeed, unless macroeconomic conditions 
change, attempts to influence a particular bilateral trade 
balance are likely to lead to compensating adjustments 
elsewhere, leaving the overall trade balance unchanged.
Over the past two decades, macroeconomic factors 
played a key role in explaining changes in bilateral bal-
ances. The path of bilateral imbalances was, to a signifi-
cant extent, determined by the relative movement of the 
two partners’ domestic imbalance between supply and 
demand—as mirrored in their respective overall trade bal-
ance. Macroeconomic factors reflected a variety of drivers, 
including fundamental factors, macroeconomic policies—
such as fiscal policies and credit cycles—and, in some 
cases, exchange rate policies and supply-side policies.
At the same time, bilateral balances are also a reflec-
tion of the international division of labor and economic 
benefits accruing through trade. Declines in tariffs and 
other trade costs have allowed global value chains to 
grow and countries to further specialize according to 
their comparative advantage while production arrange-
ments spread across borders and became more efficient.
Looking beyond the effects on bilateral trade balances, 
higher tariffs would have significant negative impacts on 
value added, employment, and productivity for the coun-
tries involved and for third countries through value chain 
links. Greater international division of labor, in particular 
through global value chains, has increased the scope for 
negative spillovers of tariffs on other countries and spill-
back effects on countries imposing the tariffs. While some 
countries may benefit from trade diversion, all will be 
affected by adverse confidence effects and tighter financial 
conditions as trade tensions escalate.
Two main policy conclusions emerge from the analysis. 
First, given the important role of macroeconomic imbal-
ances in bilateral trade and trade balances, the discussion 
of external balances is rightly focused on aggregate trade 
balances and current accounts—as well as the macroeco-
nomic policies and distortions driving them. Aggregate 
external imbalances are not bad in and of themselves, 
given that they allow countries to borrow to finance 
investment and future growth, or to smooth consumption 
at times when income is temporarily lost. But policymak-
ers should avoid distortive macroeconomic policies that 
create excessive—and possibly unsustainable—imbalances.
Second, there is a strong case for lowering tariffs. The 
evidence provided here implies that lower tariffs will 
not only boost trade, they will also allow adjustment in 
the international division of labor to more fully reflect 
comparative advantage—which in turn leads to output, 
employment, and productivity gains for countries them-
selves and for others up and down the value chain. But 
as highlighted elsewhere, it is important to have policies 
in place to ensure that the benefits from trade are widely 
shared and the burden of adjustment does not fall on 
only a few (IMF 2017a; IMF/WB/WTO 2017, 2018).
Asia (excluding CHN)
CHN
Euro area
USA NAFTA partners
USA
ROW
World
Electronics
Other
manufacturing
Other sectors
Primary
Services
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Source: IMF calculations using the model in Caliendo and others (2017).
Note: NAFTA = North American Free Trade Agreement; ROW = rest of the world. 
Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Figure 4.13.  Sectoral Effects from a 25 Percent Increase in 
Tariffs Affecting All US–China Trade: World Real Value Added
(Contributions to total percent change from baseline)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
120
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Popular debate about bilateral trade balances 
usually focuses on the standard measure of gross 
balances—that is, exports to a country minus imports 
from the same country. However, over the past few 
years, the literature has emphasized that a more 
complete picture of bilateral trade relations needs to 
include the evolution of value-added balances (John-
son and Noguera 2012a, 2012b, 2017; Koopman, 
Wang, and Wei 2014). The importance of differenti-
ating between gross and value-added bilateral balances 
has become more relevant as global value chains 
continue to develop.
The point can be explained using, as an example, 
trade among China, Korea, and the United States in 
electrical goods, such as smart phones or televisions 
(WB and others 2017). If only final goods were traded 
internationally, then any good that the United States 
exports to Korea would stay in Korea. In this case, 
gross exports of the United States to Korea would give 
a correct representation of how much value pro-
duced in the first country actually reaches the other. 
However, this is not how production of electrical 
goods is carried out in today’s global value chains, 
where trade occurs largely in intermediate goods. The 
United States exports some inputs (such as design) to 
Korea, which adds new inputs (semiconductors and 
processors) to the production stage and exports the 
resulting new intermediates to China, which in turn 
completes production by assembling the inputs and 
ships the final goods back to the United States. In the 
example of these goods, the United States accumu-
lates a gross bilateral surplus with Korea and a deficit 
with China. These values, however, do not reflect the 
true origin and destination of the value of production 
generated—and consumed—in each country. Imports 
of the United States from China, in fact, reflect only 
partially the value generated in China, given that 
they incorporate not only the extra value generated 
in Korea, but also the value initially generated in 
the United States. Therefore, the trade deficit of the 
United States with regard to China is smaller if calcu-
lated in value-added terms.
Panel 1 of Figure 4.1.1 shows the 10 largest bilateral 
imbalances in 2015, in both gross and value-added 
terms. It is clear that, while large gross bilateral 
imbalances are, in general, also accompanied by large 
value-added imbalances, the imbalances in value-added 
The author of this box is Roberto Piazza.
Agriculture
Services
Non-manuf.
High-tech manuf.
Medium-tech manuf.
Low-tech manuf.
Surplus value-added
trade balance
Surplus trade balance
Deﬁcit value-added
trade balance
Deﬁcit trade balance
CHN
MEX
JPN
IND
ROW1
Total
Bilateral trade balances
Bilateral trade balances value added
Figure 4.1.1.  Gross versus Value-Added 
Trade Balance
(Billions of US dollars)
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, Trade in Value Added database; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: G20 = Group of Twenty; manuf. = manufacturing; 
ROW = rest of the world. Data labels use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1Includes statistical discrepancy.
Trade balance
Trade balance,
value added
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Trade balance
Trade balance,
value added
Agriculture
Services
Non-manuf.
High-tech
manuf.
Medium-tech
manuf.
Low-tech
manuf.
–1,000
–500
0
500
1,000
1,500
0
–1,500
–1,000
–500
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
–600
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
CHN-USA
TWN-CHN
KOR-CHN
MEX-USA
CHN-MEX
IND-USA
DEU-USA
CHN-IND
CHN-GBR
DEU-CHN
4. United States: Sectoral Trade Balances, 2015
3. G20: Sectoral Trade Balances, 2015
2. United States: Trade Balance, by Partners,
 2015
1. Bilateral Trade Balances: Top 10 Pairs, 2015
 (Absolute values)
Box 4.1. Gross versus Value-Added Trade
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
121
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
terms are smaller. For example, Korea’s surplus with 
China is smaller in value-added terms because Korea’s 
figure for gross exports incorporates value added 
from other countries. Panel 2 looks specifically at the 
largest bilateral imbalances for the United States and 
shows that the trade deficits with Mexico and China 
shrink when measured in value-added terms. Clearly, 
when measured against the totality of the rest of the 
world, a country’s overall trade balance is the same, 
regardless of whether it is measured in gross or in 
value-added terms.
Similar considerations hold when looking at the 
sectoral composition of trade imbalances. Panel 3 
presents, for each of six sectors, the sum of surplus and 
of deficits across Group of Twenty countries. Sectoral 
trade surpluses and deficits are typically smaller on 
a value added than on a gross basis, reflecting the 
round-trip of production through different sectors. 
Panel 4 looks at imbalances for the United States. 
When measured in value added, the US surplus in 
services is reduced, and its manufacturing deficit 
shrinks. This happens, for example, when US services 
(such as intellectual property) are used as inputs in 
the manufacturing sector of other countries, and these 
manufactured goods are then imported back to the 
United States.
Box 4.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
122
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
This box derives an explicit relationship between 
bilateral and aggregate trade balances and illustrates, as 
an example, the role of macroeconomic factors for the 
US–China bilateral trade balance.
Under the relatively mild assumption that trade 
costs are symmetric—that is, the cost of shipping 
goods from country ​i​ to country ​j​ is the same as the 
cost of shipping from ​j​ to ​i​—the standard gravity 
relationship that underpins the analysis in the previous 
section can be rearranged to obtain
​ 
​TB​ ij​ 
____ 
​Y​ i​ ​Y​ j​ W​ ​  =  ​m​ ij​ ∙ ​(​ ​TB​ i​ 
___ 
​Y​ i​ ​ − ​ 
​TB​ j​ 
___ 
​Y​ j​ ​)​,
in which ​TB​ denotes trade balance and ​Y​ output, 
with one of the two outputs (​Y​ j​ W​ in the equation) 
expressed as a share of world output (see Online 
Annex 4.2 for the derivation). The equation makes 
clear that the bilateral trade balance between 
two countries (appropriately scaled) depends 
on the relative evolution of the aggregate trade 
balance-to-GDP ratio of each of the two countries.
The appropriate scaling of the bilateral trade balance 
between countries ​i​ and ​j​ jointly accounts for the 
output level of both. This captures the intuition that, 
as the two countries grow, all else equal, their bilateral 
trade balance would tend to increase in absolute 
value. Figure 4.2.1, panel 1, shows that, when scaled 
by US GDP, the bilateral trade imbalance between 
the United States and China did not shrink after the 
2008–09 global financial crisis. However, when the 
double scaling is applied—and therefore the growing 
share of China in the world economy is factored in—a 
notable reduction emerges. This is consistent with 
the decline in global imbalances seen after the global 
financial crisis. 
Finally, the equation also makes clear that changes 
in a country’s aggregate trade imbalance (driven by 
fundamentals, such as fiscal policy and credit cycles) 
are amplified or dampened at the bilateral level by 
the corresponding bilateral trade intensity ​m​ ij​, which 
summarizes how a specific trade relationship is affected 
by the pair-specific bilateral and multilateral trading 
costs (and other more micro-structural determinants) 
identified by the gravity framework.
Applying this relationship to the US–China 
bilateral trade balance confirms that macroeconomic 
 The author of this box is Roberto Piazza.
imbalances played a key role in its evolution. Fig-
ure 4.2.1 (panel 2) plots again the scaled bilateral 
trade balance (“actual”), but now against a “pre-
dicted” value constructed as the product of a constant 
estimate for ​m​ ij​ times the difference in the aggregate 
trade-balance-to-GDP ratios of the two countries. 
The fact that the two lines track quite closely shows 
that variations in aggregate trade balances explain the 
evolution of the (scaled) US–China bilateral balance 
very well. The imperfection of the relationship indi-
cates that variations in trade intensity—for example, 
because of the changing constellation of world trade 
costs, also play a role.
Actual
Predicted
Bilateral TB/GDP_USA
Bilateral TB/(GDP_USA * GDP_CHN share) 
(right scale)
Figure 4.2.1.  US–China Bilateral and 
Aggregate Trade Balances
(Percent)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
1995
98
2001
04
07
10
14
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
1995
98
2001
04
07
10
14
2. US–China Bilateral Trade Balance1
1. US–China Bilateral Trade Balance
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, Trade in Value Added database; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: TB = Trade Balance. Data labels use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1As a percentage of US GDP times the world share of 
China’s GDP.
Box 4.2. Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
123
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Will a policy of targeting bilateral trade deficits reduce 
a country’s overall current account deficit? This box 
tackles this question by documenting the role of bilateral 
trade balances in past episodes of large trade deficit 
adjustments. The results suggest that (1) overall trade 
deficit adjustments are not necessarily driven by dispro-
portionate or large trade adjustments of trading partners 
with the biggest deficits; and (2) large adjustments of 
these high-deficit trading partners are no guarantee that 
large adjustments in overall trade balances will take place.
Large Trade Deficit Reversal Episodes
Following the literature on current account deficit 
reversals (see Milesi-Ferretti and Razin 1998), episodes 
of large trade deficit adjustments are identified using 
three criteria: (1) the average reduction in the overall 
trade deficit is at least 3 percentage points of GDP over 
three years relative to the three-year average before the 
event, (2) the maximum trade deficit in the three years 
after the reversal is lower than the minimum deficit in 
the three years preceding the reversal, and (3) there is 
no other episode in the following six years. Episodes of 
large bilateral trade deficit adjustments relative to the 
trading partners with the five biggest deficits are then 
computed using the same concept.1
Using IMF Direction of Trade Statistics data from 
1980–2017 for countries with nominal GDP above 
the world median in 2017 (excluding fuel exporters), 
92 large deficit-adjustment episodes were identi-
fied. Of these, only 17 percent (16 out of 92) were 
associated with large bilateral trade adjustment by at 
least one of the five biggest deficit partners. Results are 
generally robust to the adjustment threshold for bilat-
eral trade adjustments (for example, a lower threshold 
of 2½ percentage points would increase the number 
of episodes with large bilateral trade adjustments from 
16 to 22). The findings suggest that the overall trade 
adjustments are not generally driven by large adjust-
ments in a country’s top trading partners (Figure 4.10 
in Chapter 4, blue bar). Interestingly, in many cases, 
large adjustments in at least one of the five biggest 
deficit partners took place without a large reversal in 
the overall trade deficit (Figure 4.10 in Chapter 4, 
The authors of this box are Kyun Suk Chang, Swarnali Ahmed 
Hannan, and Sergii Meleshchuk.
1To be conservative, the episodes of large bilateral trade deficit 
adjustments are initially computed using the first two require-
ments and then matched with the overall episodes. For bilateral 
episodes matched with overall episodes, any further bilateral epi-
sode within plus or minus six years is removed from the sample. 
Bilateral episodes happening outside overall reversal episodes are 
based on the remaining sample.
orange bar), suggesting that large adjustments of key 
bilateral deficit partners do not guarantee large adjust-
ments in the overall trade balance.
How Broad Based Are Trade Deficit Adjustments?
As expected, absolute adjustments are concentrated 
at the top. The five biggest deficit partners are, on 
average, responsible for 54 percent of deficit correc-
tion, the next five are responsible for 12 percent of the 
correction, and the following five explain 8 percent of 
the correction. These results are not surprising, given 
that trade is fairly concentrated across trading partners, 
especially in advanced economies, where about half of 
trade is conducted with fewer than six partners.
Relative adjustments, however, are more evenly 
distributed. Adjustments are generally broad based 
or proportional across trading partners, such that the 
Mean
Median
25th/75th percentile
Figure 4.3.1.  Improvement in Bilateral Trade 
Deﬁcits during Overall Trade Deﬁcit Reversal 
Episodes
(Percent)
Source: IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics database.
Note: Improvement in bilateral trade balance deﬁcit to GDP 
relative to initial level is calculated using the following 
formula: change in bilateral trade balance to GDP (between 
three-year average of trade balance to GDP prior to reversal 
and three-year average after the reversal) relative to the 
absolute value of initial bilateral trade balance to GDP level 
(three-year average of trade balance to GDP prior to reversal 
year). Positive value represents improvement in trade 
balance deﬁcit against deﬁcit trading partners.
0
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1–5
6–10
Deﬁcit partners ranked by size of deﬁcit
Box 4.3. Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
124
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
improvement in bilateral trade balances—adjusted for 
their initial trade balance—is similar across the top five 
and the sixth to tenth deficit partners (Figure 4.3.1). 
Specifically, the mean adjustment for the top five defi-
cit partners is about 48 percent of their initial level, 
slightly lower than 52 percent of adjustment by the 
deficit partners ranked six to ten. Regression analysis 
confirms that all trading partners (top or bottom) con-
tribute to trade deficit adjustments and that dispro-
portionate reductions in the trade balances with top 
trading partners are by no means a necessary condition 
for the overall trade balance reduction.
In sum, the findings in this box suggest that tar-
geting bilateral trade balances would likely not help 
to reduce a country’s overall current account deficit. 
This is consistent with the conventional economic 
wisdom that changes in current account balances—the 
difference between national saving and investment—is 
best achieved through adjustments to macroeconomic 
policies, not trade policies.
Recent trade measures between the United States and 
China have revived interest in the macroeconomic effects 
of tariffs. Because most of the tariffs (implemented or 
envisaged) target trade between two large economies, an 
important question is the extent to which other coun-
tries not directly involved in the dispute (third coun-
tries) could be affected. The possible spillovers are both 
macro—affecting GDP and overall trade—and micro—
including value-chain and sectoral disruptions.
This box provides a range of estimates for China, the 
United States, and third countries, in a hypothetical and 
illustrative scenario in which tariffs on all US–China 
goods trade increase by 25 percentage points. It covers 
a range of models used by macroeconomists, trade 
policy experts, and academic trade theorists: a dynamic 
stochastic general equilibrium model of the global econ-
omy (the IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal 
model, or GIMF); a multisector perfect-competition 
computable general equilibrium model often used for 
trade policy analysis (the Global Trade Analysis Project, 
or GTAP); and a multisector heterogenous-firm model 
with entry and exit à la Melitz (Caliendo and others 
2017, henceforth CFRT). Each model emphasizes 
different transmission channels.1 GIMF focuses on the 
aggregate effects over time, with a distinction between 
the short term, during which nominal and real rigidities 
tend to amplify the expenditure-switching effects of 
tariffs, and the medium to long term, during which the 
effect stems mainly from the (distortionary) permanent 
impact of tariffs on the levels of key factors of produc-
The authors of this box are Carlos Caceres, Diego Cerdeiro, 
Rui Mano, Rafael Portillo, and Marika Santoro.
1All models feature trade in intermediate goods, though to 
a varying degree, depending on the extent of the sectoral and 
regional disaggregation in the model.
tion, capital, and labor. Given their rich sectoral and 
regional disaggregation, the two trade models (GTAP 
and CFRT) emphasize, instead, the disruption that 
tariffs cause by reallocating factors of production—
inefficiently and unevenly—across sectors within 
countries over the medium to the long term. In CFRT, 
the extent of reallocation is amplified by the presence 
of increasing returns to scale associated with firm-level 
fixed costs of entering domestic and export markets.
Two preliminary remarks are in order. First, the 
emphasis of this box is on trade-related channels. The 
negative spillovers from trade policy uncertainty were 
previously analyzed with GIMF in the October 2018 
World Economic Outlook and are not included here. 
Second—and as is typical in trade policy simulations—
the results depend crucially on the ease with which 
producers can substitute inputs from different countries 
(trade elasticities). In line with estimates found in the 
literature, results are based on a calibration in which 
substitution between any two foreign suppliers is easier 
than substitution between a foreign supplier and a 
domestic firm.2 This tends to amplify the (positive) 
effects on third countries, given that production tends 
to be diverted toward them rather than re-shored to the 
countries imposing the tariffs.
Effects on the United States and China
Figures 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 show that the United States 
and China suffer the largest losses. This result is broadly 
robust across models. The starting point is a collapse in 
2This is the case in both trade models and in the short term in 
GIMF. The elasticities between domestic and foreign production 
in CFRT are calibrated using the estimates in Feenstra and oth-
ers (2018); they broadly match the elasticities in GTAP.
Box 4.3 (continued)
Box 4.4. The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a US–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
125
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
US–China trade, which falls by 25–30 percent in the 
short term (GIMF) and somewhere between 30 percent 
and 70 percent over the long term, depending on the 
model and the direction of trade (Table 4.4.1). The 
decrease in external demand leads to a decline in total 
exports and in GDP in both countries. Annual real 
GDP losses range from –0.3 percent to –0.6 percent for 
the United States and from –0.5 percent to –1.5 percent 
for China. The effect on China is typically larger across 
all models, as exports to the United States represent a 
larger share of the Chinese economy (than vice versa). 
In GIMF, the effects on China are more pronounced 
in the short term, given that wages and prices do not 
adjust sufficiently to help offset the decrease in external 
demand; the negative effects on the United States 
become larger over the long term, as higher tariffs and 
a more appreciated exchange rate (not shown) lower 
the returns to capital. In CFRT, instead, the effects on 
China are amplified by the loss of economies of scale. 
The asymmetry in the effects of the tariff dispute is 
also reflected in each country’s terms of trade: these 
improve in the United States and worsen in China. 
Finally, although the US–China bilateral trade deficit is 
reduced, there is no economically significant change in 
each country’s multilateral trade balance.3
Macro Spillovers
Figure 4.4.2 and Table 4.4.1 show the effects on 
total exports and bilateral exports to China and the 
United States by regions of the world and selected 
3The latter result (shown in Table 4.4.1) is based on GIMF 
simulations only, as the two trade models are solved under the 
explicit assumption that each country’s multilateral trade balance 
does not change.
GIMF Year 1
GIMF LR
GTAP
CFRT
Figure 4.4.1.  Macro Effects from a 25 Percent 
Increase in Tariffs Affecting All US–China 
Trade: Real GDP
(Percentage point change from baseline)
Source: IMF calculation using the model in Caliendo and 
others (2017).
Note: CFRT = Caliendo and others (2017) model; EA = euro 
area; GIMF = Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal model; 
GTAP = Global Trade Analysis Project; LR = long run; NAFTA = 
North American Free Trade Agreement; ROW = rest of the 
world.
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
World
China
USA
Asia
NAFTA
Euro area
ROW
GIMF Year 1
GIMF LR
GTAP
CFRT
–7.0
3.0
–6.0
–5.0
–4.0
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
CHN
USA
Asia
JPN
KOR
VNM
THA
MYS
EA
DEU
NAFTA
CAN
MEX
ROW
Figure 4.4.2.  Macro Effects from a 25 Percent 
Increase in Tariffs Affecting All US–China 
Trade: Real Exports
(Percentage point change from baseline)
Source: IMF calculation using the model in Caliendo and 
others (2017).
Note: CFRT = Caliendo and others (2017) model; EA = euro 
area; GIMF = Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal model; 
GTAP = Global Trade Analysis Project; LR = long run; 
NAFTA = North American Free Trade Agreement; ROW = 
rest of the world. Data labels use International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Box 4.4 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
126
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
countries.4 A very robust result across models is that, 
while third countries experience an increase in exports 
to the United States, they also experience a decrease in 
exports to China. Much of the trade diversion at the 
global level is therefore about third countries increas-
ing their exports to the United States at the expense of 
China (as well as importing more intermediate goods 
from China; more on this follows). The effect on third 
countries’ overall exports is, in general, positive, with 
Mexico and Canada benefitting the most, thanks to 
their proximity to, and strong trade relations with, 
the United States. Across models, the increase in 
third-country exports is most notable in GIMF in the 
4This version of GIMF includes four other regions (Asia exclud-
ing China, North America excluding the United States, the euro 
area, and remaining countries) besides the United States and China.
short term and in CFRT, with GTAP showing weaker, 
and in some cases negative, responses.
There is more variation across models in terms of 
the effects on output in third countries, though these 
are typically modest in size. GIMF shows positive 
effects in the short term, including relatively large ones 
in other North America (excluding the United States), 
which reflect the strength of trade diversion in the 
presence of nominal rigidities.5  The effects are small 
but negative over the long term, however, in every 
region except other North America (excluding the 
United States), as some of the capital-reducing distor-
5As already mentioned, this study does not focus on possible 
trade-policy-related uncertainty, which can create short-term neg-
ative spillovers for third countries that can more than offset the 
positive effects from the trade diversion.
Table 4.4.1. Macro Effects from a 25 Percent Increase in Tariffs Affecting All US–China Trade: Bilateral 
Trade Flows with Third Countries
GIMF
GTAP
CFRT
Macro Variables
Year 1
Long Run
Trade Balance (percent of GDP)
China
–0.2
–0.3
. . .
. . .
United States
–0.2
–0.3
. . .
. . .
Exports to the United States
China
–20.9
–25.1
–71.3
–56.0
Asia
3.7
1.8
10.6
7.7
Japan
. . .
. . .
9.2
5.8
Korea
. . .
. . .
10.3
7.7
Vietnam
. . .
. . .
13.9
9.7
Thailand
. . .
. . .
10.8
9.3
Malaysia
. . .
. . .
10.9
7.7
Euro Area
3.8
1.7
8.4
5.7
Germany
. . .
. . .
8.6
4.9
NAFTA
2.6
0.7
3.2
3.2
Canada
. . .
. . .
7.5
2.5
Mexico
. . .
. . .
2.8
4.3
Rest of the World
3.1
1.7
6.1
5.8
Exports to China
United States
–27.5
–36.4
–77.6
–63.7
Asia
0.5
–1.5
–4.9
–1.1
Japan
. . .
. . .
–5.3
–0.8
Korea
. . .
. . .
–5.3
–1.3
Vietnam
. . .
. . .
–3.4
–3.4
Thailand
. . .
. . .
–4.4
–2.1
Malaysia
. . .
. . .
–4.9
–0.6
Euro Area
1.3
–1.6
–4.3
–1.4
Germany
. . .
. . .
–4.4
–1.4
NAFTA
–0.4
–2.6
–4.4
–2.9
Canada
. . .
. . .
–0.1
–2.8
Mexico
. . .
. . .
–6.3
–3.5
Rest of the World
–0.1
–1.6
–1.0
–2.8
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: CFRT = Caliendo and others (2017); GIMF = Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal model; GTAP = Global Trade Analysis Project.
Box 4.4 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
127
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
tions from higher tariffs mentioned earlier spill over to 
third countries. GTAP shows positive but small effects, 
while CFRT shows a number of countries (such as 
Mexico, Canada, Malaysia, Thailand, and Korea) 
experiencing a relatively large expansion in output and 
benefiting from economies of scale.
Sectoral Reallocations across Countries
Results from the two trade models illustrate that, 
while, in the aggregate, the spillovers tend to be 
moderate, this is not true at the sectoral level. The 
manufacturing sector shows a large worldwide contrac-
tion, with major fallout in the electronics and other 
manufacturing sectors in China (see Figure 4.13 in the 
main text). In contrast, manufacturing sectors expand 
in Mexico, Canada, and in Asian countries. Services 
expand in China and contract in the other countries 
mentioned previously, while the US agricultural sector 
experiences a sizable contraction. The magnitude of 
the reallocation varies across models; it is larger in 
CFRT due to economies of scale.
These sectoral reallocations imply sizable job losses 
in specific sectors, which compound the macroeco-
nomic adjustment for those experiencing an overall 
contraction (mainly the United States and China). For 
example, in CFRT, large sectors in both countries shed 
a significant number of jobs—about 1 percent of the 
workforce in the US agricultural and transportation 
equipment sectors, and 5 percent in China’s other 
manufacturing sector.
Repositioning of Global Value Chains
Finally, the sectoral reallocations also have implica-
tions for global value chains and the structure of inter-
national trade. The electronics and machinery sector 
provides a good illustration, given its importance in 
global trade (about 20 percent of world imports). In 
CFRT—the model in which the reallocation effects are 
most pronounced—China would eventually stop being 
the number one exporter of electronics and machinery 
to the United States, with other countries in Asia, 
Canada, and Mexico replacing China (Figure 4.4.3). 
In, for example, Mexico, the sizable entry of new firms 
into the electronics sector would then lead to large 
increases in imports of intermediates from everywhere 
else and especially from China (Figure 4.4.4).
Before tariffs
After tariffs
Figure 4.4.3.  US Imports of Electronics and 
Machinery before and after Tariffs
Sources: Caliendo and others (2017) model; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: #x means rank, xx% means share in total US imports 
of electronics.
China
#1, 22.1%
#4, 11.5%
East Asia
#2, 15.6%
#1, 17.7%
Canada
#4, 10.8%
#3, 12.3%
Mexico
#3, 12.6%
#2, 14.6%
United States
Figure 4.4.4.  Mexico’s Imports of 
Intermediate Inputs for the Electronics and 
Manufacturing Sectors
(Percent of GDP)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Excluding machinery and electronics. Dot size is 
proportional to input intensity in Mexico’s machinery and 
electronics sector.
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Agriculture
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Other manufacturing
Transport
Metals
Oil and chemicals
Wood and paper
Textile
Food
Change in imports from China
Change in imports from all partners
Mining
Box 4.4 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
128
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
References
Ahn, JaeBin, Emine Boz, Mauric Obstfeld, and Petia Topalova. 
Forthcoming. “Bilateral Trade Balances and Global Value 
Chains.” International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ahn, JaeBin, Era Dabla-Norris, Romain Duval, Bingjie Hu, and 
Lamin Njie. 2016. “Reassessing the Productivity Gains from 
Trade Liberalization.” IMF Working Paper 16/77, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Amiti, Mary, Mi Dai, Robert C. Feenstra, and John Romalis. 
2017. “How Did China’s WTO Entry Affect US Prices?” 
NBER Working Paper 23487, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Amiti, Mary, and Jozef Konings. 2007. “Trade Liberalization, 
Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evidence from Indo-
nesia.” American Economic Review 97 (5): 1611–638.
Anderson, James E., and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity 
with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle.” American 
Economic Review 93 (1): 170–92.
Bacchetta, Marc, Cosimo Beverelli, Olivier Cadot, Marco 
Fugazza, Jean-Marie Grether, Matthias Helble, Alessan-
dro Nicita, and Roberta Piermartini. 2012. “A Practical 
Guide to Trade Policy Analysis.” World Trade Organiza-
tion, Geneva.
Baldwin, Richard, and Javier Lopez-Gonzalez. 2013. 
“Supply-Chain Trade: A Portrait of Global Patterns and 
Several Testable Hypotheses.” NBER Working Papers 18957, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baldwin, Richard, and Daria Taglioni. 2011. “Gravity Chains: 
Estimating Bilateral Trade Flows When Parts and Compo-
nents Trade is Important.” Journal of Banking and Financial 
Economics 2 (2): 61–82.
Barattieri, Alessandro. 2014. “Comparative Advantage, Service 
Trade, and Global Imbalances.” Journal of International Eco-
nomics 92 (1): 1–13.
Boz, Emine, Nan Li, and Hongrui Zhang. 2019. “Effective 
Trade Costs and the Current Account: An Empirical Analy-
sis.” IMF Working Paper 19/8, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Robert C. Feenstra, John Romalis, and Alan 
Taylor. 2017. “Tariff Reductions, Entry, and Welfare: Theory 
and Evidence for the Last Two Decades.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 21768, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of 
the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA.” The Review of 
Economic Studies 82 (1): 1–44.
Criscuolo, Chiara, and Jonathan Timmis. 2017. “The Relation-
ship between Global Value Chains and Productivity.” Centre 
for the Study of Living Standards, International Productivity 
Monitor 32 (Spring): 61–83.
Daruich, Diego, William Easterly, and Ariell Reshef. 2019. “The 
Surprising Instability of Export Specializations.” Journal of 
Development Economics 137: 36–65.
Davis, Donald, and David Weinstein. 2002. “The Mystery of 
the Excess Trade (Balances).” American Economic Review 92 
(2): 170–74.
Feenstra, Robert C. 2004. Advanced International Trade: Theory and 
Evidence. Princeton, NJ, and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Feenstra, Robert C., Philip Luck, Maurice Obstfeld, and Katheryn 
Russ. 2018. “In Search of the Armington Elasticity.” Review of 
Economics and Statistics 100 (1): 135–50.
Furceri, Davide, Swarnali A. Hannan, Jonathan D. Ostry, and 
Andrew K. Rose. 2018. “Macroeconomic Consequences of 
Tariffs.” CEPR Discussion Papers 13389, Center for Eco-
nomic and Policy Research, Washington, DC.
Group of Twenty (G20). 2018. “G20 Global Forum on Steel 
Excess Capacity Ministerial Meeting, Ministerial Report.” 
September 20, Paris.
Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2014. “Gravity Equations: 
Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook.” In Handbook of 
International Economics, Volume 4, edited by Gita Gopinath, 
Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff. Oxford: Elsevier.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2011. “People’s Republic 
of China: Spillover Report for the 2011 Article IV Consul-
tation and Selected Issues.” IMF Country Report 11/193, 
Washington, DC.
———. 2017a. “Fostering Inclusive Growth.” Prepared for dis-
cussion at the July 2017 Group of Twenty Leaders’ Summit.
———. 2017b. “People’s Republic of China 2017 Article IV 
Consultation—Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by 
the Executive Director for the People’s Republic of China.” 
IMF Country Report 17/247, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Orga-
nization (IMF/WB/WTO). 2017. “Making Trade an Engine of 
Growth for All: The Case for Trade and for Policies to Facilitate 
Adjustment.” Prepared for discussion at the March 2017 meeting 
of Group of Twenty 20 Sherpas by staffs of the International 
Monetary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Organization.
———. 2018. “Reinvigorating Trade and Inclusive Growth.” 
Prepared for discussion at the March 2017 meeting of the 
Group of Twenty Sherpas by staffs of the International Mone-
tary Fund, World Bank, and World Trade Organization.
Joy, Mark, Noëmie Lisack, Simon Lloyd, Dennis Reinhardt, 
Rana Sajedi, and Simon Whitaker. 2018. “Mind the (Cur-
rent Account) Gap.” Bank of England Financial Stability 
Paper 43, London.
Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012a. “Account-
ing for Intermediates: Production Sharing and Trade in Value 
Added.” Journal of International Economics 86 (2): 224–36.
———. 2012b. “Proximity and Production Fragmenta-
tion.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102 
(3): 407–11.
———. 2017. “A Portrait of Trade in Value Added over Four 
Decades.” Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (5): 896–911.
Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. (2014). 
Tracing Value Added and Double Counting in Gross Exports. 
American Economic Review 104 (2): 459–94.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
129
CHAPTER 4 
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin. 1998. “Sharp 
Reductions in Current Account Deficits: An Empirical Analy-
sis.” European Economic Review 42 (3–5): 897–908.
Rouzet, Dorothée, and Sébastien Miroudot. 2013. “The 
Cumulative Impact of Trade Barriers along the Value Chain: 
An Empirical Assessment Using the OECD Inter-Country 
Input-Output Model.” Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Paris. 
Silva, JMC Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Grav-
ity.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 641–58.
Topalova, Petia, and Amit Khandelwal. 2011. “Trade Liberaliza-
tion and Firm Productivity: The Case of India.” The Review of 
Economics and Statistics 93 (3): 995–1009.
Vandenbussche, Hylke, William Connell, and Woutel Simons. 
2017. “Global Value Chains, Trade Shocks, and Jobs: An 
Application to Brexit.” CEPR Discussion Paper 12303, Cen-
tre for Economic Policy Research, London.
World Bank (WB), World Trade Organization, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, and University of 
International Business and Economics. 2017. Global Value Chain 
Development Report 2017: Measuring and Analyzing the Impact of 
GVCs on Economic Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Yotov, Yoto V., Roberta Piermartini, José-Antonio Monteiro, 
and Mario Larch. 2016. “An Advanced Guide to Trade Policy 
Analysis: The Structural Gravity Model.” World Trade Orga-
nization, Geneva.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
This page intentionally left blank 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
131
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
T
he Statistical Appendix presents histori-
cal data as well as projections. It comprises 
seven sections: Assumptions, What’s New, 
Data and Conventions, Country Notes, 
Classification of Countries, Key Data Documentation, 
and Statistical Tables.
The assumptions underlying the estimates and pro-
jections for 2019–20 and the medium-term scenario 
for 2021–24 are summarized in the first section. The 
second section presents a brief description of the 
changes to the database and statistical tables since the 
October 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO). The 
third section provides a general description of the data 
and the conventions used for calculating country group 
composites. The fourth section summarizes selected 
key information for each country. The fifth section 
summarizes the classification of countries in the vari-
ous groups presented in the WEO. The sixth section 
provides information on methods and reporting stan-
dards for the member countries’ national account and 
government finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statisti-
cal tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; 
Statistical Appendix B is available online at www.imf.
org/en/Publications/WEO. Data in these tables have 
been compiled on the basis of information available 
through March 29, 2019. The figures for 2019 and 
beyond are shown with the same degree of precision 
as the historical figures solely for convenience; because 
they are projections, the same degree of accuracy is not 
to be inferred.
Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econo-
mies are assumed to remain constant at their average 
levels measured during the period January 14 to Febru-
ary 11, 2019. For 2019 and 2020, these assumptions 
imply average US dollar–special drawing right (SDR) 
conversion rates of 1.397 and 1.407, US dollar–euro 
conversion rates of 1.144 and 1.156, and yen–US dollar 
conversion rates of 107.8 and 103.2, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $59.16 a 
barrel in 2019 and $59.02 a barrel in 2020.
Established policies of national authorities are assumed 
to be maintained. The more specific policy assumptions 
underlying the projections for selected economies are 
described in Box A1.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the 
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month 
US dollar deposits will average 3.2 percent in 2019 and 
3.8 percent in 2020, that three-month euro deposits will 
average –0.3 percent in 2019 and –0.2 percent in 2020, 
and that six-month yen deposits will average 0.0 percent 
in 2019 and 2020, respectively.
As a reminder, in regard to the introduction of the 
euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the Euro-
pean Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999, the 
irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro and 
currencies of the member countries adopting the euro 
are as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO.  
1 euro	 =	
13.7603	
Austrian schillings
	
=	
40.3399	
Belgian francs
	
=	
0.585274	
Cyprus pound1
	
=	
1.95583	
Deutsche marks
	
=	
15.6466	
Estonian krooni2
	
=	
5.94573	
Finnish markkaa
	
=	
6.55957	
French francs
	
=	
340.750	
Greek drachmas3
	
=	
0.787564	
Irish pound
	
=	
1,936.27	
Italian lire
	
=	
0.702804	
Latvian lat4
	
=	
3.45280	
Lithuanian litas5
	
=	
40.3399	
Luxembourg francs
	
=	
0.42930	
Maltese lira1
	
=	
2.20371	
Netherlands guilders
	
=	
200.482	
Portuguese escudos
	
=	
30.1260	
Slovak koruna6
	
=	
239.640	
Slovenian tolars7
	
=	
166.386	
Spanish pesetas
1Established on January 1, 2008.
2Established on January 1, 2011.
3Established on January 1, 2001.
4Established on January 1, 2014.
5Established on January 1, 2015.
6Established on January 1, 2009.
7Established on January 1, 2007.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
132	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
What’s New
•	 FYR Macedonia is now called North Macedonia.
•	 In February 2019, Zimbabwe adopted a new local 
currency unit, the RTGS dollar, which has become the 
official unit of account. Efforts are underway to revise 
and update all national accounts series to the new 
RTGS dollar. Current data are based on IMF staff esti-
mates of price and exchange rate developments in US 
(and RTGS) dollars. Staff estimates of US dollar values 
may differ from authorities’ estimates.
Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 194 economies form the statis-
tical basis of the WEO database. The data are maintained 
jointly by the IMF’s Research Department and regional 
departments, with the latter regularly updating country 
projections based on consistent global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the ultimate 
providers of historical data and definitions, international 
organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with 
the objective of harmonizing methodologies for the com-
pilation of national statistics, including analytical frame-
works, concepts, definitions, classifications, and valuation 
procedures used in the production of economic statistics. 
The WEO database reflects information from both 
national source agencies and international organizations.  
Most countries’ macroeconomic data presented in the 
WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version of the System 
of National Accounts (SNA). The IMF’s sector statistical 
standards—the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and 
International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), the Mon-
etary and Financial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide 
(MFSMCG), and the Government Finance Statistics Manual 
2014 (GFSM 2014)—have been or are being aligned with 
the SNA 2008. These standards reflect the IMF’s special 
interest in countries’ external positions, financial sector 
stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The process 
of adapting country data to the new standards begins in 
earnest when the manuals are released. However, full con-
cordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent on the 
provision by national statistical compilers of revised country 
data; hence, the WEO estimates are only partially adapted 
to these manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, the 
impact on major balances and aggregates of conversion to 
the updated standards will be small. Many other countries 
have partially adopted the latest standards and will continue 
implementation over a period of years.1  
1 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European System 
of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few countries use 
versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar adoption pat-
tern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer to Table G, 
which lists the statistical standards adhered to by each country.
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the WEO 
are drawn from official data sources and IMF staff estimates. 
While attempts are made to align gross and net debt data 
with the definitions in the GFSM, as a result of data limita-
tions or specific country circumstances, these data can some-
times deviate from the formal definitions. Although every 
effort is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant and 
internationally comparable, differences in both sectoral and 
instrument coverage mean that the data are not universally 
comparable. As more information becomes available, changes 
in either data sources or instrument coverage can give rise to 
data revisions that can sometimes be substantial. For clarifi-
cation on the deviations in sectoral or instrument coverage, 
please refer to the metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are either 
sums or weighted averages of data for individual coun-
tries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages of growth 
rates are expressed as compound annual rates of change.2 
Arithmetically weighted averages are used for all data for the 
emerging market and developing economies group—except 
data on inflation and money growth, for which geometric 
averages are used. The following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, inter-
est rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are 
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market 
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three years) 
as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic 
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted by 
GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share of total 
world or group GDP.3 Annual inflation rates are simple 
percentage changes from the previous years, except in the 
case of emerging market and developing economies, for 
which the rates are based on logarithmic differences. 
Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing power 
parity terms are sums of individual country data after con-
version to the international dollar in the years indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors for 
the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepancies in 
intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual GDP data are 
used for the euro area and for the majority of individual 
countries, except for Cyprus, Germany, Ireland, and 
Portugal, which report calendar-adjusted data. For data 
2 Averages for real GDP and its components, employment, inflation, 
factor productivity, GDP per capita, trade, and commodity prices are 
calculated based on the compound annual rate of change, except in the case 
of the unemployment rate, which is based on the simple arithmetic average.
3 See “Revised Purchasing Power Parity Weights” the July 2014 WEO 
Update for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based 
weights, as well as Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO and Annex IV of the 
May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne Schulze-
Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the World Economic 
Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, December 1993), 106–23..
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
133
prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 1995 European 
currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver-
age market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment growth 
are weighted by labor force as a share of group labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are 
sums of individual country data after conversion to US 
dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years 
indicated for balance of payments data and at end-of-
year market exchange rates for debt denominated in 
currencies other than US dollars.  
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and 
prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent changes 
for individual countries weighted by the US dollar value 
of exports or imports as a share of total world or group 
exports or imports (in the preceding year).
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are com-
puted if 90 percent or more of the share of group weights 
is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few 
countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the economies 
with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts 
and government finance data for each country. 
For some countries, the figures for 2018 and earlier 
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; Table 
G lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and bal-
ance of payments indicators for each country.
Country Notes
The consumer price data for Argentina before Decem-
ber 2013 reflect the consumer price index (CPI) for 
the Greater Buenos Aires Area (CPI-GBA), while from 
December 2013 to October 2015 the data reflect the 
national CPI (IPCNu). The government that took office 
in December 2015 discontinued the IPCNu, stating that 
it was flawed, and released a new CPI for the Greater 
Buenos Aires Area on June 15, 2016 (a new national 
CPI has been disseminated starting in June 2017). At its 
November 9, 2016, meeting, the IMF Executive Board 
considered the new CPI series to be in line with inter-
national standards and lifted the declaration of censure 
issued in 2013. Given the differences in geographical 
coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology of these 
series, the average CPI inflation for 2014, 2015, and 
2016 and end-of-period inflation for 2015 and 2016 are 
not reported in the April 2019 WEO. 
Argentina’s authorities discontinued the publication of 
labor market data in December 2015 and released new 
series starting in the second quarter of 2016. 
India’s real GDP growth rates are calculated as per 
national accounts: for 1998 to 2011 with base year 
2004/05 and, thereafter, with base year 2011/12.
Against the backdrop of a civil war and weak capacity, 
the reliability of Libya’s data, especially medium-term 
projections, is low.
Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward 
because of the uncertain political situation.
Trinidad and Tobago’s growth estimates for 2018 are 
based on full-year energy sector data from the Ministry 
of Energy and Ministry of Finance, preliminary national 
accounts data for the first three quarters of the year from 
the Central Statistical Office, and staff projections for 
the fourth quarter nonenergy output based on available 
information. Growth estimates are subject to revision 
once the finalized data for the full year become available.
Starting from October 2018, Uruguay’s public pen-
sion system has been receiving transfers in the context 
of a new law that compensates persons affected by the 
creation of the mixed pension system (amounting to 
1.3 percent of GDP in 2018). These funds are recorded 
as revenue, consistent with IMF methodology. There-
fore, data and projections for 2018–22 are affected by 
these transfers.
Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, 
including assessing past and current economic devel-
opments as the basis for the projections, is compli-
cated by the lack of discussions with the authorities 
(the last Article IV consultation took place in 2004), 
incomplete understanding of the reported data, and 
difficulties in interpreting certain reported economic 
indicators given economic developments. The fiscal 
accounts include the budgetary central government; 
social security; FOGADE (insurance deposit institu-
tion); and a sample of public enterprises, including 
Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA); and data 
for 2018–24 are IMF staff estimates. The effects of 
hyperinflation and the paucity of reported data mean 
that the IMF staff’s projected macroeconomic indica-
tors need to be interpreted with caution. For example, 
nominal GDP is estimated assuming the GDP deflator 
rises in line with the IMF staff’s projection of average 
inflation. Public external debt in relation to GDP is 
projected using the IMF staff’s estimate of the average 
exchange rate for the year. Wide uncertainty surrounds 
these projections. Venezuela’s consumer prices (CPI) are 
excluded from all WEO group composites. 
Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the 
world into two major groups: advanced economies and 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
134	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
emerging market and developing economies.4 This 
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic or 
otherwise, and has evolved over time. The objective is 
to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably mean-
ingful method of organizing data. Table A provides 
an overview of the country classification, showing 
the number of countries in each group by region and 
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size 
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports 
of goods and services, and population). 
Some countries remain outside the country classifi-
cation and therefore are not included in the analysis. 
Cuba and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
are examples of countries that are not IMF members, 
and their economies therefore are not monitored by 
the IMF.
General Features and Composition of Groups in 
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
The 39 advanced economies are listed in Table B. 
The seven largest in terms of GDP based on market 
exchange rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, 
France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—con-
stitute the subgroup of major advanced economies, 
often referred to as the Group of Seven (G7). The 
members of the euro area are also distinguished as a 
subgroup. Composite data shown in the tables for the 
euro area cover the current members for all years, even 
though the membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European 
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced 
economies in the WEO.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing econo-
mies (155) includes all those that are not classified as 
advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and 
developing economies are Commonwealth of Indepen-
dent States (CIS); emerging and developing Asia; emerg-
ing and developing Europe (sometimes also referred to 
as “central and eastern Europe”); Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC); Middle East, North Africa, Afghani-
4 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always refer 
to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and 
practice. Some territorial entities included here are not states, although 
their statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
stan, and Pakistan (MENAP); and sub-Saharan Africa 
(SSA).
Emerging market and developing economies are also 
classified according to analytical criteria. The analyti-
cal criteria reflect the composition of export earnings 
and a distinction between net creditor and net debtor 
economies. The detailed composition of emerging 
market and developing economies in the regional and 
analytical groups is shown in Tables D and E. 
The analytical criterion source of export earnings distin-
guishes between the categories fuel (Standard Interna-
tional Trade Classification (SITC) 3) and nonfuel and 
then focuses on nonfuel primary products (SITCs 0, 1, 2, 
4, and 68). Economies are categorized into one of these 
groups if their main source of export earnings exceeded 
50 percent of total exports on average between 2013 
and 2017. 
The financial criteria focus on net creditor economies, 
net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries 
(HIPCs), and low-income developing countries (LIDCs). 
Economies are categorized as net debtors when their 
latest net international investment position, where 
available, was less than zero or their current account 
balance accumulations from 1972 (or earliest available 
data) to 2017 were negative. Net debtor economies are 
further differentiated on the basis of experience with 
debt servicing.5
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are 
or have been considered by the IMF and the World 
Bank for participation in their debt initiative known as 
the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external 
debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustain-
able” level in a reasonably short period of time.6 Many 
of these countries have already benefited from debt 
relief and have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita 
income levels below a certain threshold (set at $2,700 
in 2016 as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas 
method), structural features consistent with limited 
development and structural transformation, and exter-
nal financial linkages insufficiently close for them to be 
widely seen as emerging market economies.
5 During 2013–17, 27 economies incurred external payments 
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling 
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or 
rescheduling during 2013–17.
6 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and 
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The 
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
135
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods
and Services, and Population, 20181
(Percent of total for group or world)
GDP
Exports of Goods 
and Services
Population
Number of
Economies
Advanced
Economies
World
Advanced
Economies
World
Advanced
Economies
World
Advanced Economies
39
100.0
40.8
100.0
63.0
100.0
14.3
United States
37.2
15.2
16.1
10.1
30.6
4.4
Euro Area
19
28.0
11.4
41.8
26.3
31.7
4.5
Germany
7.9
3.2
12.0
7.6
7.8
1.1
France
5.4
2.2
5.7
3.6
6.1
0.9
Italy
4.4
1.8
4.2
2.6
5.7
0.8
Spain
3.4
1.4
3.1
2.0
4.3
0.6
Japan
10.2
4.1
5.9
3.7
11.8
1.7
United Kingdom
5.5
2.2
5.4
3.4
6.2
0.9
Canada
3.3
1.4
3.5
2.2
3.5
0.5
Other Advanced Economies
16
15.8
6.4
27.3
17.2
16.1
2.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
7
73.8
30.1
52.8
33.2
71.6
10.3
Emerging  
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging  
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
155
100.0
59.2
100.0
37.0
100.0
85.7
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
12
7.5
4.4
8.1
3.0
4.5
3.9
Russia
5.3
3.1
5.5
2.0
2.3
1.9
Emerging and Developing Asia
30
56.2
33.3
48.9
18.1
56.4
48.3
China 
31.6
18.7
28.8
10.7
21.8
18.7
India 
13.1
7.8
6.2
2.3
20.9
17.9
Excluding China and India
28
11.5
6.8
13.9
5.2
13.7
11.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
12
6.1
3.6
9.8
3.6
2.8
2.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
33
12.6
7.5
13.7
5.1
9.8
8.4
Brazil
4.2
2.5
3.0
1.1
3.3
2.8
Mexico
3.2
1.9
5.2
1.9
2.0
1.7
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
23
12.5
7.4
15.0
5.6
11.0
9.4
Middle East and North Africa
21
10.9
6.5
14.7
5.4
7.3
6.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
45
5.1
3.0
4.5
1.7
15.6
13.4
Excluding Nigeria and South Africa
43
2.7
1.6
2.6
1.0
11.7
10.0
Analytical Groups3
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
28
17.3
10.2
22.0
8.2
11.8
10.1
Nonfuel
126
82.7
49.0
78.0
28.9
88.2
75.6
Of Which, Primary Products
35
5.0
3.0
5.1
1.9
8.9
7.6
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies 
122
51.5
30.5
49.4
18.3
68.3
58.5
Net Debtor Economies by Debt-
Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling 
during 2013–17
27
3.5
2.1
2.5
0.9
6.5
5.5
Other Groups
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
39
2.5
1.5
1.9
0.7
11.7
10.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
59
7.3
4.3
6.9
2.5
23.0
19.7
1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those 
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geogra-
phy and similarity in economic structure.
3Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings, and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of 
insufficient data.  
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
136	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Greece
Netherlands
Belgium
Ireland
Portugal
Cyprus
Italy
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Finland
Lithuania
Spain 
France
Luxembourg
Germany 
Malta 
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
United States
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Australia
Korea
Singapore
Czech Republic
Macao SAR2
Sweden
Denmark
New Zealand
Switzerland
Hong Kong SAR1
Norway
Taiwan Province of China
Iceland
Puerto Rico
Israel
San Marino
1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a 
Special Administrative Region of China.
Table C. European Union
Austria
Germany
Poland
Belgium
Greece
Portugal
Bulgaria
Hungary
Romania
Croatia
Ireland
Slovak Republic
Cyprus
Italy
Slovenia
Czech Republic
Latvia
Spain
Denmark
Lithuania
Sweden
Estonia
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Finland
Malta
France
Netherlands 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
137
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel Primary Products
Commonwealth of Independent States
Azerbaijan
Tajikistan
Kazakhstan
Uzbekistan
Russia
Turkmenistan1
Emerging and Developing Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Kiribati
Timor-Leste
Lao P.D.R.
Marshall Islands
Mongolia 
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
Latin America and the Caribbean
Bolivia
Argentina
Ecuador 
Chile
Trinidad and Tobago 
Guyana
Venezuela
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Algeria
Afghanistan
Bahrain
Mauritania
Iran
Somalia
Iraq
Sudan
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Burkina Faso
Chad
Burundi
Republic of Congo
Central African Republic
Equatorial Guinea
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Gabon
Côte d’Ivoire 
Nigeria
Eritrea
South Sudan
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe
1Turkmenistan, which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, is included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in 
economic structure.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
138	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Commonwealth of Independent States
Armenia
*
Azerbaijan
•
Belarus
*
Georgia3
*
Kazakhstan
*
Kyrgyz Republic
*
*
Moldova
*
*
Russia
•
Tajikistan
*
*
Turkmenistan3
*
Ukraine3
*
Uzbekistan
•
*
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
*
Bhutan
*
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
Cambodia
*
*
China
•
Fiji
*
India
*
Indonesia
*
Kiribati
•
*
Lao P.D.R.
*
*
Malaysia
*
Maldives
*
Marshall Islands
*
Micronesia
•
Mongolia
*
Myanmar
*
*
Nauru
*
Nepal
•
*
Palau
•
Papua New Guinea
*
*
Philippines
*
Samoa
*
Solomon Islands
*
*
Sri Lanka
*
Thailand
*
Timor-Leste
•
*
Tonga
*
Tuvalu
•
Vanuatu
*
Vietnam
*
*
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
Bulgaria
*
Croatia
*
Hungary
*
Kosovo
*
Montenegro
*
North Macedonia
*
Poland
*
Romania
*
Serbia
*
Turkey
*
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
Argentina
•
Aruba
*
The Bahamas
*
Barbados
*
Belize
*
Bolivia
*
•
Brazil
*
Chile
*
Colombia
*
Costa Rica
*
Dominica
•
Dominican Republic
*
Ecuador
*
El Salvador
*
Grenada
*
Guatemala
*
Guyana
*
•
Haiti
*
•
*
Honduras
*
•
*
Jamaica
*
Mexico
*
Nicaragua
*
•
*
Panama
*
Paraguay
*
Peru
*
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
St. Lucia
*
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
*
Suriname
*
Trinidad and Tobago
•
Uruguay
*
Venezuela
•
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
and Low-Income Developing Countries
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
139
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Afghanistan
•
•
*
Algeria
•
Bahrain
•
Djibouti
*
*
Egypt
*
Iran
•
Iraq
•
Jordan
*
Kuwait
•
Lebanon
*
Libya
•
Mauritania
*
•
*
Morocco
*
Oman
•
Pakistan
*
Qatar
•
Saudi Arabia
•
Somalia
*
*
*
Sudan
*
*
*
Syria4
. . .
Tunisia
*
United Arab Emirates
•
Yemen
*
*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
*
Benin
*
•
*
Botswana
•
Burkina Faso
*
•
*
Burundi
*
•
*
Cabo Verde
*
Cameroon
*
•
*
Central African Republic
*
•
*
Chad
*
•
*
Comoros
*
•
*
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
*
•
*
Republic of Congo
*
•
*
Côte d’Ivoire
*
•
*
Equatorial Guinea
*
Eritrea
*
*
*
Eswatini
•
Ethiopia
*
•
*
Gabon
•
The Gambia
*
•
*
Ghana
*
•
*
Guinea
*
•
*
Guinea-Bissau
*
•
*
Kenya
*
*
Lesotho
*
*
Liberia
*
•
*
Madagascar
*
•
*
Malawi
*
•
*
Mali
*
•
*
Mauritius
•
Mozambique
*
•
*
Namibia
*
Niger
*
•
*
Nigeria
*
*
Rwanda
*
•
*
São Tomé and Príncipe
*
•
*
Senegal
*
•
*
Seychelles
*
Sierra Leone
*
•
*
South Africa
•
South Sudan4
. . . 
*
Tanzania
*
•
*
Togo
*
•
*
Uganda
*
•
*
Zambia
*
•
*
Zimbabwe
*
*
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
and Low-Income Developing Countries (continued)
1Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).  
2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in 
economic structure.
4South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
140	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
   Government Finance
The Bahamas
Jul/Jun
Barbados
Apr/Mar
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Apr/Mar
Dominica
Jul/Jun
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Apr/Mar
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
Apr/Mar
India
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Apr/Mar
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Malawi
Jul/Jun
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Jul/Jun
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
St. Lucia
Apr/Mar
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Apr/Mar
Thailand
Oct/Sep
Trinidad and Tobago
Oct/Sep
1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
141
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
NSO
2017
2002/03
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Albania
Albanian lek
IMF staff
2017
1996
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2018
Algeria
Algerian dinar
NSO
2017
2001
SNA 1993
From 2005
NSO
2017
Angola
Angolan kwanza
NSO and MEP
2017
2002
ESA 1995
NSO
2018
Antigua and 
Barbuda
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
CB
2017
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Argentina
Argentine peso
NSO
2018
2004
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Armenia
Armenian dram
NSO
2017
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Aruba
Aruban Florin
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2017
Australia
Australian dollar
NSO 
2018
2015/16
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2018
Austria
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan manat
NSO
2017
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2017
The Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
NSO
2017
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Bahrain
Bahrain dinar
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Bangladesh
Bangladesh taka
NSO
2017
2005/06
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Barbados
Barbados dollar
NSO and CB
2018
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
NSO
2017
2014
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2017
Belgium
Euro
CB
2017
2016
ESA 2010
From 1995
CB
2017
Belize
Belize dollar
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Benin
CFA franc
NSO
2015
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Bhutan
Bhutanese 
ngultrum
NSO
2015/16
2000/016
SNA 1993
CB
2016/17
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
NSO
2017
1990
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bosnian convertible 
marka
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2018
Botswana
Botswana pula
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Brazil
Brazilian real
NSO
2018
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Brunei Darussalam
Brunei dollar
NSO and GAD
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and GAD
2017
Bulgaria
Bulgarian lev
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2018
Burkina Faso
CFA franc
NSO and MEP
2017
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Burundi
Burundi franc
NSO
2015
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verdean 
escudo
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 2008
From 2011
NSO
2017
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Cameroon
CFA franc
NSO
2017
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Canada
Canadian dollar
NSO
2018
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2018
Central African 
Republic
CFA franc
NSO
2012
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2015
Chad
CFA franc
CB
2017
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Chile
Chilean peso
CB
2018
20136
SNA 2008
From 2003
NSO
2018
China
Chinese yuan
NSO
2018
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Colombia
Colombian peso
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2017
Comoros
Comorian franc
MEP
2017
2000
. . .
NSO
2017
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
Congolese franc
NSO
2018
2005
SNA 1993
CB
2018
Republic of Congo
CFA franc
NSO
2017
1990
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colón
CB
2016
2012
SNA 2008
CB
2016
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
142	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Afghanistan
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
NSO, MoF, and CB
2017
BPM 5
Albania
IMF staff
2018
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
. . .
CB
2017
BPM 6
Algeria
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Angola
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
. . .
CB
2017
BPM 6
Antigua and 
Barbuda
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Argentina
MEP
2018
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
NSO
2018
BPM 6
Armenia
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Aruba
MoF
2017
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 5
Australia
MoF
2017
2014
CG,SG,LG,TG
A
NSO
2018
BPM 6
Austria
NSO
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Azerbaijan
MoF
2017
. . .
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
The Bahamas
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Bahrain
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Bangladesh
MoF
2017
. . .
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Barbados
MoF
2018/19
1986
BCG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Belarus
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Belgium
CB
2017
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Belize
MoF
2017
1986
CG,MPC
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Benin
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Bhutan
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG
C
CB
2015/16
BPM 6
Bolivia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS,NMPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2018
BPM 6
Botswana
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Brazil
MoF
2018
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS, 
MPC,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Brunei Darussalam
MoF
2017
. . .
CG, BCG
C
NSO, MEP, and GAD
2017
BPM 6
Bulgaria
MoF
2018
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Burkina Faso
MoF
2017
2001
CG
CB
CB
2016
BPM 6
Burundi
MoF
2015
2001
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 6
Cabo Verde
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Cambodia
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG
A
CB
2017
BPM 5
Cameroon
MoF
2017
2001
CG,NFPC
C
MoF
2017
BPM 6
Canada
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
A
NSO
2018
BPM 6
Central African 
Republic
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2015
BPM 5
Chad
MoF
2017
1986
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2015
BPM 6
Chile
MoF
2018
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
China
MoF
2018
. . .
CG,LG
C
GAD
2018
BPM 6
Colombia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
. . .
CB and NSO
2017
BPM 6
Comoros
MoF
2017
1986
CG
Mixed
CB and IMF staff
2017
BPM 5
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
MoF
2018
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2016
BPM 5
Republic of Congo
MoF
2018
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Costa Rica
MoF and CB
2016
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
143
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Côte d'Ivoire
CFA franc
NSO
2016
2009
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Croatia
Croatian kuna
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
NSO
2018
Cyprus
Euro
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Denmark
Danish krone
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2018
Djibouti
Djibouti franc
NSO
2018
1990
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Dominica
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2016
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
CB
2017
2007
SNA 2008
From 2007
CB
2017
Ecuador
US dollar
CB
2018
2007
SNA 1993
NSO and CB
2018
Egypt
Egyptian pound
MEP
2017/18
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2017/18
El Salvador
US dollar
CB
2018
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Equatorial Guinea
CFA franc
MEP and CB
2017
2006
SNA 1993
MEP
2018
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
IMF staff
2006
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2009
Estonia
Euro
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2018
Eswatini
Swazi lilangeni
NSO
2017
2011
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
NSO
2016/17
2015/16
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Fiji
Fijian dollar
NSO
2017
20116
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Finland
Euro
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
France
Euro
NSO
2017
2014
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2018
Gabon
CFA franc
MoF
2017
2001
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
The Gambia
Gambian dalasi
NSO
2018
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Georgia
Georgian lari
NSO
2016
2010
SNA 1993
From 1996
NSO
2017
Germany
Euro
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1991
NSO
2018
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
NSO
2017
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Greece
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Grenada
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Guatemala
Guatemalan 
quetzal
CB
2017
2001
SNA 1993
From 2001
NSO
2018
Guinea
Guinean franc
NSO
2016
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Guinea-Bissau
CFA franc
NSO
2017
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
NSO
2017
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Haiti
Haitian gourde
NSO
2017/18
1986/87
SNA 1993
NSO
2017/18
Honduras
Honduran lempira
CB
2017
2000
SNA 1993
CB
2018
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong dollar
NSO
2018
2016
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2018
Hungary
Hungarian forint
NSO
2018
2005
ESA 2010
From 2005
IEO
2018
Iceland
Icelandic króna
NSO
2018
2005
ESA 2010
From 1990
NSO
2018
India
Indian rupee
NSO
2017/18
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2017/18
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
NSO
2018
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Iran
Iranian rial
CB
2017/18
2011/12
SNA 1993
CB
2017/18
Iraq
Iraqi dinar 
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1968/93
NSO
2017
Ireland
Euro
NSO
2017
2016
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Israel
New Israeli shekel
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2017
Italy
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2018
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
144	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Côte d'Ivoire
MoF
2017
1986
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 6
Croatia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Cyprus
NSO
2018
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Czech Republic
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Denmark
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2018
BPM 6
Djibouti
MoF
2018
2001
CG
A
CB
2018
BPM 5
Dominica
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Dominican Republic
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS, NMPC
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ecuador
CB and MoF
2018
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Egypt
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 5
El Salvador
MoF and CB
2018
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Equatorial Guinea
MoF and MEP
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Eritrea
MoF
2008
2001
CG
C
CB
2008
BPM 5
Estonia
MoF
2017
1986/2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Eswatini
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ethiopia
MoF
2015/16
1986
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 5
Fiji
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Finland
MoF
2016
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
France
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Gabon
IMF staff
2018
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 5
The Gambia
MoF
2018
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2018
BPM 5
Georgia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
C
NSO and CB
2016
BPM 6
Germany
NSO
2018
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Ghana
MoF
2018
2001
CG
C
CB
2018
BPM 5
Greece
NSO
2017
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Grenada
MoF
2017
2014
CG
CB
CB
2017
BPM 6
Guatemala
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Guinea
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB and MEP
2017
BPM 6
Guinea-Bissau
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Guyana
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Haiti
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 5
Honduras
MoF
2018
2014
CG,LG,SS,other
Mixed
CB
2018
BPM 6
Hong Kong SAR
NSO
2018/19
2001
CG
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Hungary
MEP and NSO
2017
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Iceland
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
India
MoF and IMF staff
2017/18
1986
CG,SG
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 6
Indonesia
MoF
2018
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Iran
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 5
Iraq
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ireland
MoF and NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Israel
MoF and NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
. . .
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Italy
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Jamaica
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
145
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Japan
Japanese yen
GAD
2018
2011
SNA 2008
From 1980
GAD
2018
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
NSO
2017
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1993
From 1994
CB
2017
Kenya
Kenyan shilling
NSO
2017
2009
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Kiribati
Australian dollar
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Korea
South Korean won
CB
2017
2010
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2017
Kosovo
Euro
NSO
2018
2016
ESA 2010
NSO
2018
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
MEP and NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2018
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz som
NSO
2016
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Lao P.D.R.
Lao kip
NSO
2017
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Latvia
Euro
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Lebanon
Lebanese pound
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2017/18
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
NSO
2015/16
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Liberia
US dollar
CB
2017
1992
SNA 1993
CB
2017
Libya
Libyan dinar
MEP
2016
2003
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Lithuania
Euro
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 2005
NSO
2018
Luxembourg
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Macao SAR
Macanese pataca
NSO
2017
2016
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2017
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
NSO
2016
2000
SNA 1968
NSO
2017
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
NSO
2011
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
NSO
2018
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MoF and NSO
2017
2014
SNA 1993
CB
2017
Mali
CFA franc
NSO
2016
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Malta
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2018
Marshall Islands
US dollar
NSO
2016/17
2003/04
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
Mauritania
Mauritanian 
ouguiya
NSO
2014
2004
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
NSO
2018
2006
SNA 1993
From 1999
NSO
2018
Mexico
Mexican peso
NSO
2017
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Micronesia
US dollar
NSO
2016/17
2004
SNA 1993
NSO
2015/16
Moldova
Moldovan leu
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Mongolia
Mongolian tögrög  
NSO
2016
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
Montenegro
Euro
NSO
2017
2006
ESA 2010
NSO
2018
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
NSO
2016
2007
SNA 1993
From 1998
NSO
2017
Mozambique
Mozambican 
metical
NSO
2017
2009
SNA 1993/ 
2008
NSO
2017
Myanmar
Myanmar kyat
MEP
2017/18
2010/11
. . .
NSO
2017/18
Namibia
Namibian dollar
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Nauru
Australian dollar
. . .
2015/16
2006/07
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NSO
2017/18
2000/01
SNA 1993
CB
2017/18
Netherlands
Euro
NSO
2018
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2018
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NSO
2017
2009/10
SNA 2008
From 1987
NSO
2017
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan 
córdoba
CB
2017
2006
SNA 1993
From 1994
CB
2018
Niger
CFA franc
NSO
2016
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NSO
2018
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
North Macedonia
Macedonian denar
NSO
2018
2005
ESA 2010
NSO
2018
Norway
Norwegian krone
NSO
2017
2016
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
146	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Japan
GAD
2017
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
MoF
2018
BPM 6
Jordan
MoF
2017
2001
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kazakhstan
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kenya
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kiribati
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO
2016
BPM 6
Korea
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kosovo
MoF
2018
. . .
CG,LG
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Kuwait
MoF
2017
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kyrgyz Republic
MoF
2017
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Lao P.D.R.
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Latvia
MoF
2017
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Lebanon
MoF
2017
2001
CG
Mixed
CB and IMF staff
2017
BPM 5
Lesotho
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 5
Liberia
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 5
Libya
MoF
2018
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Lithuania
MoF
2017
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Luxembourg
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Macao SAR
MoF
2017
2014
CG,SS
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Madagascar
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Malawi
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
NSO and GAD
2017
BPM 6
Malaysia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
NSO
2018
BPM 6
Maldives
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Mali
MoF
2016
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2016
BPM 6
Malta
NSO
2017
2001
CG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Marshall Islands
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2016/17
BPM 6
Mauritania
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Mauritius
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Mexico
MoF
2018
2014
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Micronesia
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
. . .
NSO
2016/17
BPM 5
Moldova
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Mongolia
MoF
2016
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Montenegro
MoF
2018
1986/2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Morocco
MEP
2017
2001
CG
A
GAD
2017
BPM 6
Mozambique
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Myanmar
MoF
2017/18
2014
CG,NFPC
C
IMF staff
2017/18
BPM 6
Namibia
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Nauru
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2014/15
BPM 6
Nepal
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 5
Netherlands
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
New Zealand
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG, LG
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Nicaragua
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
IMF staff
2017
BPM 6
Niger
MoF
2017
1986
CG
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Nigeria
MoF
2018
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
North Macedonia
MoF
2018
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Norway
NSO and MoF
2016
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
147
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Oman
Omani rial
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Pakistan
Pakistan rupee
NSO
2017/18
2005/066
. . .
NSO
2017/18
Palau
US dollar
MoF
2016/17
2014/15
SNA 1993
MoF
2016/17
Panama
US dollar
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1993
From 2007
NSO
2017
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea 
kina
NSO and MoF
2015
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2015
Paraguay
Paraguayan 
guaraní
CB
2017
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2017
Peru
Peruvian nuevo sol
CB
2018
2007
SNA 1993
CB
2018
Philippines
Philippine peso
NSO
2018
2000
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Poland
Polish zloty
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Portugal
Euro
NSO
2017
2011
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2018
Puerto Rico
US dollar
NSO
2016/17
1954
SNA1968
NSO
2016/17
Qatar
Qatari riyal
NSO and MEP
2018
2013
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2018
Romania
Romanian leu
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2018
Russia
Russian ruble
NSO
2017
2016
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2018
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
NSO
2017
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Samoa
Samoan tala
NSO
2016/17
2009/10
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
San Marino
Euro
NSO
2017
2007
. . .
NSO
2017
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
São Tomé and 
Príncipe dobra
NSO
2017
2008
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
NSO and MEP
2018
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2018
Senegal
CFA franc
NSO
2018
2014
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Serbia
Serbian dinar
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2018
Seychelles
Seychelles rupee
NSO
2016
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean 
leone
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
From 2010
NSO
2017
Singapore
Singapore dollar
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Slovak Republic
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1997
NSO
2018
Slovenia
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2018
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands 
dollar
CB
2016
2004
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Somalia
US dollar
CB
2016
2012
SNA 1993
CB
2014
South Africa
South African rand
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
South Sudan
South Sudanese 
pound
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Spain
Euro
NSO
2018
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2018
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
St. Kitts and Nevis
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
St. Lucia
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Sudan
Sudanese pound
NSO
2014
1982
SNA 1968
NSO
2018
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
148	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Oman
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Pakistan
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 6
Palau
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
. . .
MoF
2016/17
BPM 6
Panama
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Papua New Guinea
MoF
2015
1986
CG
C
CB
2015
BPM 5
Paraguay
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Peru
CB and MoF
2018
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2018
BPM 5
Philippines
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Poland
MoF and NSO
2017
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Portugal
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Puerto Rico
MEP
2015/16
2001
. . .
A
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
MoF
2018
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2018
BPM 5
Romania
MoF
2018
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Russia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2018
BPM 6
Rwanda
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Samoa
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
A
CB
2016/17
BPM 6
San Marino
MoF
2017
. . .
CG
. . .
Other
2017
. . .
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
MoF and Customs
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Saudi Arabia
MoF
2018
2014
CG
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Senegal
MoF
2018
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2018
BPM 6
Serbia
MoF
2017
1986/2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Seychelles
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Sierra Leone
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Singapore
MoF
2018/19
2001
CG
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Slovak Republic
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Slovenia
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Solomon Islands
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Somalia
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
South Africa
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
South Sudan
MoF and MEP
2017
. . .
CG
C
MoF, NSO, and MEP
2017
BPM 6
Spain
MoF and NSO
2017
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Sri Lanka
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
St. Kitts and Nevis
MoF
2017
1986
CG, SG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
St. Lucia
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Sudan
MoF
2018
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2018
BPM 6
Suriname
MoF
2017
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 5
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
149
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Sweden
Swedish krona
NSO
2018
2017
ESA 2010
From 1993
NSO
2018
Switzerland
Swiss franc
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
Syria
Syrian pound
NSO
2010
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2011
Taiwan Province of 
China
New Taiwan dollar
NSO
2018
2011
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Tajikistan
Tajik somoni
NSO
2017
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Tanzania
Tanzanian shilling
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Thailand
Thai baht
MEP
2017
2002
SNA 1993
From 1993
MEP
2018
Timor-Leste
US dollar
MoF
2016
20156
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Togo
CFA franc
NSO
2016
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Tonga
Tongan pa’anga
CB
2017
2010
SNA 1993
CB
2017
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and 
Tobago dollar
NSO
2017
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
From 2009
NSO
2016
Turkey
Turkish lira
NSO
2018
2009
ESA 2010
From 2009
NSO
2018
Turkmenistan
New Turkmen 
manat
NSO
2017
2008
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2017
Tuvalu
Australian dollar
PFTAC advisors
2015
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
CB
2017/18
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2017
United Arab 
Emirates
U.A.E. dirham
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
United Kingdom
British pound
NSO
2018
2016
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2018
United States
US dollar
NSO
2018
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2018
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
CB
2017
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Uzbekistan
Uzbek sum
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 1993
NSO, and IMF 
staff
2018
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolívar 
soberano
CB
2017
1997
SNA 2008
CB
2017
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
NSO
2018
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Yemen
Yemeni rial
IMF staff
2017
1990
SNA 1993
NSO,CB, and 
IMF staff
2017
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2018
Zimbabwe
RTGS dollar
NSO
2015
2012
. . .
NSO
2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
150	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Sweden
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2018
BPM 6
Switzerland
MoF
2016
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Syria
MoF
2009
1986
CG
C
CB
2009
BPM 5
Taiwan Province of 
China
MoF
2018
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Tajikistan
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Tanzania
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Thailand
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,BCG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Timor-Leste
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Togo
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Tonga
MoF
2017
2014
CG
C
CB and NSO
2018
BPM 6
Trinidad and Tobago
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Tunisia
MoF
2016
1986
CG
C
CB
2018
BPM 5
Turkey
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS,other
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Turkmenistan
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO and IMF staff
2015
BPM 6
Tuvalu
MoF
2017
. . .
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2012
BPM 6
Uganda
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ukraine
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
United Arab 
Emirates
MoF
2017
2001
CG,BCG,SG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
United Kingdom
NSO
2018
2001
CG,LG
A
NSO
2018
BPM 6
United States
MEP
2017
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Uruguay
MoF
2018
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Uzbekistan
MoF
2018
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
MEP
2017
BPM 6
Vanuatu
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Venezuela
MoF
2017
2001
BCG,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Vietnam
MoF
2016
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Yemen
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
C
IMF staff
2017
BPM 5
Zambia
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Zimbabwe
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB and MoF
2017
BPM 6
Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning,  
Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to 
calculate the index. 
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers 
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; EUA = extrabudgetary units/accounts; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central 
bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; NMPC  = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.  
6Base year is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2018	
151
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in 
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally 
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for 
differences between the national authorities and the 
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions and 
projected fiscal outturns. When no official budget has 
been announced, projections incorporate policy mea-
sures that are judged likely to be implemented. The 
medium-term fiscal projections are similarly based on 
a judgment about the most likely path of policies. For 
cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient informa-
tion to assess the authorities’ budget intentions and 
prospects for policy implementation, an unchanged 
structural primary balance is assumed unless indicated 
otherwise. Specific assumptions used in regard to some 
of the advanced economies follow. (See also Tables B5 
to B9 in the online section of the Statistical Appendix 
for data on fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural 
balances.)1 
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the avail-
able information regarding budget outturn and budget 
plans for the federal and provincial governments, fiscal 
measures announced by the authorities, and the IMF 
staff’s macroeconomic projections. 
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on Australian 
Bureau of Statistics data, the fiscal year 2018/19 budgets 
of the Commonwealth and states and territories, 2018/19 
midyear fiscal and economic reviews by states and territo-
ries, and the IMF staff’s estimates and projections. 
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on data from 
Statistics Austria, the authorities’ projections, and the 
IMF staff’s estimates and projections.
Belgium: Projections are based on the 2018–21 
Stability Programme and other available information 
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a 
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed 
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the 
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output 
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, 
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition 
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include 
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations 
in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical 
fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of 
structural balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of 
potential GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See 
Annex I of the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated as 
gross debt minus financial assets corresponding to debt instru-
ments. Estimates of the output gap and of the structural balance 
are subject to significant margins of uncertainty.
on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for 
the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections for 2019 take into account 
the deficit target approved in the budget law.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts in the 
2018 federal budget and the latest provincial budget 
updates as available. The IMF staff makes some adjust-
ments to these forecasts, including for differences in 
macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff’s forecast 
also incorporates the most recent data releases from Sta-
tistics Canada’s Canadian System of National Economic 
Accounts, including federal, provincial, and territorial 
budgetary outturns through the third quarter of 2018.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’ 
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s 
projections for GDP and copper prices. 
China: Fiscal expansion is expected for 2019 as a 
result of personal income tax reform and other mea-
sures to respond to economic slowdown.
Denmark: Estimates for 2018 are aligned with the 
latest official budget numbers, adjusted where appro-
priate for the IMF staff’s macroeconomic assumptions. 
For 2019, the projections incorporate key features 
of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the 
authorities’ Convergence Programme 2018 submitted 
to the European Union.
France: Projections for 2018 and beyond are based 
on the measures of the 2018 budget law, the multiyear 
law for 2018–22, and the 2019 budget law adjusted 
for differences in assumptions on macroeconomic and 
financial variables, and revenue projections. Historical fis-
cal data reflect the September 2018 revisions and update 
of the historical fiscal accounts, debt data, and national 
accounts.
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2019 and 
beyond are based on the 2019 Draft Budgetary Plan 
and data updates from the national statistical agency, 
adjusted for the differences in the IMF staff’s mac-
roeconomic framework and assumptions concerning 
revenue elasticities. The estimate of gross debt includes 
portfolios of impaired assets and noncore business 
transferred to institutions that are winding up, as well 
as other financial sector and EU support operations.
Greece: Greece’s general government primary balance 
estimate for 2018 is based on preliminary data up to 
November 2018, provided by the Ministry of Finance 
as of February 1, 2019. Historical data since 2010 
reflect adjustments in line with the primary balance 
definition under the enhanced surveillance framework 
for Greece.
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
152	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections 
are based on the authorities’ medium-term fiscal projec-
tions on expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF staff’s 
projections of the macroeconomic framework and of 
the impact of recent legislative measures, as well as fiscal 
policy plans announced in the 2018 budget.
India: Historical data are based on budgetary execu-
tion data. Projections are based on available information 
on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the 
IMF staff’s assumptions. Subnational data are incorpo-
rated with a lag of up to one year; general government 
data are thus finalized well after central government data. 
IMF and Indian presentations differ, particularly regard-
ing divestment and license auction proceeds, net versus 
gross recording of revenues in certain minor categories, 
and some public sector lending.
Indonesia: IMF projections are based on moderate tax 
policy and administration reforms and a gradual increase 
in social and capital spending over the medium term in 
line with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country’s 
Budget 2019. 
Israel: Historical data are based on Government 
Finance Statistics data prepared by the Central Bureau of 
Statistics. The central government deficit is assumed to 
increase to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2019. It is assumed 
to decline afterward, but not in line with medium-term 
fiscal targets, consistent with long experience of revisions 
to those targets.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections are 
informed by the fiscal plans included in the govern-
ment’s 2019 draft budget. The IMF staff assumes that 
the automatic value-added tax hikes for next year will be 
canceled.
Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures already 
announced by the government, including the consump-
tion tax hike in October 2019 and the mitigating mea-
sures included in the FY2019 budget and tax reform. 
Korea: The medium-term forecast incorporates the 
medium-term path for public spending announced by 
the government.
Mexico: Fiscal projections for 2018 are broadly in line 
with the approved budget; projections for 2019 and 
beyond assume compliance with rules established in the 
Fiscal Responsibility Law.
Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2018–24 are based 
on the authorities’ Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
budget projections, after adjustment for differences 
in macroeconomic assumptions. Historical data were 
revised following the June 2014 Central Bureau of 
Statistics release of revised macroeconomic data because 
of the adoption of ESA 2010 and the revisions of data 
sources.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the fiscal 
year 2018/19 budget and 2018 Half-Year Economic and 
Fiscal Update and the IMF staff’s estimates. 
Portugal: The projections for the current year are 
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted 
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast. 
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption of 
unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the Puerto 
Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plans (FEGPs), 
which were prepared in October 2018, and are certified 
by the Oversight Board. In line with this plan’s assump-
tions, IMF projections assume federal aid for rebuilding 
after Hurricane Maria, which devastated the island in 
September 2017. The projections also assume revenue 
losses from the following: elimination of federal funding 
for the Affordable Care Act starting in 2020 for Puerto 
Rico; elimination of federal tax incentives starting in 
2018 that had neutralized the effects of Puerto Rico’s Act 
154 on foreign firms; and the effects of the Tax Cuts and 
Jobs Act, which reduce the tax advantage of US firms 
producing in Puerto Rico. Given sizable policy uncer-
tainty, some FEGP and IMF assumptions may differ, in 
particular those relating to the effects of the corporate 
tax reform, tax compliance, and tax adjustments (fees 
and rates); reduction of subsidies and expenses, freezing 
of payroll operational costs, and improvement of mobil-
ity; reduction of expenses; and increased health care 
efficiency. On the expenditure side, measures include 
extension of Act 66, which freezes much government 
spending, through 2020; reduction of operating costs; 
decreases in government subsidies; and spending cuts in 
education. Although IMF policy assumptions are similar 
to those in the FEGP scenario with full measures, the 
IMF’s projections of fiscal revenues, expenditures, and 
balance are different from the FEGPs’. This stems from 
two main differences in methodologies: first, while IMF 
projections are on an accrual basis, the FEGPs’ are on 
a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGPs make very dif-
ferent macroeconomic assumptions. 
Russia: Projections for 2018–21 are the IMF staff’s 
estimates, based on the authorities’ budget. Projections 
for 2022–24 are based on the new oil price rule, with 
adjustments by the IMF staff.
Box A1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
153
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff baseline projections of 
total government revenues, except exported oil revenues, 
are based on IMF staff understanding of government 
policies as announced in the 2019 Budget and Fiscal 
Balance Program 2019 Update. Exported oil revenues 
are based on WEO baseline oil prices and the assump-
tion that Saudi Arabia will continue to meet its com-
mitments under the OPEC+ agreement. Expenditure 
projections take the 2019 budget and the Fiscal Balance 
Program 2019 Update as a starting point and reflect 
IMF staff estimates of the latest changes in policies and 
economic developments. 
Singapore: For fiscal year 2019/20, projections are 
based on budget numbers. For the rest of the projection 
period, the IMF staff assumes unchanged policies.
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions are based on the 
2019 Budget Review. Nontax revenue excludes transac-
tions in financial assets and liabilities, as they involve 
primarily revenues associated with realized exchange rate 
valuation gains from the holding of foreign currency 
deposits, sale of assets, and conceptually similar items.
Spain: For 2019, projections assume expenditures 
under the 2018 budget extension scenario and already 
legislated measures, including pension and public wage 
increases, and the IMF staff’s projection of revenues. For 
2020 and beyond, fiscal projections are IMF staff projec-
tions, which assume an unchanged structural primary 
balance.
Sweden: Fiscal projections take into account the 
authorities’ projections based on the 2018 December 
Budget. The impact of cyclical developments on the 
fiscal accounts is calculated using the 2014 Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development’s elastic-
ity (Price, Dang and Guillemette (2014)) to take into 
account output and employment gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal policy 
is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in line 
with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal rules.
Turkey: The fiscal projections assume a more nega-
tive primary and overall balance than envisaged in 
the authorities’ New Economic Program 2019–21, 
based partly on the IMF staff’s lower growth forecast 
and partly on definitional differences: the basis for the 
projections in the WEO and Fiscal Monitor is the IMF-
defined fiscal balance, which excludes some revenue and 
expenditure items that are included in the authorities’ 
headline balance. 
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on 
the country’s Spring 2019 Budget, with expenditure 
projections based on the budgeted nominal values 
and with revenue projections adjusted for differences 
between the IMF staff’s forecasts of macroeconomic 
variables (such as GDP growth and inflation) and the 
forecasts of these variables assumed in the authori-
ties’ fiscal projections. The IMF staff’s data exclude 
public sector banks and the effect of transferring 
assets from the Royal Mail Pension Plan to the public 
sector in April 2012. Real government consump-
tion and investment are part of the real GDP path, 
which, according to the IMF staff, may or may not 
be the same as projected by the UK Office for Budget 
Responsibility. 
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the 
January 2019 Congressional Budget Office baseline, 
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeconomic 
assumptions. Projections incorporate the effects of tax 
reform (the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, signed into law at 
the end of 2017) as well as the Bipartisan Budget Act of 
2018, passed in February 2018. Finally, fiscal projections 
are adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s forecasts for key 
macroeconomic and financial variables—and different 
accounting treatment of financial sector support and 
defined-benefit pension plans—and are converted to a 
general government basis. Data are compiled using SNA 
2008 and, when translated into government finance sta-
tistics, this is in accordance with the Government Finance 
Statistics Manual 2014. Because of data limitations, most 
series begin in 2001.
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the 
established policy framework in each country. In most 
cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance over 
the business cycle: official interest rates will increase 
when economic indicators suggest that inflation will 
rise above its acceptable rate or range; they will decrease 
when indicators suggest inflation will not exceed the 
acceptable rate or range, that output growth is below 
its potential rate, and that the margin of slack in the 
economy is significant. On this basis, the London inter-
bank offered rate on six-month US dollar deposits is 
assumed to average 3.2 percent in 2019 and 3.8 percent 
in 2020 (see Table 1.1). The rate on three-month euro 
deposits is assumed to average –0.3 percent in 2019 and 
–0.2 percent in 2020. The interest rate on six-month 
Japanese yen deposits is assumed to average 0.0 percent 
in 2019 and 2020.
Box A1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
154	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Argentina: Monetary policy assumptions are con-
sistent with the current monetary policy framework, 
which targets zero base money growth in seasonally 
adjusted terms.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with market expectations.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent 
with gradual convergence of inflation toward the 
middle of the target range.
Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with market expectations.
China: Monetary policy is expected to remain on 
hold.
Denmark: The monetary policy is to maintain the 
peg to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro 
area member countries are in line with market 
expectations.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The IMF 
staff assumes that the currency board system will 
remain intact.
India: Monetary policy projections are consistent 
with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation 
target over the medium term.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with the maintenance of inflation within the central 
bank’s targeted band.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with 
market expectations.
Korea: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with 
market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent 
with attaining the inflation target.
Russia: Monetary projections assume that the 
Central Bank of Russia is pausing the transition to a 
neutral stance.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based 
on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the 
US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line 
with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy will remain neutral.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with Riks-
bank projections.
Switzerland: The projections assume no change in 
the policy rate in 2018–19.
Turkey: The outlook for monetary and financial 
conditions assumes no changes to the current policy 
stance.
United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate path is 
based on market interest rate expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects continued 
gradual normalization of the federal funds target rate, 
in line with the broader macroeconomic outlook.
Box A1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
155
List of Tables
Output
A1.	 Summary of World Output	
A2.	 Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3.	 Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP	
A4.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP	
Inflation
A5.	 Summary of Inflation	
A6.	 Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices	
A7.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices	
Financial Policies
A8.	 Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt	
Foreign Trade
A9.	 Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices	
Current Account Transactions
A10.	 Summary of Current Account Balances	
A11.	 Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account	
A12.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account	
Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13.	 Summary of Financial Account Balances	
Flow of Funds
A14.	 Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing 	
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15.	 Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario	
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
156	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
World
3.9
4.3
3.5
3.5
3.6
3.4
3.4
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.6
3.7
Advanced Economies
1.7
1.7
1.2
1.4
2.1
2.3
1.7
2.4
2.2
1.8
1.7
1.6
United States
1.7
1.6
2.2
1.8
2.5
2.9
1.6
2.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
1.6
Euro Area
1.2
1.6
–0.9
–0.2
1.4
2.1
2.0
2.4
1.8
1.3
1.5
1.4
Japan
0.6
–0.1
1.5
2.0
0.4
1.2
0.6
1.9
0.8
1.0
0.5
0.5
Other Advanced Economies2
2.8
3.0
2.0
2.3
3.0
2.0
2.1
2.7
2.2
1.9
2.2
2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.2
6.4
5.4
5.1
4.7
4.3
4.6
4.8
4.5
4.4
4.8
4.9
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
5.5
5.3
3.6
2.5
1.0
–1.9
0.8
2.4
2.8
2.2
2.3
2.4
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.4
7.9
7.0
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.7
6.6
6.4
6.3
6.3
6.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.9
6.7
2.6
4.9
3.9
4.8
3.3
6.0
3.6
0.8
2.8
3.1
Latin America and the Caribbean
3.2
4.6
2.9
2.9
1.3
0.3
–0.6
1.2
1.0
1.4
2.4
2.8
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
5.1
4.4
4.8
2.6
2.9
2.6
5.2
2.2
1.8
1.5
3.2
2.8
Middle East and North Africa
5.1
4.4
4.9
2.4
2.7
2.4
5.3
1.8
1.4
1.3
3.2
2.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.9
5.3
4.7
5.2
5.1
3.2
1.4
2.9
3.0
3.5
3.7
4.0
Memorandum
European Union
1.6
1.8
–0.3
0.3
1.9
2.4
2.1
2.7
2.1
1.6
1.7
1.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
6.5
5.3
4.7
6.0
6.0
4.6
3.6
4.9
4.6
5.0
5.1
5.3
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.5
5.2
5.0
2.6
2.2
0.3
2.1
1.0
1.0
0.7
2.3
2.1
Nonfuel
6.4
6.7
5.4
5.7
5.3
5.2
5.1
5.6
5.3
5.1
5.3
5.3
Of Which, Primary Products
4.2
5.0
2.5
4.1
2.1
2.8
1.8
3.0
1.7
2.1
3.1
3.7
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
5.1
5.3
4.4
4.7
4.5
4.1
4.1
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.8
5.2
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
4.7
2.6
1.6
3.0
1.9
1.0
2.8
3.3
3.8
3.8
4.5
5.0
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
2.2
1.9
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.3
2.4
2.8
2.7
2.1
2.2
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.5
4.7
4.4
4.2
3.7
3.3
3.3
3.5
3.2
3.5
3.5
3.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.2
6.0
5.1
5.2
5.0
3.9
4.2
4.7
3.9
5.0
5.0
5.0
Output per Capita4
Advanced Economies
1.1
1.2
0.7
0.9
1.6
1.7
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.3
1.3
1.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.6
4.9
3.6
3.6
3.2
2.8
3.1
3.3
3.2
3.0
3.5
3.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.8
3.6
1.7
3.7
3.7
2.2
1.2
2.6
2.4
2.7
2.9
3.1
World Growth Rate Based on Market 
Exchange Rates
2.5
3.1
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.8
2.5
3.2
3.1
2.7
2.9
2.9
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
49,851
73,245
74,639
76,770
78,852
74,689
75,735
80,145
84,740
87,265
92,310
114,577
At Purchasing Power Parities
70,655
95,045
99,926
105,120 110,836 115,750 120,828 127,693
135,178
142,046
150,169
187,689
1Real GDP.
2Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
4Output per capita is in international currency at purchasing power parity.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
157
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Fourth Quarter2
Average
Projections
Projections 
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
2018:Q4
2019:Q4 2020:Q4
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
1.7
1.7
1.2
1.4
2.1
2.3
1.7
2.4
2.2
1.8
1.7
1.6
2.0
1.8
1.8
United States
1.7
1.6
2.2
1.8
2.5
2.9
1.6
2.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
1.6
3.0
2.2
1.7
Euro Area
1.2
1.6
–0.9
–0.2
1.4
2.1
2.0
2.4
1.8
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.1
1.6
1.4
Germany
0.9
3.7
0.7
0.6
2.2
1.5
2.2
2.5
1.5
0.8
1.4
1.2
0.6
1.4
1.3
France
1.3
2.2
0.3
0.6
1.0
1.1
1.2
2.2
1.5
1.3
1.4
1.5
0.9
1.6
1.3
Italy
0.3
0.6
–2.8
–1.7
0.1
0.9
1.1
1.6
0.9
0.1
0.9
0.6
0.0
0.6
0.8
Spain
2.2
–1.0
–2.9
–1.7
1.4
3.6
3.2
3.0
2.5
2.1
1.9
1.6
2.4
1.9
1.7
Netherlands
1.4
1.5
–1.0
–0.1
1.4
2.0
2.2
2.9
2.5
1.8
1.7
1.5
1.7
1.8
1.7
Belgium
1.6
1.8
0.2
0.2
1.3
1.7
1.5
1.7
1.4
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.4
Austria
1.5
2.9
0.7
0.0
0.7
1.1
2.0
2.6
2.7
2.0
1.7
1.5
1.7
2.5
1.6
Greece
1.8
–9.1
–7.3
–3.2
0.7
–0.4
–0.2
1.5
2.1
2.4
2.2
1.2
2.3
2.7
1.8
Portugal
0.7
–1.8
–4.0
–1.1
0.9
1.8
1.9
2.8
2.1
1.7
1.5
1.4
1.7
1.6
1.6
Ireland
2.9
3.7
0.2
1.3
8.7
25.0
4.9
7.2
6.8
4.1
3.4
2.7
4.0
4.0
3.5
Finland
1.7
2.6
–1.4
–0.8
–0.6
0.1
2.5
2.8
2.4
1.9
1.7
1.3
2.5
1.6
2.4
Slovak Republic
4.9
2.8
1.7
1.5
2.8
4.2
3.1
3.2
4.1
3.7
3.5
2.5
4.0
3.7
3.5
Lithuania
4.3
6.0
3.8
3.5
3.5
2.0
2.4
4.1
3.4
2.9
2.6
2.0
3.6
2.5
2.4
Slovenia
2.7
0.6
–2.7
–1.1
3.0
2.3
3.1
4.9
4.5
3.4
2.8
2.1
3.4
4.1
2.0
Luxembourg
2.7
2.5
–0.4
3.7
4.3
3.9
2.4
1.5
3.0
2.7
2.8
2.6
2.0
3.3
2.4
Latvia
3.8
6.4
4.0
2.4
1.9
3.0
2.1
4.6
4.8
3.2
3.1
3.0
5.6
1.7
3.7
Estonia
3.3
7.6
4.3
1.9
2.9
1.9
3.5
4.9
3.9
3.0
2.9
2.8
4.3
1.3
3.9
Cyprus 
3.3
0.4
–2.9
–5.8
–1.3
2.0
4.8
4.5
3.9
3.5
3.3
2.4
3.8
3.2
3.7
Malta
2.0
1.4
2.7
4.6
8.6
10.6
5.7
6.6
6.4
5.2
4.4
3.2
7.0
5.2
3.3
Japan
0.6
–0.1
1.5
2.0
0.4
1.2
0.6
1.9
0.8
1.0
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3
1.4
United Kingdom
1.6
1.6
1.4
2.0
2.9
2.3
1.8
1.8
1.4
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.0
1.5
Korea
4.4
3.7
2.3
2.9
3.3
2.8
2.9
3.1
2.7
2.6
2.8
2.9
3.2
2.3
3.2
Canada
1.9
3.1
1.8
2.3
2.9
0.7
1.1
3.0
1.8
1.5
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.8
1.8
Australia
3.1
2.8
3.9
2.1
2.6
2.5
2.8
2.4
2.8
2.1
2.8
2.6
2.3
2.6
2.8
Taiwan Province of China
4.2
3.8
2.1
2.2
4.0
0.8
1.5
3.1
2.6
2.5
2.5
2.1
1.8
2.6
2.7
Switzerland
1.8
1.8
1.0
1.9
2.5
1.3
1.6
1.7
2.5
1.1
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.4
1.6
Sweden
2.1
2.7
–0.3
1.2
2.6
4.5
2.7
2.1
2.3
1.2
1.8
2.0
2.4
0.8
2.2
Singapore
5.8
6.5
4.3
5.0
4.1
2.5
2.8
3.9
3.2
2.3
2.4
2.6
1.9
3.4
1.3
Hong Kong SAR
4.1
4.8
1.7
3.1
2.8
2.4
2.2
3.8
3.0
2.7
3.0
3.0
1.3
4.1
2.9
Norway
1.6
1.0
2.7
1.0
2.0
2.0
1.2
2.0
1.4
2.0
1.9
1.7
1.8
0.7
2.6
Czech Republic
3.2
1.8
–0.8
–0.5
2.7
5.3
2.5
4.4
2.9
2.9
2.7
2.5
2.8
2.7
2.9
Israel
3.2
5.1
2.2
4.3
3.9
2.6
4.0
3.5
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.0
2.6
3.6
3.2
Denmark
0.8
1.3
0.2
0.9
1.6
2.3
2.4
2.3
1.2
1.7
1.8
1.6
2.2
1.6
1.7
New Zealand
2.7
1.9
2.5
2.2
3.1
4.0
4.2
2.6
3.0
2.5
2.9
2.5
3.3
2.2
3.1
Puerto Rico
0.7
–0.4
0.0
–0.3
–1.2
–1.0
–1.3
–2.4
–2.3
–1.1
–0.7
–0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
. . .
21.7
9.2
11.2
–1.2 –21.6
–0.9
9.7
4.7
4.3
4.2
4.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iceland
2.6
1.9
1.3
4.1
2.1
4.7
6.6
4.6
4.6
1.7
2.9
2.5
3.8
3.0
2.3
San Marino
. . .
–8.3
–7.0
–0.8
–0.7
2.5
2.5
0.6
1.1
0.8
0.7
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.3
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.1
1.4
2.2
2.1
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.8
1.6
1.5
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.4
0.8
1.1
2.1
2.6
1.9
2.3
2.2
1.9
1.7
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.8
United States
1.7
1.5
2.2
1.6
2.6
3.6
1.8
2.5
3.0
2.5
1.7
1.4
3.1
2.2
1.7
Euro Area
1.1
0.7
–2.4
–0.6
1.3
2.4
2.4
1.7
1.7
1.3
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.5
Germany
0.3
3.0
–0.8
1.0
1.6
1.4
2.9
2.2
1.9
1.1
1.7
1.3
1.9
1.0
1.9
France
1.5
2.1
–0.4
0.7
1.5
1.5
1.7
2.1
1.0
1.0
1.1
2.0
0.5
1.4
0.9
Italy
0.5
–0.6
–5.6
–2.6
0.2
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.0
–0.2
1.0
0.7
0.0
0.5
0.9
Spain
2.3
–3.1
–5.1
–3.2
2.0
4.0
2.4
3.0
3.0
2.2
1.7
1.4
2.8
2.1
1.5
Japan
0.2
0.7
2.3
2.4
0.4
0.8
0.0
1.4
0.6
1.3
0.3
0.4
0.8
–0.4
1.7
United Kingdom
1.7
–0.2
1.8
2.1
3.2
2.3
2.4
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.6
2.0
0.9
1.5
Canada
2.9
3.4
2.0
2.2
1.7
–0.1
0.7
3.9
1.7
0.6
1.8
1.6
0.0
1.7
1.6
Other Advanced Economies3
2.9
3.2
2.0
1.5
2.8
2.4
2.3
3.4
2.5
2.3
2.6
2.6
2.3
2.8
2.5
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.3
1.4
1.2
1.4
2.0
2.4
1.6
2.2
2.1
1.7
1.4
1.3
2.1
1.4
1.6
1In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
158	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2001–10
2011–20
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
1.8
1.7
1.1
0.9
1.2
1.8
2.5
2.2
2.2
2.0
1.6
1.5
United States
2.1
2.3
1.9
1.5
1.5
2.9
3.7
2.7
2.5
2.6
2.2
1.8
Euro Area
1.1
0.8
0.0
–1.2
–0.6
0.9
1.8
2.0
1.6
1.3
1.1
1.3
Germany
0.5
1.3
1.3
1.4
0.8
1.1
1.6
1.9
2.0
0.9
0.8
1.3
France
1.8
0.9
0.6
–0.4
0.5
0.8
1.5
2.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
1.0
Italy
0.5
0.0
0.0
–4.0
–2.4
0.2
1.9
1.3
1.5
0.6
0.3
1.0
Spain
2.0
0.7
–2.4
–3.5
–3.1
1.5
3.0
2.9
2.5
2.4
2.0
1.7
Japan
0.9
0.4
–0.4
2.0
2.4
–0.9
–0.2
–0.1
1.1
0.4
0.4
–0.5
United Kingdom
1.8
1.6
–0.7
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.6
3.1
2.1
1.7
1.1
1.2
Canada
3.1
2.2
2.3
1.9
2.6
2.6
2.3
2.2
3.5
2.1
0.8
1.4
Other Advanced Economies1
3.0
2.6
3.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.8
2.5
2.7
2.5
2.4
2.7
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.6
1.6
1.1
1.1
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.1
2.1
1.8
1.4
1.3
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
2.1
0.8
–0.6
–0.1
–0.1
0.5
1.7
1.9
0.7
1.6
1.6
1.4
United States
2.1
–0.1
–3.0
–1.5
–1.9
–0.8
1.7
1.5
–0.1
1.2
1.0
0.7
Euro Area
1.9
0.8
–0.1
–0.3
0.4
0.7
1.3
1.8
1.1
1.0
1.3
1.1
Germany
1.2
1.8
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.6
2.9
4.0
1.6
1.0
2.1
1.4
France
1.6
1.1
1.1
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.0
1.4
1.3
1.0
0.8
0.5
Italy
1.0
–0.4
–1.8
–1.4
–0.3
–0.7
–0.6
0.1
–0.2
0.2
–0.4
0.8
Spain
4.7
0.2
–0.3
–4.7
–2.1
–0.3
2.0
1.0
1.9
2.3
1.7
0.8
Japan
1.5
1.3
1.9
1.7
1.5
0.5
1.5
1.4
0.3
0.8
1.3
1.8
United Kingdom
2.6
1.0
0.1
1.2
–0.2
2.2
1.4
0.8
–0.2
0.4
2.2
1.7
Canada
2.5
1.0
1.3
0.7
–0.8
0.6
1.4
1.8
2.1
2.5
0.3
0.6
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.7
1.6
1.9
2.3
2.4
2.6
3.5
2.3
3.9
3.7
3.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.9
0.5
–1.1
–0.2
–0.5
0.1
1.6
1.6
0.3
1.1
1.1
1.0
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
0.5
2.8
3.2
2.6
1.7
3.5
3.2
2.0
3.8
3.1
2.5
2.4
United States
0.0
3.9
4.6
6.9
3.6
4.9
3.3
1.7
4.0
4.8
3.6
2.2
Euro Area
0.4
1.7
1.5
–3.4
–2.3
1.7
4.9
4.0
2.6
3.0
2.4
2.6
Germany
–0.2
2.7
7.4
–0.1
–1.2
3.9
1.1
3.3
3.6
2.7
3.0
3.1
France
1.2
1.6
2.0
0.2
–0.8
0.0
1.0
2.8
4.5
2.9
1.8
1.8
Italy
0.1
–0.8
–1.9
–9.3
–6.6
–2.3
2.1
3.5
4.4
3.4
–1.0
0.8
Spain
1.2
1.0
–6.9
–8.6
–3.4
4.7
6.7
2.9
4.8
5.2
2.9
2.7
Japan
–2.2
2.1
1.7
3.5
4.9
3.1
1.6
–0.3
3.0
1.3
1.9
0.9
United Kingdom
0.3
2.7
2.6
2.1
3.4
7.2
3.4
2.3
3.5
0.2
0.6
2.3
Canada
3.8
1.1
4.6
4.9
1.4
2.3
–5.2
–4.3
3.0
0.8
0.5
3.9
Other Advanced Economies1
2.7
2.7
4.1
3.0
2.5
2.6
2.0
2.7
4.3
1.0
1.4
3.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
2.9
3.7
3.7
2.2
3.8
2.2
1.5
3.8
3.4
2.5
2.1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
159
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2001–10
2011–20
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.8
1.3
1.1
1.1
2.0
2.5
2.1
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
United States
1.7
2.3
1.6
2.0
1.3
2.8
3.3
2.3
2.5
2.9
2.3
1.7
Euro Area
1.1
1.0
0.3
–1.5
–0.8
1.0
2.3
2.4
1.7
1.6
1.4
1.6
Germany
0.5
1.7
2.5
1.0
0.5
1.8
1.8
2.6
2.3
1.3
1.5
1.7
France
1.6
1.1
1.0
0.2
0.5
0.8
1.3
2.1
1.8
1.4
1.0
1.1
Italy
0.5
–0.2
–0.8
–4.5
–2.8
–0.4
1.4
1.4
1.7
1.0
–0.1
0.9
Spain
2.3
0.6
–3.0
–4.8
–3.0
1.8
3.6
2.5
2.9
3.0
2.1
1.7
Japan
0.2
1.0
0.5
2.3
2.8
0.2
0.6
0.1
1.4
0.6
1.2
0.3
United Kingdom
1.7
1.7
0.0
1.6
1.7
2.9
2.5
2.5
1.9
1.2
1.2
1.5
Canada
3.1
1.7
2.6
2.4
1.6
2.1
0.3
0.6
3.1
1.9
0.7
1.8
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.6
3.0
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
3.1
2.2
2.3
2.8
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.3
1.7
1.3
1.4
1.2
1.9
2.3
1.9
2.2
2.0
1.7
1.4
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.3
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
United States
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.2
0.2
–0.1
0.3
–0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.2
Euro Area
–0.1
0.0
0.5
–0.9
0.2
0.3
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
Germany
–0.1
–0.1
0.5
–1.7
0.5
–0.2
–0.3
0.3
–0.1
0.5
–0.4
0.0
France
–0.1
0.1
1.1
–0.6
0.2
0.7
0.3
–0.4
0.2
–0.4
0.0
0.0
Italy
0.0
0.0
0.2
–1.1
0.2
0.6
0.1
0.1
–0.3
–0.1
0.0
0.1
Spain
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.2
0.5
–0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
–0.4
0.1
0.3
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
United Kingdom
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.2
0.2
0.7
–0.2
–0.1
–0.6
0.4
0.2
–0.2
Canada
–0.1
0.1
0.7
–0.3
0.5
–0.4
–0.4
0.0
0.8
–0.2
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
0.0
–0.1
0.2
–0.3
–0.8
0.2
0.0
–0.4
0.2
0.3
0.0
–0.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
–0.3
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.0
–0.3
–0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
United States
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.3
–0.8
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
Euro Area
0.1
0.3
0.9
1.5
0.3
0.1
–0.2
–0.4
0.8
0.2
0.1
0.1
Germany
0.5
0.2
0.9
1.4
–0.3
0.7
0.2
–0.6
0.3
–0.4
–0.2
–0.2
France
–0.2
0.0
0.1
0.7
–0.1
–0.5
–0.4
–0.5
0.1
0.6
0.3
0.3
Italy
–0.2
0.4
1.2
2.8
0.8
–0.1
–0.5
–0.4
0.2
–0.1
0.2
0.0
Spain
–0.2
0.6
2.1
2.2
1.5
–0.5
–0.3
0.8
0.1
–0.4
0.0
0.2
Japan
0.3
–0.1
–0.9
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.1
United Kingdom
–0.1
–0.1
1.5
–0.4
–0.5
–0.4
–0.3
–0.7
0.5
–0.2
–0.2
0.1
Canada
–1.1
0.2
–0.3
–0.4
0.1
1.2
0.9
0.4
–1.1
0.1
0.8
0.1
Other Advanced Economies1
0.6
0.2
0.5
0.5
0.9
0.4
–0.1
0.0
–0.5
0.3
0.0
0.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
–0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WoRLD econoMIc oUtLooK: GRoWtH sLoWDoWn, PRecARIoUs RecoVeRY
160	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Commonwealth of Independent States1,2
5.5
5.3
3.6
2.5
1.0
–1.9
0.8
2.4
2.8
2.2
2.3
2.4
Russia
4.8
5.1
3.7
1.8
0.7
–2.5
0.3
1.6
2.3
1.6
1.7
1.6
Excluding Russia
7.3
6.0
3.5
4.2
1.9
–0.5
2.1
4.1
3.9
3.5
3.7
4.0
Armenia
8.1
4.7
7.1
3.3
3.6
3.3
0.3
7.5
5.0
4.6
4.5
4.5
Azerbaijan
14.4
–1.6
2.2
5.8
2.8
1.0
–3.1
0.1
1.4
3.4
3.1
1.7
Belarus
7.4
5.5
1.7
1.0
1.7
–3.8
–2.5
2.5
3.0
1.8
2.2
2.0
Georgia
6.3
7.2
6.4
3.4
4.6
2.9
2.8
4.8
4.7
4.6
5.0
5.2
Kazakhstan
8.3
7.4
4.8
6.0
4.2
1.2
1.1
4.1
4.1
3.2
3.2
4.5
Kyrgyz Republic
4.0
6.0
–0.1
10.9
4.0
3.9
4.3
4.7
3.5
3.8
3.4
3.4
Moldova 
5.1
5.8
–0.6
9.0
5.0
–0.3
4.4
4.7
4.0
3.5
3.8
3.8
Tajikistan
8.0
7.4
7.5
7.4
6.7
6.0
6.9
7.1
7.0
5.0
4.5
4.0
Turkmenistan
13.2
14.7
11.1
10.2
10.3
6.5
6.2
6.5
6.2
6.3
6.0
5.7
Ukraine3
3.9
5.5
0.2
0.0
–6.6
–9.8
2.4
2.5
3.3
2.7
3.0
3.3
Uzbekistan
6.9
8.3
8.2
8.0
8.0
7.9
9.0
8.9
5.0
5.0
5.5
6.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.4
7.9
7.0
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.7
6.6
6.4
6.3
6.3
6.1
Bangladesh
5.8
6.5
6.3
6.0
6.3
6.8
7.2
7.6
7.7
7.3
7.0
7.0
Bhutan
8.4
9.7
6.4
3.6
4.0
6.2
7.3
7.4
5.8
4.8
6.3
6.5
Brunei Darussalam
1.4
3.7
0.9
–2.1
–2.5
–0.4
–2.5
1.3
–0.2
4.8
6.6
2.2
Cambodia
8.0
7.1
7.3
7.4
7.1
7.0
6.9
7.0
7.3
6.8
6.7
6.0
China
10.5
9.5
7.9
7.8
7.3
6.9
6.7
6.8
6.6
6.3
6.1
5.5
Fiji
1.3
2.7
1.4
4.7
5.6
3.8
0.7
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.3
3.2
India4
7.5
6.6
5.5
6.4
7.4
8.0
8.2
7.2
7.1
7.3
7.5
7.7
Indonesia
5.4
6.2
6.0
5.6
5.0
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.3
Kiribati
0.7
1.6
4.7
4.2
–0.7
10.4
5.1
0.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
1.8
Lao P.D.R.
7.2
8.0
7.8
8.0
7.6
7.3
7.0
6.8
6.5
6.7
6.8
6.8
Malaysia
4.6
5.3
5.5
4.7
6.0
5.1
4.2
5.9
4.7
4.7
4.8
4.8
Maldives
6.5
8.4
2.4
7.3
7.3
2.9
7.3
6.9
7.0
6.3
5.5
5.5
Marshall Islands
1.6
3.2
2.8
–0.7
–0.6
1.8
4.5
2.6
2.4
2.3
2.0
1.3
Micronesia
0.2
3.3
–2.0
–3.9
–2.2
5.0
0.7
2.4
2.1
1.2
0.7
0.6
Mongolia
6.3
17.3
12.3
11.6
7.9
2.4
1.2
5.3
6.9
6.3
4.9
5.5
Myanmar
10.7
5.5
6.5
7.9
8.2
7.5
5.2
6.3
6.7
6.4
6.6
7.0
Nauru
. . .
11.7
10.1
34.2
36.5
2.8
10.4
4.0
–2.4
–1.0
0.1
2.0
Nepal
4.0
3.4
4.8
4.1
6.0
3.3
0.6
7.9
6.3
6.5
6.3
5.0
Palau
0.5
5.5
4.8
–1.7
3.0
10.4
0.5
–3.7
0.4
2.0
2.5
2.0
Papua New Guinea
4.0
1.1
4.6
3.8
15.4
5.3
1.7
2.4
0.0
3.8
3.1
3.9
Philippines
4.8
3.7
6.7
7.1
6.1
6.1
6.9
6.7
6.2
6.5
6.6
6.8
Samoa
2.5
5.6
0.4
–1.9
1.2
1.7
7.2
2.7
0.7
3.3
4.6
2.2
Solomon Islands
3.4
13.2
4.6
3.0
2.3
2.5
3.5
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.8
2.9
Sri Lanka
5.1
8.4
9.1
3.4
5.0
5.0
4.5
3.3
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.8
Thailand
4.6
0.8
7.2
2.7
1.0
3.1
3.4
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.5
3.6
Timor-Leste5
4.3
7.7
5.5
2.5
4.1
4.0
5.3
–4.6
0.8
5.0
4.8
4.8
Tonga
1.4
1.8
–1.1
–0.6
2.9
3.5
4.2
2.5
1.8
4.6
4.9
1.1
Tuvalu
0.9
7.9
–3.8
4.6
1.3
9.1
3.0
3.2
4.3
4.1
4.4
2.7
Vanuatu
2.9
1.2
1.8
2.0
2.3
0.2
3.5
4.4
3.2
3.0
2.8
2.8
Vietnam
6.8
6.2
5.2
5.4
6.0
6.7
6.2
6.8
7.1
6.5
6.5
6.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.9
6.7
2.6
4.9
3.9
4.8
3.3
6.0
3.6
0.8
2.8
3.1
Albania
5.6
2.5
1.4
1.0
1.8
2.2
3.3
3.8
4.2
3.7
3.9
4.0
Bosnia and Herzegovina
3.9
0.9
–0.7
2.4
1.1
3.1
3.2
3.0
3.1
3.1
3.2
3.5
Bulgaria
4.6
1.9
0.0
0.5
1.8
3.5
3.9
3.8
3.2
3.3
3.0
2.8
Croatia
2.5
–0.3
–2.3
–0.5
–0.1
2.4
3.5
2.9
2.7
2.6
2.5
2.0
Hungary
2.0
1.7
–1.6
2.1
4.2
3.5
2.3
4.1
4.9
3.6
2.7
2.2
Kosovo
4.6
4.4
2.8
3.4
1.2
4.1
4.1
4.2
4.0
4.2
4.0
4.0
Montenegro
3.3
3.2
–2.7
3.5
1.8
3.4
2.9
4.7
4.5
2.8
2.5
2.9
North Macedonia
3.0
2.3
–0.5
2.9
3.6
3.9
2.8
0.2
2.7
3.0
3.1
3.5
Poland
3.9
5.0
1.6
1.4
3.3
3.8
3.1
4.8
5.1
3.8
3.1
2.8
Romania
4.2
2.0
2.1
3.5
3.4
3.9
4.8
7.0
4.1
3.1
3.0
3.0
Serbia
5.0
2.0
–0.7
2.9
–1.6
1.8
3.3
2.0
4.4
3.5
4.0
4.0
Turkey
4.0
11.1
4.8
8.5
5.2
6.1
3.2
7.4
2.6
–2.5
2.5
3.5
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
161
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Latin America and the Caribbean
3.2
4.6
2.9
2.9
1.3
0.3
–0.6
1.2
1.0
1.4
2.4
2.8
Antigua and Barbuda
1.4
–2.1
3.5
–0.1
4.7
4.0
4.8
3.6
5.3
4.0
3.3
2.0
Argentina
3.4
6.0
–1.0
2.4
–2.5
2.7
–2.1
2.7
–2.5
–1.2
2.2
3.6
Aruba
–0.8
3.5
–1.4
4.2
0.9
–0.4
0.5
2.3
1.2
0.7
0.9
1.1
The Bahamas
0.7
0.6
3.1
–0.4
–0.1
1.0
–1.7
1.4
2.3
2.1
1.6
1.5
Barbados
0.7
–0.8
–0.1
–1.4
–0.2
2.2
2.3
–0.2
–0.5
–0.1
0.6
1.8
Belize
3.9
2.2
2.9
0.9
3.7
3.4
–0.6
1.4
3.0
2.5
2.1
1.7
Bolivia
3.8
5.2
5.1
6.8
5.5
4.9
4.3
4.2
4.3
4.0
3.9
3.7
Brazil
3.7
4.0
1.9
3.0
0.5
–3.5
–3.3
1.1
1.1
2.1
2.5
2.2
Chile
4.2
6.1
5.3
4.0
1.8
2.3
1.7
1.3
4.0
3.4
3.2
3.0
Colombia
4.0
7.4
3.9
4.6
4.7
3.0
2.1
1.4
2.7
3.5
3.6
3.6
Costa Rica
4.3
4.3
4.8
2.3
3.5
3.6
4.2
3.4
2.7
2.9
2.8
3.5
Dominica
2.4
–0.2
–1.1
0.8
4.2
–3.7
2.6
–5.4
–12.0
8.0
7.0
1.5
Dominican Republic
4.6
3.1
2.7
4.9
7.6
7.0
6.6
4.6
7.0
5.1
5.0
5.0
Ecuador
4.1
7.9
5.6
4.9
3.8
0.1
–1.2
2.4
1.1
–0.5
0.2
2.1
El Salvador
1.6
3.8
2.8
2.2
1.7
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.5
2.5
2.3
2.2
Grenada
1.8
0.8
–1.2
2.4
7.3
6.4
3.7
5.1
4.8
4.2
2.4
2.7
Guatemala
3.3
4.2
3.0
3.7
4.2
4.1
3.1
2.8
3.1
3.5
3.6
3.5
Guyana
2.4
5.4
5.0
5.0
3.9
3.1
3.4
2.1
3.4
3.8
29.6
17.9
Haiti
0.1
5.5
2.9
4.2
2.8
1.2
1.5
1.2
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.6
Honduras
4.1
3.8
4.1
2.8
3.1
3.8
3.8
4.9
3.7
3.4
3.4
3.7
Jamaica
0.6
1.4
–0.5
0.2
0.6
0.9
1.5
0.7
1.4
1.7
1.9
2.4
Mexico
1.5
3.7
3.6
1.4
2.8
3.3
2.9
2.1
2.0
1.6
1.9
2.7
Nicaragua
2.9
6.3
6.5
4.9
4.8
4.8
4.7
4.9
–4.0
–5.0
–0.2
3.0
Panama
5.9
11.3
9.8
6.9
5.1
5.7
5.0
5.3
3.9
6.0
5.5
5.5
Paraguay
3.7
4.2
–0.5
8.4
4.9
3.1
4.3
5.0
3.7
3.5
4.0
4.0
Peru
5.6
6.5
6.0
5.8
2.4
3.3
4.0
2.5
4.0
3.9
4.0
3.8
St. Kitts and Nevis
2.2
1.8
–0.7
5.5
6.1
2.1
2.3
1.2
3.0
3.5
3.5
2.7
St. Lucia
2.0
4.1
–0.3
–2.0
0.0
0.3
3.9
3.7
1.0
3.3
2.7
1.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
2.6
0.2
1.3
2.5
0.2
0.8
0.8
0.7
2.0
2.3
2.4
2.3
Suriname
5.0
5.8
2.7
2.9
0.3
–3.4
–5.6
1.7
2.0
2.2
2.5
3.0
Trinidad and Tobago4
5.7
–0.2
–0.7
2.3
–1.3
1.9
–6.5
–2.0
0.3
0.0
1.5
1.7
Uruguay
3.2
5.2
3.5
4.6
3.2
0.4
1.7
2.7
2.1
1.9
3.0
3.0
Venezuela
3.1
4.2
5.6
1.3
–3.9
–6.2
–17.0
–15.7
–18.0
–25.0
–10.0
–1.5
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
5.1
4.4
4.8
2.6
2.9
2.6
5.2
2.2
1.8
1.5
3.2
2.8
Afghanistan
. . .
6.5
14.0
5.7
2.7
1.0
2.2
2.7
2.3
3.0
3.5
5.5
Algeria
3.9
2.8
3.4
2.8
3.8
3.7
3.2
1.4
2.1
2.3
1.8
0.4
Bahrain
5.4
2.0
3.7
5.4
4.4
2.9
3.5
3.8
1.8
1.8
2.1
3.0
Djibouti
3.5
7.3
4.8
5.0
6.0
6.5
6.5
6.7
6.7
6.7
6.0
6.0
Egypt
4.9
1.8
2.2
3.3
2.9
4.4
4.3
4.2
5.3
5.5
5.9
6.0
Iran
4.7
3.1
–7.7
–0.3
3.2
–1.6
12.5
3.7
–3.9
–6.0
0.2
1.1
Iraq
12.1
7.5
13.9
7.6
0.7
2.5
13.6
–1.7
0.6
2.8
8.1
1.9
Jordan
6.0
2.6
2.7
2.8
3.1
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.4
3.0
Kuwait
4.6
9.6
6.6
1.2
0.5
0.6
2.9
–3.5
1.7
2.5
2.9
2.9
Lebanon
5.7
0.9
2.7
2.6
1.9
0.4
1.6
0.6
0.2
1.3
2.0
3.3
Libya4
4.1
–66.7
124.7
–36.8
–53.0
–13.0
–7.4
64.0
17.9
4.3
1.4
1.5
Mauritania
4.9
4.7
5.8
6.1
5.6
0.4
1.8
3.0
3.0
6.4
4.7
8.1
Morocco
4.9
5.2
3.0
4.5
2.7
4.5
1.1
4.1
3.1
3.2
3.8
4.5
Oman
3.0
2.6
9.1
5.1
1.4
4.7
5.0
–0.9
2.1
1.1
6.2
1.7
Pakistan
4.5
3.6
3.8
3.7
4.1
4.1
4.6
5.4
5.2
2.9
2.8
2.5
Qatar
13.1
13.4
4.7
4.4
4.0
3.7
2.1
1.6
2.2
2.6
3.2
3.0
Saudi Arabia
3.4
10.0
5.4
2.7
3.7
4.1
1.7
–0.7
2.2
1.8
2.1
2.3
Somalia
. . .
. . .
1.2
–0.8
0.4
3.8
4.9
2.3
3.1
3.5
3.5
3.5
Sudan6
5.1
–2.8
–17.0
2.0
4.7
1.9
2.9
1.7
–2.1
–2.3
–1.3
1.5
Syria7
4.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tunisia
4.2
–1.9
4.0
2.9
3.0
1.2
1.1
2.0
2.5
2.7
3.2
4.1
United Arab Emirates
3.9
6.9
4.5
5.1
4.4
5.1
3.0
0.8
1.7
2.8
3.3
2.7
Yemen
4.3
–12.7
2.4
4.8
–0.2
–16.7
–13.6
–5.9
–2.7
2.1
10.0
3.7
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
162	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.9
5.3
4.7
5.2
5.1
3.2
1.4
2.9
3.0
3.5
3.7
4.0
Angola
8.8
3.5
8.5
5.0
4.8
0.9
–2.6
–0.2
–1.7
0.4
2.9
3.9
Benin
3.9
3.0
4.8
7.2
6.4
2.1
4.0
5.8
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5
Botswana
4.1
6.0
4.5
11.3
4.1
–1.7
4.3
2.9
4.6
3.9
4.1
3.9
Burkina Faso
5.9
6.6
6.5
5.8
4.3
3.9
5.9
6.3
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
Burundi
3.7
4.0
4.4
5.9
4.5
–4.0
–1.0
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.5
Cabo Verde
5.4
4.0
1.1
0.8
0.6
1.0
4.7
4.0
4.7
5.0
5.0
5.0
Cameroon 
3.9
4.1
4.5
5.4
5.9
5.7
4.6
3.5
4.0
4.3
4.7
5.5
Central African Republic
1.5
3.3
4.1
–36.7
1.0
4.8
4.5
4.3
4.3
5.0
5.0
5.0
Chad
9.8
0.1
8.8
5.8
6.9
1.8
–6.4
–3.1
3.1
4.5
6.0
3.8
Comoros
2.0
2.2
3.0
3.5
2.0
1.0
2.2
2.7
2.8
2.8
2.9
3.3
Democratic Republic of the Congo
4.7
6.9
7.1
8.5
9.5
6.9
2.4
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.4
4.9
Republic of Congo
4.7
3.4
3.8
3.3
6.8
2.6
–2.8
–3.1
0.8
5.4
1.5
2.2
Côte d'Ivoire
1.1
–4.9
10.9
9.3
8.8
8.8
8.0
7.7
7.4
7.5
7.2
6.5
Equatorial Guinea
15.2
6.5
8.3
–4.1
0.4
–9.1
–8.8
–4.7
–5.7
–4.0
–4.7
1.5
Eritrea
0.9
8.7
7.0
4.6
2.9
2.6
1.9
5.0
4.2
3.8
4.1
4.4
Eswatini
3.5
2.2
4.7
6.4
1.9
0.4
3.2
1.9
0.2
–0.4
0.2
2.2
Ethiopia
8.5
11.4
8.7
9.9
10.3
10.4
8.0
10.1
7.7
7.7
7.5
7.0
Gabon
1.4
7.1
5.3
5.5
4.4
3.9
2.1
0.5
1.2
3.1
3.9
4.4
The Gambia
3.8
–4.3
5.6
4.8
–0.9
5.9
0.4
4.6
6.6
5.4
5.2
4.8
Ghana
5.8
17.4
9.0
7.9
2.9
2.2
3.4
8.1
5.6
8.8
5.8
3.8
Guinea
3.1
5.6
5.9
3.9
3.7
3.8
10.5
9.9
5.8
5.9
6.0
5.0
Guinea-Bissau
2.5
8.1
–1.7
3.3
1.0
6.1
6.3
5.9
3.8
5.0
5.0
5.0
Kenya
4.2
6.1
4.6
5.9
5.4
5.7
5.9
4.9
6.0
5.8
5.9
6.0
Lesotho
3.9
6.7
4.9
2.2
3.0
2.5
3.1
–1.6
1.5
3.9
0.3
1.7
Liberia
2.0
7.7
8.4
8.8
0.7
0.0
–1.6
2.5
1.2
0.4
1.6
3.7
Madagascar
2.6
1.4
3.0
2.2
3.3
3.1
4.2
4.3
5.2
5.2
5.3
4.8
Malawi
4.9
4.9
1.9
5.2
5.7
2.9
2.3
4.0
3.2
4.0
5.0
6.5
Mali
5.8
3.2
–0.8
2.3
7.1
6.2
5.8
5.4
4.9
5.0
4.9
4.8
Mauritius
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.7
3.6
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.9
3.9
4.0
Mozambique
8.2
7.1
7.2
7.1
7.4
6.6
3.8
3.7
3.3
4.0
4.0
11.7
Namibia
4.0
5.1
5.1
5.6
6.4
6.1
0.6
–0.9
–0.1
1.4
2.0
3.3
Niger
5.4
2.2
11.8
5.3
7.5
4.3
4.9
4.9
5.2
6.5
6.0
5.5
Nigeria
8.9
4.9
4.3
5.4
6.3
2.7
–1.6
0.8
1.9
2.1
2.5
2.6
Rwanda
8.2
7.8
8.8
4.7
7.6
8.9
6.0
6.2
8.6
7.8
8.1
7.5
São Tomé and Príncipe
5.2
4.4
3.1
4.8
6.5
3.8
4.2
3.9
3.0
4.0
4.5
5.0
Senegal
4.0
1.5
5.1
2.8
6.6
6.4
6.2
7.2
6.2
6.9
7.5
6.0
Seychelles
2.0
5.4
3.7
6.0
4.5
4.9
4.5
5.3
3.6
3.4
3.3
3.6
Sierra Leone
8.9
6.3
15.2
20.7
4.6
–20.5
6.4
3.8
3.7
5.4
5.4
5.1
South Africa
3.5
3.3
2.2
2.5
1.8
1.2
0.4
1.4
0.8
1.2
1.5
1.8
South Sudan
. . .
. . .
–52.4
29.3
2.9
–0.2
–16.7
–5.5
–1.2
8.8
5.2
5.0
Tanzania
6.3
7.9
5.1
6.8
6.7
6.2
6.9
6.8
6.6
4.0
4.2
4.9
Togo
2.2
6.4
6.5
6.1
5.9
5.7
5.6
4.4
4.7
5.0
5.3
5.4
Uganda
7.9
6.8
2.2
4.7
4.6
5.7
2.3
5.0
6.2
6.3
6.2
6.7
Zambia
7.4
5.6
7.6
5.1
4.7
2.9
3.8
3.4
3.5
3.1
2.9
2.5
Zimbabwe8
–3.9
14.2
16.7
2.0
2.4
1.8
0.7
4.7
3.4
–5.2
3.3
4.0
1Data for some countries refer to real net material product (NMP) or are estimates based on NMP. The figures should be interpreted only as indicative of broad orders of magnitude because 
reliable, comparable data are not generally available. In particular, the growth of output of new private enterprises of the informal economy is not fully reflected in the recent figures.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
3Data are based on the 2008 System of National Accounts. The revised national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
4See country-specific notes for India, Libya, and Trinidad and Tobago in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5In this table only, the data for Timor-Leste are based on non-oil GDP.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
8The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values 
may differ from authorities’ estimates. Real GDP is in constant 2009 prices.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
163
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)
Average
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
1.7
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.5
1.3
1.0
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.8
1.9
United States
2.1
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.9
1.1
1.1
1.9
2.3
1.8
2.1
2.1
Euro Area
1.9
1.0
1.3
1.2
0.9
1.4
0.8
1.1
1.4
1.5
1.8
2.0
Japan
–1.1
–1.7
–0.8
–0.3
1.7
2.1
0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.6
1.2
0.7
Other Advanced Economies1
2.1
2.0
1.2
1.5
1.3
1.0
1.3
2.0
1.4
1.6
1.7
1.9
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
2.7
2.0
1.4
1.4
0.3
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.6
2.1
2.0
United States
2.4
3.1
2.1
1.5
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
2.0
2.7
2.2
Euro Area2
2.1
2.7
2.5
1.3
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.3
1.6
2.0
Japan
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
0.3
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
1.1
1.5
1.4
Other Advanced Economies1
2.1
3.3
2.1
1.7
1.5
0.5
0.9
1.8
1.9
1.6
1.8
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
6.6
7.1
5.8
5.5
4.7
4.7
4.2
4.3
4.8
4.9
4.7
4.2
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States4
12.1
9.8
6.2
6.5
8.1
15.5
8.3
5.5
4.5
5.7
5.0
4.3
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.3
6.5
4.6
4.6
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.1
3.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
10.2
5.5
6.1
4.5
4.1
3.2
3.2
6.2
8.7
9.0
7.5
6.9
Latin America and the Caribbean
5.8
5.2
4.6
4.6
4.9
5.5
5.6
6.0
6.2
6.5
5.1
3.6
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
7.1
9.3
9.8
9.2
6.7
5.4
4.7
6.4
10.4
9.7
9.3
7.8
Middle East and North Africa
6.9
8.8
9.7
9.4
6.5
5.5
4.9
6.7
11.4
10.0
9.6
8.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
9.9
9.3
9.2
6.6
6.4
7.0
11.2
11.0
8.5
8.1
7.4
6.6
Memorandum
European Union
2.4
3.1
2.6
1.5
0.5
0.1
0.2
1.7
1.9
1.6
1.7
2.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
9.7
11.7
9.8
8.0
7.2
6.9
8.6
9.6
9.1
8.2
7.9
7.3
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
9.7
8.6
8.0
8.1
6.4
8.6
6.9
5.4
7.2
7.6
7.2
6.5
Nonfuel
5.7
6.7
5.3
4.9
4.2
3.8
3.7
4.0
4.3
4.4
4.2
3.9
Of Which, Primary Products5
6.5
6.8
7.0
6.5
7.1
5.2
6.4
11.2
13.6
15.0
10.7
6.7
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
7.4
7.6
6.9
6.2
5.6
5.4
5.1
5.5
5.4
5.2
5.0
4.5
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
8.5
10.3
7.9
6.6
10.1
13.8
8.4
16.7
16.7
12.9
10.9
8.1
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
2.2
3.2
2.6
1.4
0.7
0.1
0.6
1.6
1.9
1.6
1.7
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
5.1
5.4
4.5
3.8
3.1
2.7
2.7
3.3
3.1
3.1
3.2
3.0
1Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Venezuela and Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
5Includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
164	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average 
Projections
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
2018
2019
2020
Advanced Economies
2.0
2.7
2.0
1.4
1.4
0.3
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.6
2.1
2.0
1.7
2.0
1.9
United States
2.4
3.1
2.1
1.5
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
2.0
2.7
2.2
2.0
2.7
2.4
Euro Area3
2.1
2.7
2.5
1.3
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.3
1.6
2.0
1.5
1.4
1.6
Germany
1.6
2.5
2.2
1.6
0.8
0.7
0.4
1.7
1.9
1.3
1.7
2.2
1.8
1.6
1.8
France
1.9
2.3
2.2
1.0
0.6
0.1
0.3
1.2
2.1
1.3
1.5
1.9
2.0
1.2
1.6
Italy
2.2
2.9
3.3
1.2
0.2
0.1
–0.1
1.3
1.2
0.8
1.2
1.6
1.2
0.8
1.2
Spain
2.8
3.2
2.4
1.4
–0.2
–0.5
–0.2
2.0
1.7
1.2
1.6
1.9
1.2
1.3
1.7
Netherlands
2.1
2.5
2.8
2.6
0.3
0.2
0.1
1.3
1.6
2.3
1.6
2.0
1.9
2.0
1.7
Belgium
2.1
3.4
2.6
1.2
0.5
0.6
1.8
2.2
2.3
1.9
1.6
2.0
2.2
1.3
2.1
Austria
1.9
3.5
2.6
2.1
1.5
0.8
1.0
2.2
2.1
1.8
2.0
2.0
1.7
1.9
2.0
Greece
3.4
3.1
1.0
–0.9
–1.4
–1.1
0.0
1.1
0.8
1.1
1.4
1.8
0.6
0.8
1.6
Portugal
2.5
3.6
2.8
0.4
–0.2
0.5
0.6
1.6
1.2
1.0
1.7
2.0
0.6
4.0
–1.7
Ireland
2.2
1.2
1.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
–0.2
0.3
0.7
1.2
1.5
2.0
0.8
0.4
1.5
Finland
1.7
3.3
3.2
2.2
1.2
–0.2
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.3
1.5
2.0
1.3
1.4
1.5
Slovak Republic
4.1
4.1
3.7
1.5
–0.1
–0.3
–0.5
1.4
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.1
1.9
2.2
2.1
Lithuania
3.0
4.1
3.2
1.2
0.2
–0.7
0.7
3.7
2.5
2.3
2.3
2.5
1.8
2.3
2.3
Slovenia
4.2
1.8
2.6
1.8
0.2
–0.5
–0.1
1.4
1.7
1.4
1.6
2.0
1.4
1.3
1.9
Luxembourg
2.6
3.7
2.9
1.7
0.7
0.1
0.0
2.1
2.0
1.6
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.6
Latvia
5.4
4.2
2.3
0.0
0.7
0.2
0.1
2.9
2.6
2.4
2.4
2.1
2.5
2.4
2.4
Estonia
4.2
5.1
4.2
3.2
0.5
0.1
0.8
3.7
3.4
3.0
2.8
2.5
3.3
3.0
2.8
Cyprus
2.4
3.5
3.1
0.4
–0.3
–1.5
–1.2
0.7
0.8
0.5
1.6
2.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
Malta
2.4
2.5
3.2
1.0
0.8
1.2
0.9
1.3
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
1.2
1.9
1.9
Japan
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
0.3
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
1.1
1.5
1.4
0.8
1.7
1.0
United Kingdom
2.1
4.5
2.8
2.6
1.5
0.0
0.7
2.7
2.5
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.3
1.8
2.0
Korea
3.2
4.0
2.2
1.3
1.3
0.7
1.0
1.9
1.5
1.4
1.6
2.0
1.3
1.4
1.6
Canada
2.0
2.9
1.5
0.9
1.9
1.1
1.4
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.9
2.0
2.1
1.8
1.9
Australia
3.0
3.4
1.7
2.5
2.5
1.5
1.3
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.5
1.8
2.3
2.3
Taiwan Province of China
0.9
1.4
1.6
1.0
1.3
–0.6
1.0
1.1
1.5
1.1
1.2
1.4
–0.1
1.1
1.2
Switzerland
0.9
0.2
–0.7
–0.2
0.0
–1.1
–0.4
0.5
0.9
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.4
0.2
1.2
Sweden
1.9
1.4
0.9
0.4
0.2
0.7
1.1
1.9
2.0
1.9
1.7
2.0
2.2
1.8
1.7
Singapore
1.6
5.2
4.6
2.4
1.0
–0.5
–0.5
0.6
0.4
1.3
1.4
1.4
0.5
1.4
1.4
Hong Kong SAR
0.4
5.3
4.1
4.3
4.4
3.0
2.4
1.5
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.5
2.4
2.4
2.5
Norway
2.0
1.3
0.7
2.1
2.0
2.2
3.6
1.9
2.8
1.9
1.7
2.0
3.5
1.6
1.8
Czech Republic
2.5
1.9
3.3
1.4
0.4
0.3
0.7
2.5
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.0
Israel
2.1
3.4
1.7
1.5
0.5
–0.6
–0.5
0.2
0.8
0.9
1.7
2.0
0.8
1.3
2.0
Denmark
2.0
2.7
2.4
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.1
0.7
1.1
1.3
2.0
0.7
1.2
1.4
New Zealand
2.6
4.1
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.3
0.6
1.9
1.6
2.0
1.9
2.0
2.1
1.9
2.0
Puerto Rico
2.7
2.9
1.3
1.1
0.6
–0.8
–0.3
1.8
2.5
0.3
1.3
1.4
2.5
0.3
1.3
Macao SAR
. . .
5.8
6.1
5.5
6.0
4.6
2.4
1.2
3.0
2.5
2.7
3.0
2.9
2.5
2.7
Iceland
6.2
4.0
5.2
3.9
2.0
1.6
1.7
1.8
2.7
2.8
2.5
2.5
3.7
2.6
2.6
San Marino
. . .
2.0
2.8
1.6
1.1
0.1
0.6
1.0
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.7
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Major Advanced Economies
1.8
2.6
1.9
1.3
1.5
0.3
0.8
1.8
2.1
1.7
2.2
2.0
1.8
2.1
2.0
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
stAtIstIcAL APPenDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
165
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
2018
2019
2020
Commonwealth of Independent  
States3,4
12.1
9.8
6.2
6.5
8.1
15.5
8.3
5.5
4.5
5.7
5.0
4.3
5.1
5.6
4.6
Russia
12.5
8.4
5.1
6.8
7.8
15.5
7.1
3.7
2.9
5.0
4.5
4.0
4.3
4.8
4.2
Excluding Russia
11.0
13.3
9.2
5.7
8.7
15.5
11.3
9.9
8.3
7.5
6.1
4.8
7.2
7.2
5.7
Armenia
4.4
7.7
2.5
5.8
3.0
3.7
–1.4
0.9
2.5
2.1
3.0
3.4
1.9
2.6
3.2
Azerbaijan
7.4
7.8
1.0
2.4
1.4
4.0
12.4
12.8
2.3
2.5
2.5
3.0
2.3
2.5
2.5
Belarus
20.1
53.2
59.2
18.3
18.1
13.5
11.8
6.0
4.9
5.0
5.0
4.0
5.6
5.0
5.0
Georgia
6.6
8.5
–0.9
–0.5
3.1
4.0
2.1
6.0
2.6
2.5
3.0
3.0
1.5
3.0
3.0
Kazakhstan
8.6
8.3
5.1
5.8
6.7
6.7
14.6
7.4
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.0
5.3
5.5
4.5
Kyrgyz Republic
7.4
16.6
2.8
6.6
7.5
6.5
0.4
3.2
1.5
2.2
4.9
5.0
0.5
4.7
5.1
Moldova
9.5
7.6
4.6
4.6
5.1
9.6
6.4
6.6
3.1
3.3
5.1
5.0
0.9
5.1
5.0
Tajikistan
13.5
12.4
5.8
5.0
6.1
5.8
5.9
7.3
3.8
6.7
6.2
6.5
5.4
6.2
6.2
Turkmenistan
7.2
5.3
5.3
6.8
6.0
7.4
3.6
8.0
13.6
13.0
9.0
6.0
8.9
13.0
9.0
Ukraine5
11.1
8.0
0.6
–0.3
12.1
48.7
13.9
14.4
10.9
8.0
5.9
5.0
9.8
7.0
5.6
Uzbekistan
14.5
12.4
11.9
11.7
9.1
8.5
8.0
12.5
17.9
16.5
11.9
7.5
14.4
15.7
10.5
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.3
6.5
4.6
4.6
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.4
2.6
2.9
3.1
3.3
2.3
2.9
3.1
Bangladesh
6.3
11.5
6.2
7.5
7.0
6.2
5.7
5.6
5.6
5.4
5.4
5.5
5.4
5.4
5.5
Bhutan
4.6
7.3
9.3
11.3
9.5
7.6
7.6
5.5
3.6
4.0
4.5
4.5
3.2
3.4
4.2
Brunei Darussalam
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.4
–0.2
–0.4
–0.7
–0.2
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.5
Cambodia
5.1
5.5
2.9
3.0
3.9
1.2
3.0
2.9
2.4
2.5
2.8
3.0
1.6
2.6
2.8
China
2.1
5.4
2.6
2.6
2.0
1.4
2.0
1.6
2.1
2.3
2.5
3.0
1.9
2.2
2.5
Fiji
3.7
7.3
3.4
2.9
0.5
1.4
3.9
3.4
4.1
3.5
3.0
3.0
4.9
3.5
3.0
India
6.5
9.5
10.0
9.4
5.8
4.9
4.5
3.6
3.5
3.9
4.2
4.0
2.7
4.1
4.3
Indonesia
8.6
5.3
4.0
6.4
6.4
6.4
3.5
3.8
3.2
3.3
3.6
3.0
3.1
3.6
3.5
Kiribati
3.1
1.5
–3.0
–1.5
2.1
0.6
1.9
0.4
1.9
2.1
2.5
2.6
1.9
2.1
2.5
Lao P.D.R.
7.6
7.6
4.3
6.4
4.1
1.3
1.8
0.7
2.0
3.1
3.3
3.1
1.5
2.9
3.1
Malaysia
2.2
3.2
1.7
2.1
3.1
2.1
2.1
3.8
1.0
2.0
2.6
2.2
0.2
2.4
2.6
Maldives
4.0
11.3
10.9
3.8
2.1
1.9
0.8
2.3
1.5
2.2
2.3
2.0
1.3
2.1
2.4
Marshall Islands
. . .
5.4
4.3
1.9
1.1
–2.2
–1.5
0.0
0.8
0.2
2.1
2.1
0.8
0.2
2.1
Micronesia
3.2
4.1
6.3
2.2
0.7
–0.2
0.5
0.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Mongolia
8.8
7.7
15.0
8.6
12.9
5.9
0.5
4.6
7.6
8.4
7.6
7.1
9.7
7.2
8.0
Myanmar
19.5
6.8
0.4
5.8
5.1
7.3
9.1
4.6
5.9
7.5
6.7
6.1
8.6
7.2
7.1
Nauru
. . .
–3.4
0.3
–1.1
0.3
9.8
8.2
5.1
3.8
2.5
2.0
2.0
3.0
2.8
2.3
Nepal
6.1
9.6
8.3
9.9
9.0
7.2
9.9
4.5
4.2
4.9
6.5
5.3
4.6
5.1
6.5
Palau
2.7
4.7
3.6
3.4
4.1
0.9
–1.0
0.9
2.8
2.3
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.4
2.0
Papua New Guinea
6.5
4.4
4.5
5.0
5.2
6.0
6.7
5.4
4.7
4.3
4.7
3.7
4.8
4.7
4.7
Philippines
5.2
4.8
3.0
2.6
3.6
0.7
1.3
2.9
5.2
3.8
3.3
3.0
5.1
3.5
3.1
Samoa
5.7
2.9
6.2
–0.2
–1.2
1.9
0.1
1.3
3.7
5.1
4.3
2.8
5.8
4.5
4.0
Solomon Islands
8.5
7.4
5.9
5.4
5.2
–0.6
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.7
2.6
4.4
3.2
3.3
3.6
Sri Lanka
9.7
6.7
7.5
6.9
2.8
2.2
4.0
6.6
4.3
4.5
4.6
5.0
2.8
4.5
4.7
Thailand
2.6
3.8
3.0
2.2
1.9
–0.9
0.2
0.7
1.1
1.0
1.3
2.0
0.4
1.9
0.6
Timor-Leste
4.5
13.2
10.9
9.5
0.8
0.6
–1.5
0.5
2.3
2.5
3.1
4.0
2.1
2.8
3.5
Tonga
7.7
6.3
1.1
2.1
1.2
–1.1
2.6
7.4
3.9
5.8
5.0
2.5
6.7
5.0
4.9
Tuvalu
2.9
0.5
1.4
2.0
1.1
3.1
3.5
4.1
4.2
3.7
3.5
2.4
4.0
3.4
3.5
Vanuatu
2.9
0.9
1.3
1.5
0.8
2.5
0.8
3.1
2.8
2.0
2.2
2.2
2.6
2.6
2.2
Vietnam
7.7
18.7
9.1
6.6
4.1
0.6
2.7
3.5
3.5
3.1
3.3
3.9
3.0
3.2
3.4
Emerging and Developing Europe
10.2
5.5
6.1
4.5
4.1
3.2
3.2
6.2
8.7
9.0
7.5
6.9
10.2
8.3
7.4
Albania
3.0
3.4
2.0
1.9
1.6
1.9
1.3
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.4
3.0
1.8
2.2
2.6
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2.1
3.7
2.1
–0.1
–0.9
–1.0
–1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.6
2.0
1.6
1.6
1.6
Bulgaria6
6.0
3.4
2.4
0.4
–1.6
–1.1
–1.3
1.2
2.6
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.3
Croatia
2.8
2.3
3.4
2.2
–0.2
–0.5
–1.1
1.1
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.9
0.9
1.2
1.5
Hungary
5.6
3.9
5.7
1.7
–0.2
–0.1
0.4
2.4
2.8
3.2
3.1
3.0
2.7
3.5
3.0
Kosovo
2.8
7.3
2.5
1.8
0.4
–0.5
0.3
1.5
1.1
2.2
1.3
2.0
2.9
0.6
2.4
Montenegro
7.3
3.5
4.1
2.2
–0.7
1.5
–0.3
2.4
2.6
0.9
1.7
2.0
1.7
1.9
1.8
North Macedonia
2.1
3.9
3.3
2.8
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
1.4
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.2
0.8
2.0
2.0
Poland
2.8
4.3
3.7
0.9
0.0
–0.9
–0.6
2.0
1.6
2.0
1.9
2.3
1.1
2.3
1.9
Romania
12.1
5.8
3.3
4.0
1.1
–0.6
–1.6
1.3
4.6
3.3
3.0
2.5
3.3
3.5
3.0
Serbia
14.7
11.1
7.3
7.7
2.1
1.4
1.1
3.1
2.0
2.0
2.5
3.0
2.0
2.5
2.5
Turkey
17.5
6.5
8.9
7.5
8.9
7.7
7.8
11.1
16.3
17.5
14.1
12.4
20.3
15.5
14.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
166	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2001–10 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
2018
2019
2020
Latin America and the 
Caribbean7
5.8
5.2
4.6
4.6
4.9
5.5
5.6
6.0
6.2
6.5
5.1
3.6
7.1
5.6
4.9
Antigua and Barbuda
2.2
3.5
3.4
1.1
1.1
1.0
–0.5
2.4
1.3
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.2
2.0
2.0
Argentina8
9.5
9.8 10.0 10.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
25.7
34.3
43.7
23.2
5.8
47.6
30.5
21.2
Aruba
3.3
4.4
0.6 –2.4
0.4
0.5
–0.9
–0.5
3.5
1.4
1.9
2.2
3.7
1.0
2.7
The Bahamas
2.3
3.1
1.9
0.4
1.2
1.9
–0.3
1.4
2.2
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.8
2.4
2.3
Barbados
4.1
9.4
4.5
1.8
1.8
–1.1
1.5
4.4
3.6
1.3
1.9
2.3
0.0
1.4
2.3
Belize
2.5
1.7
1.2
0.5
1.2
–0.9
0.7
1.1
0.3
1.2
1.6
2.0
–0.1
2.4
0.8
Bolivia
4.6
9.9
4.5
5.7
5.8
4.1
3.6
2.8
2.3
2.3
3.6
5.0
1.9
3.0
4.0
Brazil
6.6
6.6
5.4
6.2
6.3
9.0
8.7
3.4
3.7
3.6
4.1
4.0
3.7
3.9
4.0
Chile
3.2
3.3
3.0
1.8
4.7
4.3
3.8
2.2
2.3
2.3
3.0
3.0
2.1
2.7
3.0
Colombia
5.6
3.4
3.2
2.0
2.9
5.0
7.5
4.3
3.2
3.4
3.2
3.0
3.2
3.2
3.0
Costa Rica
10.3
4.9
4.5
5.2
4.5
0.8
0.0
1.6
2.3
2.6
3.1
3.0
2.0
3.2
3.0
Dominica
2.2
1.1
1.4
0.0
0.8
–0.9
0.0
0.6
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
1.4
1.8
1.8
Dominican Republic
12.1
8.5
3.7
4.8
3.0
0.8
1.6
3.3
3.6
1.4
4.2
4.0
1.2
3.7
4.0
Ecuador
8.1
4.5
5.1
2.7
3.6
4.0
1.7
0.4
–0.2
0.6
1.2
1.0
0.3
0.5
1.6
El Salvador
3.4
5.1
1.7
0.8
1.1
–0.7
0.6
1.0
1.1
0.6
1.3
1.0
0.4
1.4
1.2
Grenada
3.0
3.0
2.4
0.0 –1.0
–0.6
1.7
0.9
1.1
1.7
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.9
Guatemala
6.8
6.2
3.8
4.3
3.4
2.4
4.4
4.4
3.8
3.4
3.7
4.2
2.3
3.8
4.1
Guyana
5.9
4.4
2.4
1.9
0.7
–0.9
0.8
2.0
1.3
2.9
3.1
2.8
2.2
3.0
3.2
Haiti
14.0
7.4
6.8
6.8
3.9
7.5
13.4
14.7
13.5
14.9
13.0
10.2
14.6
13.5
12.5
Honduras
7.6
6.8
5.2
5.2
6.1
3.2
2.7
3.9
4.3
4.7
4.5
4.0
4.2
4.7
4.5
Jamaica
11.8
7.5
6.9
9.4
8.3
3.7
2.3
4.4
3.7
3.6
4.9
5.0
2.4
4.9
5.0
Mexico
4.7
3.4
4.1
3.8
4.0
2.7
2.8
6.0
4.9
3.8
3.1
3.0
4.8
3.1
3.0
Nicaragua
8.3
8.1
7.2
7.1
6.0
4.0
3.5
3.9
5.0
5.1
3.9
5.0
3.9
5.5
3.9
Panama
2.6
5.9
5.7
4.0
2.6
0.1
0.7
0.9
0.8
1.5
2.0
2.0
0.2
1.5
2.0
Paraguay
7.8
8.2
3.7
2.7
5.0
3.1
4.1
3.6
4.0
3.6
4.0
4.0
3.2
4.0
4.0
Peru
2.4
3.4
3.7
2.8
3.2
3.5
3.6
2.8
1.3
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.2
2.2
2.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.3
5.8
0.8
1.1
0.2
–2.3
–0.3
0.0
–0.6
0.0
2.0
2.0
–2.0
2.0
2.0
St. Lucia
2.6
2.8
4.2
1.5
3.5
–1.0
–3.1
0.1
1.9
1.9
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
2.9
3.2
2.6
0.8
0.2
–1.7
–0.2
2.2
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Suriname
13.1
17.7
5.0
1.9
3.4
6.9
55.5
22.0
6.9
5.4
5.3
3.5
5.4
5.3
5.4
Trinidad and Tobago
7.0
5.1
9.3
5.2
5.7
4.7
3.1
1.9
1.1
1.1
2.2
3.0
1.0
1.1
2.2
Uruguay
8.7
8.1
8.1
8.6
8.9
8.7
9.6
6.2
7.6
7.6
7.2
7.0
8.0
7.5
7.0
Venezuela8
22.3
27.1 21.1 38.5 57.3 111.8 254.4 493.6 929,789.5
10,000,000
10,000,000
10,000,000
1,555,146
10,000,000
10,000,000
Middle East, North 
Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
7.1
9.3
9.8
9.2
6.7
5.4
4.7
6.4
10.4
9.7
9.3
7.8
12.5
9.1
9.3
Afghanistan
. . .
11.8
6.4
7.4
4.7
–0.7
4.4
5.0
0.6
1.9
3.5
5.0
0.8
3.0
4.0
Algeria
3.6
4.5
8.9
3.3
2.9
4.8
6.4
5.6
4.3
5.6
6.7
14.0
2.7
4.2
9.4
Bahrain
1.8
–0.4
2.8
3.3
2.7
1.8
2.8
1.4
2.1
3.3
3.2
2.2
1.9
3.8
3.2
Djibouti
3.7
5.2
4.2
1.1
2.3
0.9
0.4
0.8
–0.1
0.8
1.2
1.5
0.6
1.0
1.3
Egypt
7.9
11.1
8.6
6.9 10.1
11.0
10.2
23.5
20.9
14.5
12.3
6.9
14.4
12.8
10.7
Iran
14.7
21.5 30.6 34.7 15.6
11.9
9.1
9.6
31.2
37.2
31.0
25.0
51.1
31.2
30.0
Iraq
. . .
5.6
6.1
1.9
2.2
1.4
0.5
0.1
0.4
2.0
2.0
2.0
–0.1
2.0
2.0
Jordan
4.0
4.2
4.5
4.8
2.9
–0.9
–0.8
3.3
4.5
2.0
2.5
2.5
3.6
2.5
2.5
Kuwait
3.2
4.9
3.2
2.7
3.1
3.7
3.5
1.5
0.7
2.5
2.7
3.0
1.1
2.8
3.0
Lebanon
2.6
5.0
6.6
4.8
1.8
–3.7
–0.8
4.5
6.1
2.0
2.3
2.3
4.0
2.2
2.4
Libya8
0.4
15.9
6.1
2.6
2.4
9.8
25.9
28.5
23.1
15.0
15.0
15.0
15.0
15.0
15.0
Mauritania
6.5
5.7
4.9
4.1
3.8
0.5
1.5
2.3
3.1
3.9
4.0
4.3
3.2
4.0
4.1
Morocco
1.8
0.9
1.3
1.9
0.4
1.5
1.6
0.8
1.9
1.4
2.0
2.0
0.4
1.4
2.0
Oman
2.9
4.0
2.9
1.2
1.0
0.1
1.1
1.6
0.9
1.5
1.8
2.5
0.9
1.5
1.8
Pakistan
8.1
13.7 11.0
7.4
8.6
4.5
2.9
4.1
3.9
7.6
7.0
5.0
5.2
8.4
6.8
Qatar
5.1
2.0
1.8
3.2
3.4
1.8
2.7
0.4
0.2
0.1
3.7
2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
2.1
3.8
2.9
3.5
2.2
1.3
2.0
–0.9
2.5
–0.7
2.2
2.1
2.5
–0.7
2.2
Somalia
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
3.5
3.0
2.8
Sudan9
10.8
18.1 35.6 36.5 36.9
16.9
17.8
32.4
63.3
49.6
58.1
72.8
72.9
56.2
59.4
Syria10
5.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tunisia
3.5
3.5
5.1
5.8
4.9
4.8
3.6
5.3
7.3
7.5
5.6
4.0
7.5
6.8
5.2
United Arab Emirates
5.5
0.9
0.7
1.1
2.3
4.1
1.6
2.0
3.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
3.1
2.1
2.1
Yemen
10.9
19.5
9.9 11.0
8.2
12.0 –12.6
24.7
41.8
20.0
7.5
5.0
30.0
10.0
5.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
167
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2001–10
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
2018
2019
2020
Sub-Saharan Africa
9.9
9.3
9.2
6.6
6.4
7.0
11.2
11.0
8.5
8.1
7.4
6.6
8.0
8.0
7.3
Angola
42.4
13.5
10.3
8.8
7.3
9.2
30.7
29.8
19.6
17.5
11.1
6.0
18.6
15.0
9.0
Benin
3.0
2.7
6.7
1.0
–1.1
0.3
–0.8
0.1
1.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.0
2.0
1.9
Botswana
8.6
8.5
7.5
5.9
4.4
3.1
2.8
3.3
3.2
3.6
3.8
3.9
3.5
3.7
3.8
Burkina Faso
2.8
2.8
3.8
0.5
–0.3
0.9
–0.2
0.4
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Burundi
8.9
9.6
18.2
7.9
4.4
5.6
5.5
16.6
1.2
7.3
9.0
9.0
5.3
9.0
9.0
Cabo Verde
2.4
4.5
2.5
1.5
–0.2
0.1
–1.4
0.8
1.3
1.6
2.0
2.0
1.5
1.6
2.0
Cameroon
2.6
2.9
2.4
2.1
1.9
2.7
0.9
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
2.0
1.1
1.2
1.5
Central African Republic
3.3
1.2
5.9
6.6
11.6
4.5
4.6
4.1
3.0
3.0
2.5
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.7
Chad
2.9
1.9
7.7
0.2
1.7
6.8
–1.1
–0.9
2.5
2.9
3.0
2.4
3.5
–1.2
5.0
Comoros
4.2
2.2
5.9
1.6
1.3
2.0
1.8
1.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.8
2.2
Democratic Republic of the Congo
36.8
14.9
0.9
0.9
1.2
1.0
18.2
41.5
29.3
8.4
6.7
3.5
7.2
7.1
7.0
Republic of Congo
2.9
1.8
5.0
4.6
0.9
3.2
3.2
0.4
1.2
1.5
1.8
3.0
0.9
2.0
2.5
Côte d’Ivoire
2.9
4.9
1.3
2.6
0.4
1.2
0.7
0.8
0.3
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.1
2.0
2.0
Equatorial Guinea
5.6
4.8
3.4
3.2
4.3
1.7
1.4
0.7
1.3
2.6
2.7
3.0
2.6
2.6
2.7
Eritrea
17.8
3.9
6.0
6.5
10.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
Eswatini
7.1
6.1
8.9
5.6
5.7
5.0
7.8
6.2
4.8
5.6
5.5
5.5
5.3
5.2
5.8
Ethiopia
11.1
33.2
24.1
8.1
7.4
9.6
6.6
10.7
13.8
9.3
8.0
8.0
10.4
8.0
8.0
Gabon
1.2
1.3
2.7
0.5
4.5
–0.1
2.1
2.7
4.8
3.0
2.5
2.5
6.3
3.0
2.5
The Gambia
7.0
4.8
4.6
5.2
6.3
6.8
7.2
8.0
6.5
6.3
6.0
5.0
6.4
6.5
5.5
Ghana
15.9
7.7
7.1
11.7
15.5
17.2
17.5
12.4
9.8
9.1
8.4
6.0
9.4
8.7
8.0
Guinea
16.0
21.4
15.2
11.9
9.7
8.2
8.2
8.9
9.7
8.9
8.3
7.8
9.6
8.6
8.1
Guinea-Bissau
2.3
5.1
2.1
0.8
–1.0
1.5
1.5
1.1
1.4
2.0
2.1
3.0
5.4
2.1
2.3
Kenya
7.0
14.0
9.4
5.7
6.9
6.6
6.3
8.0
4.7
4.4
5.0
5.0
5.7
4.7
5.0
Lesotho
7.0
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.6
4.3
6.2
4.5
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.5
5.2
5.4
5.6
Liberia
10.0
8.5
6.8
7.6
9.9
7.7
8.8
12.4
23.4
22.3
20.5
13.5
27.2
21.8
19.0
Madagascar
10.2
9.5
5.7
5.8
6.1
7.4
6.7
8.3
7.3
6.7
6.3
5.0
6.1
6.4
6.0
Malawi
8.1
7.6
21.3
28.3
23.8
21.9
21.7
11.5
9.2
8.7
8.2
5.0
9.9
8.3
7.7
Mali
2.7
3.1
5.3
–2.4
2.7
1.4
–1.8
1.8
1.7
1.7
2.2
2.2
1.0
2.2
2.2
Mauritius
5.7
6.5
3.9
3.5
3.2
1.3
1.0
3.7
3.2
2.1
3.7
3.4
1.8
4.1
3.6
Mozambique
11.0
11.2
2.6
4.3
2.6
3.6
19.9
15.1
3.9
4.2
5.5
5.5
3.5
5.5
5.5
Namibia
7.1
5.0
6.7
5.6
5.3
3.4
6.7
6.1
4.3
5.2
5.5
5.5
5.1
5.2
5.4
Niger
2.5
2.9
0.5
2.3
–0.9
1.0
0.2
2.4
3.0
2.4
2.1
2.0
1.6
2.2
2.0
Nigeria
12.9
10.8
12.2
8.5
8.0
9.0
15.7
16.5
12.1
11.7
11.7
11.0
11.4
12.1
11.7
Rwanda
7.9
5.7
6.3
4.2
1.8
2.5
5.7
4.8
1.4
3.5
5.0
5.0
1.1
5.0
5.0
São Tomé and Príncipe
16.2
14.3
10.6
8.1
7.0
5.2
5.4
5.7
7.9
7.8
5.5
3.0
9.0
6.0
5.0
Senegal
2.1
3.4
1.4
0.7
–1.1
0.1
0.8
1.3
0.5
1.3
1.5
1.5
1.3
1.9
1.5
Seychelles
7.6
2.6
7.1
4.3
1.4
4.0
–1.0
2.9
3.7
3.4
3.0
3.0
3.4
3.9
3.2
Sierra Leone
8.3
6.8
6.6
5.5
4.6
6.7
10.9
18.2
16.9
15.8
13.0
8.2
17.5
14.0
12.0
South Africa
5.9
5.0
5.6
5.8
6.1
4.6
6.3
5.3
4.6
5.0
5.4
5.5
4.9
5.3
5.5
South Sudan
. . .
. . .
45.1
0.0
1.7
52.8
379.8
187.9
83.5
24.5
16.9
8.0
40.1
35.9
10.8
Tanzania
6.6
12.7
16.0
7.9
6.1
5.6
5.2
5.3
3.5
3.5
4.5
4.9
3.3
4.1
4.9
Togo
3.0
3.6
2.6
1.8
0.2
1.8
0.9
–0.7
0.7
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.8
1.4
Uganda
6.4
15.0
12.7
4.9
3.1
5.4
5.5
5.6
2.6
3.6
4.4
5.0
2.2
4.0
4.8
Zambia
15.4
8.7
6.6
7.0
7.8
10.1
17.9
6.6
7.0
10.7
12.0
10.0
8.0
13.5
10.5
Zimbabwe11
–5.6
3.5
3.7
1.6
–0.2
–2.4
–1.6
0.9
10.6
73.4
9.4
3.0
42.1
40.1
4.8
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3For many countries, inflation for the earlier years is measured on the basis of a retail price index. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation data with broader and more up-to-date coverage are 
typically used for more recent years.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in the group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
5Starting in 2014, data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
6Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
7Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward.
8See country-specific notes for Argentina, Libya, and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
10Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
11The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values 
may differ from authorities’ estimates.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
168	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP unless noted otherwise)
Average
Projections
2001–10
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.5
–4.1
–3.4
–2.8
–3.1
–2.8
–2.9
–3.2
–3.0
–2.6
Output Gap2
–0.4
–1.7
–1.3
–0.6
–0.6
0.0
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.5
Structural Balance2
–4.2
–3.7
–3.0
–2.7
–3.0
–2.9
–3.1
–3.5
–3.3
–2.8
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
–4.8
–4.1
–3.7
–3.2
–3.9
–3.8
–4.3
–4.6
–4.4
–3.7
Output Gap2
–0.4
–1.9
–1.2
–0.1
–0.2
0.2
1.1
1.4
1.3
1.0
Structural Balance2
–4.3
–4.0
–3.4
–3.2
–3.9
–4.0
–4.7
–5.2
–5.0
–4.1
Net Debt 
47.8
80.9
80.5
80.4
81.7
80.7
80.9
83.4
86.2
94.3
Gross Debt 
68.3
104.8
104.4
104.7
106.9
106.2
105.8
106.7
107.5
110.3
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.0
–3.1
–2.5
–2.0
–1.6
–1.0
–0.6
–1.0
–0.9
–1.1
Output Gap2
0.4
–2.7
–2.3
–1.8
–1.2
–0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.1
Structural Balance2
–3.2
–1.3
–1.0
–0.9
–0.8
–0.7
–0.7
–0.9
–1.1
–1.2
Net Debt
56.4
74.6
75.0
73.8
72.8
70.9
68.9
67.9
66.7
62.3
Gross Debt
70.5
91.6
91.8
89.9
89.1
86.8
85.0
83.6
81.8
75.7
Germany 
Net Lending/Borrowing
–2.8
–0.1
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.7
1.1
1.1
0.7
Output Gap2
–0.5
–0.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.9
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.0
Structural Balance2
–2.2
0.2
0.9
0.8
1.0
0.9
1.3
0.7
0.6
0.7
Net Debt
53.9
57.5
54.0
51.0
48.2
44.5
41.0
38.6
36.2
28.4
Gross Debt
66.1
77.4
74.5
70.8
67.9
63.9
59.8
56.9
53.8
43.7
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.8
–4.1
–3.9
–3.6
–3.4
–2.7
–2.6
–3.3
–2.4
–2.6
Output Gap2
0.2
–0.8
–0.9
–0.8
–0.8
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.0
–3.5
–3.3
–3.0
–2.8
–2.6
–2.5
–2.5
–2.5
–2.6
Net Debt
59.1
83.0
85.5
86.4
87.5
87.5
87.6
88.2
87.7
85.2
Gross Debt
68.3
93.4
94.9
95.6
96.6
98.5
98.6
99.2
98.7
96.2
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.4
–2.9
–3.0
–2.6
–2.5
–2.4
–2.1
–2.7
–3.4
–3.8
Output Gap2
0.0
–4.1
–4.1
–3.4
–2.7
–1.5
–0.9
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
Structural Balance2,4
–4.0
–0.6
–1.1
–0.7
–1.4
–1.6
–1.7
–2.1
–3.1
–4.1
Net Debt
95.7
116.7
118.8
119.5
118.9
119.0
120.1
121.5
122.5
127.8
Gross Debt
104.2
129.0
131.8
131.6
131.3
131.3
132.1
133.4
134.1
138.5
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.4
–7.9
–5.6
–3.8
–3.7
–3.2
–3.2
–2.8
–2.1
–2.1
Output Gap2
–1.6
–1.7
–2.0
–1.5
–1.7
–0.5
–0.5
–0.2
–0.2
0.1
Structural Balance2
–6.0
–7.5
–5.5
–4.3
–4.1
–3.4
–3.1
–2.8
–2.1
–2.1
Net Debt
99.9
146.4
148.5
147.8
152.6
151.1
153.2
153.6
153.2
154.5
Gross Debt5
175.9
232.5
236.1
231.6
236.3
235.0
237.1
237.5
237.0
238.3
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.1
–5.3
–5.3
–4.2
–2.9
–1.8
–1.4
–1.3
–1.2
–0.6
Output Gap2
0.6
–1.8
–0.7
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.6
–3.9
–4.6
–3.9
–2.8
–1.9
–1.4
–1.2
–1.0
–0.6
Net Debt
40.4
76.8
78.8
79.3
78.8
77.5
77.5
76.2
75.0
70.9
Gross Debt
45.4
85.2
87.0
87.9
87.9
87.1
86.9
85.7
84.4
80.3
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
–0.2
–1.5
0.2
–0.1
–0.4
–0.3
–0.4
–0.6
–0.6
–0.6
Output Gap2
–0.3
–1.3
–0.8
–2.1
–2.4
–0.8
–0.5
–0.4
0.1
0.1
Structural Balance2
–0.1
–0.9
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.1
–0.2
–0.4
–0.7
–0.6
Net Debt6
29.7
29.8
28.6
28.5
28.8
27.6
27.9
26.6
25.8
23.0
Gross Debt
74.5
86.2
85.7
91.3
91.8
90.1
90.6
88.0
84.7
72.0
Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values 
for the relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the 
System of National Accounts (SNA) 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ defined-benefit 
pension plans. Fiscal data for the aggregated major advanced economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and the United States is therefore for the 
period 2001–07.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Excludes one-time measures based on the authorities’ data and, if unavailable, on receipts from the sale of assets.
5Nonconsolidated basis.
6Includes equity shares.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
169
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2001–10
2011–20
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
5.0
3.9
7.3
3.1
3.6
3.9
2.8
2.2
5.4
3.8
3.4
3.9
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
3.9
–0.3
11.0
–1.8
–0.7
–1.8
–13.2
–4.0
4.3
5.2
–1.4
0.8
In SDRs
2.4
0.5
7.3
1.2
0.1
–1.7
–5.8
–3.4
4.5
3.1
–0.1
0.1
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.9
3.5
6.1
2.9
3.2
3.9
3.8
1.8
4.4
3.1
2.7
3.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8.1
4.5
8.9
3.6
4.7
3.2
1.4
2.9
7.2
4.3
4.0
4.8
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.5
3.4
5.3
1.7
2.5
3.9
4.9
2.5
4.3
3.3
3.0
3.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
5.0
11.6
5.4
5.2
4.3
–1.0
1.8
7.5
5.6
4.6
5.3
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.1
–1.5
–0.7
0.9
0.3
1.9
1.2
–0.2
–0.6
–0.3
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.0
–0.2
3.5
0.6
–0.6
–0.6
–4.3
–1.6
0.8
1.3
–0.9
0.0
Trade in Goods 
World Trade1
Volume
5.0
3.8
7.4
2.8
3.4
3.0
2.2
2.1
5.6
3.9
3.3
3.9
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
3.9
–0.5
12.2
–1.9
–1.3
–2.4
–14.4
–4.8
4.8
5.7
–1.6
0.7
In SDRs
2.4
0.3
8.4
1.1
–0.5
–2.3
–7.1
–4.2
5.1
3.5
–0.3
–0.1
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
1.9
–0.1
4.1
2.7
–3.0
–0.5
–2.3
–5.2
–0.3
2.7
1.0
0.2
Oil
10.8
–2.9
31.7
0.9
–0.9
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
29.4
–13.4
–0.2
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
8.9
–1.2
20.0
–7.8
–5.4
–5.4
–17.1
–1.0
6.4
1.6
–0.2
1.1
Food
5.6
–0.3
18.8
–3.8
0.7
–1.4
–16.8
0.0
3.9
–0.6
–2.9
2.1
Beverages
8.4
–1.4
24.1
–18.1
–13.7
20.1
–7.2
–3.1
–4.7
–8.2
–2.1
6.8
Agricultural Raw Materials
5.9
–2.3
24.3
–20.5
–4.4
–7.5
–11.5
0.0
5.2
1.9
–3.7
–0.2
Metal
14.5
–3.5
12.7
–17.8
–3.9
–12.2
–27.3
–5.3
22.1
6.2
2.4
–2.2
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
0.5
0.7
0.6
5.9
–2.2
–0.4
6.0
–4.6
0.0
0.6
2.3
–0.5
Oil
9.2
–2.1
27.2
4.0
–0.1
–7.5
–42.7
–15.1
23.6
26.7
–12.3
–0.9
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
7.4
–0.4
15.9
–4.9
–4.7
–5.4
–10.0
–0.4
6.7
–0.5
1.1
0.4
Food
4.0
0.5
14.8
–0.8
1.5
–1.3
–9.7
0.7
4.2
–2.6
–1.6
1.3
Beverages
6.8
–0.6
20.0
–15.6
–13.0
20.1
0.7
–2.5
–4.5
–10.1
–0.8
6.0
Agricultural Raw Materials
4.3
–1.5
20.1
–18.1
–3.7
–7.5
–4.0
0.6
5.5
–0.2
–2.4
–0.9
Metal
12.9
–2.7
8.9
–15.3
–3.1
–12.1
–21.1
–4.7
22.5
4.0
3.8
–2.9
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
–1.7
1.3
–0.7
11.2
–6.1
–0.5
17.0
–5.0
–2.3
–1.9
4.3
–0.9
Oil
6.9
–1.5
25.5
9.2
–4.1
–7.6
–36.8
–15.4
20.8
23.6
–10.6
–1.3
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
5.1
0.2
14.4
–0.2
–8.5
–5.5
–0.7
–0.8
4.3
–2.9
3.1
0.0
Food
1.8
1.1
13.3
4.2
–2.6
–1.4
–0.4
0.3
1.8
–5.0
0.4
1.0
Beverages
4.5
–0.1
18.4
–11.4
–16.4
20.0
11.1
–2.8
–6.6
–12.3
1.2
5.6
Agricultural Raw Materials
2.1
–0.9
18.5
–14.0
–7.5
–7.6
5.9
0.3
3.1
–2.6
–0.5
–1.2
Metal
10.4
–2.2
7.4
–11.0
–7.0
–12.2
–12.9
–5.0
19.7
1.5
5.8
–3.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
170	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2001–10
2011–20
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Trade in Goods
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.8
3.3
6.4
2.6
2.7
3.1
3.2
1.5
4.5
3.2
2.3
3.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8.0
4.2
7.9
3.9
4.7
2.7
1.1
2.9
6.9
3.9
3.8
4.7
Fuel Exporters
4.8
1.9
5.8
2.8
2.1
–0.3
2.9
1.5
1.0
–0.1
0.3
3.1
Nonfuel Exporters
9.3
4.9
8.7
4.3
5.9
3.9
0.4
3.3
8.4
4.9
4.8
5.1
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.6
3.3
6.0
1.1
2.2
3.4
3.8
2.2
4.9
3.6
3.2
3.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.2
4.8
11.4
5.1
4.8
2.6
–0.9
2.2
7.6
5.6
4.6
5.4
Fuel Exporters
11.0
1.9
12.0
8.6
3.7
1.1
–7.5
–5.5
3.1
0.4
1.5
3.2
Nonfuel Exporters
8.9
5.4
11.3
4.4
5.0
3.0
0.6
3.8
8.4
6.5
5.1
5.8
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
1.7
0.2
6.1
–0.4
0.3
–1.8
–6.5
–2.2
4.4
2.7
–0.5
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
0.4
13.0
3.0
–1.3
–3.1
–8.8
–7.2
6.7
4.8
–0.7
–0.4
Fuel Exporters
7.8
–1.0
25.6
4.4
–2.6
–6.9
–29.7
–12.8
17.0
15.2
–6.7
–1.0
Nonfuel Exporters
3.0
0.8
8.0
2.4
–0.7
–1.5
–0.8
–5.6
4.1
2.1
1.1
–0.2
Imports
Advanced Economies
1.7
0.1
8.1
0.6
–0.6
–2.0
–8.1
–3.5
4.5
3.4
–0.2
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.2
0.5
8.1
2.4
–0.8
–2.6
–4.5
–5.6
5.5
3.6
0.2
–0.4
Fuel Exporters
3.7
0.6
6.2
3.1
0.0
–2.4
–3.1
–3.3
3.7
1.3
1.2
–0.4
Nonfuel Exporters
3.0
0.5
8.6
2.3
–1.0
–2.7
–4.8
–6.0
5.9
4.1
0.1
–0.4
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.0
–1.8
–1.0
0.9
0.2
1.7
1.4
–0.1
–0.7
–0.3
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.2
–0.1
4.5
0.6
–0.5
–0.4
–4.5
–1.7
1.1
1.1
–0.9
0.0
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
3.0
–0.9
21.2
1.8
–6.5
–1.8
–22.2
–13.6
12.0
12.7
–5.6
0.4
Emerging and Developing Asia
–1.3
0.6
–2.7
1.4
1.1
2.4
8.5
0.0
–3.4
–2.1
1.3
0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.8
1.7
0.9
–0.2
0.3
–2.7
–2.1
1.6
0.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.3
–0.7
5.1
–1.7
–1.2
–2.5
–8.9
0.6
3.5
–0.4
–0.5
–0.1
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
3.4
–1.5
12.8
0.0
–0.1
–4.6
–25.1
–5.3
10.6
10.6
–6.6
–1.0
Middle East and North Africa
3.5
–1.5
13.0
0.5
0.0
–4.7
–25.9
–5.9
10.9
11.0
–6.7
–1.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
3.9
–0.7
12.7
–1.5
–2.3
–2.8
–15.0
–0.6
7.5
3.6
–6.5
0.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
3.9
–1.5
18.3
1.3
–2.6
–4.6
–27.5
–9.9
12.9
13.7
–7.8
–0.6
Nonfuel
0.0
0.3
–0.5
0.1
0.3
1.3
4.3
0.5
–1.7
–1.9
1.0
0.2
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
13,467
23,299
22,306
22,602
23,324
23,751
21,101
20,714
22,774
24,838
25,206 26,375
Goods
10,664
18,106
17,923
18,124
18,546
18,633
16,201
15,743
17,436
19,082
19,264 20,107
Average Oil Price4
10.8
–2.9
31.7
0.9
–0.9
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
29.4
–13.4
–0.2
In US Dollars a Barrel
54.25
74.23
104.05
105.01
104.07
96.25
50.79
42.84
52.81
68.33
59.16
59.02
Export Unit Value of Manufactures5
1.9
–0.1
4.1
2.7
–3.0
–0.5
–2.3
–5.2
–0.3
2.7
1.0
0.2
1Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
2As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) 
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16 
shares in world commodity imports.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
4Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices.
5Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
171
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances 
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Advanced Economies
–39.9
25.5
212.8
238.8
286.6
328.0
423.3
371.9
303.8
267.8
354.4
United States
–445.7
–426.8
–348.8
–365.2
–407.8
–432.9
–449.1
–468.8
–513.4
–583.3
–548.8
Euro Area
–12.4
173.5
300.7
340.4
342.6
383.6
410.6
403.6
394.8
399.6
361.4
Germany
229.7
248.9
252.5
291.0
301.2
297.5
295.0
294.3
279.6
282.0
305.7
France
–24.6
–25.9
–14.3
–27.3
–9.0
–18.5
–14.8
–19.6
–10.2
–0.5
–25.4
Italy
–68.3
–7.0
21.0
41.1
27.1
47.4
54.2
53.5
58.9
54.3
36.5
Spain
–47.4
–3.1
20.7
14.9
13.9
27.9
24.3
11.1
11.8
12.5
14.5
Japan
129.8
59.7
45.9
36.8
136.4
194.9
196.1
174.1
180.4
196.6
237.9
United Kingdom
–51.6
–100.9
–141.9
–149.6
–142.4
–139.3
–88.1
–109.1
–117.4
–115.9
–128.1
Canada
–49.6
–65.7
–59.4
–43.2
–55.1
–49.0
–46.3
–45.3
–53.7
–51.7
–54.7
Other Advanced Economies1
262.0
272.7
343.7
357.0
360.9
344.4
324.8
345.7
338.3
344.5
395.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
376.0
346.2
173.5
173.9
–57.0
–76.3
–9.5
–23.7
–149.4
–200.9
–471.5
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
107.3
67.4
17.9
57.6
53.0
0.6
20.4
109.3
83.6
78.0
46.7
Russia
97.3
71.3
33.4
57.5
67.7
24.5
33.3
114.9
92.1
84.4
56.9
Excluding Russia
10.0
–3.9
–15.5
0.1
–14.7
–23.9
–12.9
–5.6
–8.6
–6.5
–10.2
Emerging and Developing Asia
97.6
123.1
101.2
230.2
310.6
227.9
151.7
–25.1
–16.2
–44.2
–186.6
China
136.1
215.4
148.2
236.0
304.2
202.2
164.9
49.2
59.6
40.8
–40.4
India
–78.2
–87.8
–32.3
–26.8
–22.1
–14.4
–48.7
–68.5
–73.6
–77.9
–117.6
ASEAN-53
49.4
6.3
–3.6
22.4
30.7
43.2
47.8
13.7
14.5
11.4
–7.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
–119.4
–81.8
–71.9
–59.0
–35.7
–33.5
–49.1
–44.4
–18.1
–29.8
–60.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
–111.0
–146.4
–169.2
–183.0
–169.1
–98.5
–79.0
–100.2
–103.6
–110.0
–136.2
Brazil
–76.3
–83.8
–79.8
–101.4
–54.5
–24.0
–7.2
–14.5
–33.2
–33.1
–46.6
Mexico
–12.5
–18.7
–31.8
–24.8
–30.5
–24.3
–19.4
–22.2
–21.1
–24.7
–29.3
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
410.1
410.7
331.3
190.8
–123.6
–119.4
–20.3
79.3
–31.5
–25.6
–65.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
–8.7
–26.9
–35.9
–62.8
–92.2
–53.4
–33.2
–42.6
–63.6
–69.2
–69.2
South Africa
–9.2
–20.3
–21.2
–17.8
–14.6
–8.2
–8.3
–12.4
–12.7
–14.4
–17.0
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
619.8
596.9
465.4
311.8
–78.0
–73.7
80.5
274.5
114.7
112.3
52.9
Nonfuel
–243.9
–250.7
–292.0
–137.9
21.0
–2.6
–90.0
–298.2
–264.1
–313.3
–524.4
Of Which, Primary Products
–31.6
–67.6
–86.9
–59.2
–66.1
–43.9
–58.3
–72.1
–54.6
–60.0
–64.4
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–338.9
–412.7
–384.5
–354.4
–306.3
–212.3
–221.7
–294.7
–305.6
–327.0
–452.9
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
–37.0
–54.7
–53.9
–39.2
–49.3
–50.2
–41.5
–37.8
–39.5
–41.2
–43.4
Memorandum
World
336.1
371.7
386.3
412.7
229.5
251.7
413.8
348.2
154.5
66.9
–117.1
European Union
77.1
208.3
284.8
302.5
299.1
321.8
445.1
388.0
367.0
373.3
332.8
Low-Income Developing Countries
–22.5
–31.0
–37.8
–44.9
–78.6
–40.7
–33.7
–50.4
–62.9
–72.0
–79.4
Middle East and North Africa
405.1
413.2
333.8
192.8
–121.5
–115.9
–8.6
97.3
–17.2
–13.3
–44.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
172	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.6
United States
–2.9
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.3
–2.3
–2.4
–2.6
–2.1
Euro Area
–0.1
1.4
2.3
2.5
2.9
3.2
3.2
3.0
2.9
2.8
2.2
Germany
6.1
7.0
6.7
7.5
8.9
8.5
8.0
7.4
7.1
6.8
6.2
France
–0.9
–1.0
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.8
–0.6
–0.7
–0.4
0.0
–0.8
Italy
–3.0
–0.3
1.0
1.9
1.5
2.5
2.8
2.6
2.9
2.6
1.6
Spain
–3.2
–0.2
1.5
1.1
1.2
2.3
1.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
Japan
2.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
3.1
4.0
4.0
3.5
3.5
3.6
3.5
United Kingdom
–2.0
–3.8
–5.1
–4.9
–4.9
–5.2
–3.3
–3.9
–4.2
–4.0
–3.8
Canada
–2.8
–3.6
–3.2
–2.4
–3.5
–3.2
–2.8
–2.6
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
Other Advanced Economies1
4.0
4.1
5.0
5.2
5.7
5.3
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.4
4.2
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
1.4
1.2
0.6
0.6
–0.2
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
–0.5
–0.9
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
4.1
2.4
0.6
2.1
2.8
0.0
1.0
5.0
3.8
3.4
1.7
Russia
4.8
3.2
1.5
2.8
5.0
1.9
2.1
7.0
5.7
5.1
3.0
Excluding Russia
1.7
–0.6
–2.2
0.0
–2.8
–5.1
–2.5
–1.0
–1.5
–1.1
–1.2
Emerging and Developing Asia
0.8
1.0
0.7
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.6
China
1.8
2.5
1.5
2.2
2.7
1.8
1.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
–0.2
India
–4.3
–4.8
–1.7
–1.3
–1.0
–0.6
–1.8
–2.5
–2.5
–2.4
–2.5
ASEAN-53
2.6
0.3
–0.2
1.1
1.5
2.0
2.1
0.6
0.6
0.4
–0.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
–6.3
–4.4
–3.6
–2.9
–2.0
–1.8
–2.5
–2.2
–0.9
–1.4
–2.1
Latin America and the Caribbean
–1.9
–2.5
–2.8
–3.1
–3.2
–1.9
–1.4
–1.9
–1.9
–2.0
–2.0
Brazil
–2.9
–3.4
–3.2
–4.1
–3.0
–1.3
–0.4
–0.8
–1.7
–1.6
–1.9
Mexico
–1.1
–1.6
–2.5
–1.9
–2.6
–2.3
–1.7
–1.8
–1.7
–1.9
–1.9
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
12.7
12.4
9.8
5.5
–4.0
–3.9
–0.6
2.3
–0.9
–0.7
–1.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
–0.6
–1.7
–2.2
–3.6
–5.9
–3.7
–2.1
–2.6
–3.7
–3.7
–2.8
South Africa
–2.2
–5.1
–5.8
–5.1
–4.6
–2.8
–2.4
–3.4
–3.4
–3.7
–3.7
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
10.5
9.6
7.3
5.1
–1.6
–1.6
1.6
5.2
2.2
2.0
0.8
Nonfuel
–1.2
–1.1
–1.2
–0.6
0.1
0.0
–0.3
–1.1
–0.9
–1.0
–1.2
Of Which, Primary Products
–1.8
–3.6
–4.5
–3.2
–3.5
–2.5
–3.0
–3.8
–2.9
–3.0
–2.5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–2.6
–3.0
–2.7
–2.4
–2.3
–1.6
–1.5
–2.0
–2.0
–2.0
–2.0
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
–4.8
–6.6
–6.1
–4.4
–5.7
–5.9
–5.3
–4.5
–4.3
–4.2
–3.5
Memorandum
World
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1
–0.1
European Union
0.4
1.2
1.6
1.6
1.8
1.9
2.6
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.4
Low-Income Developing Countries
–1.5
–1.9
–2.1
–2.3
–4.2
–2.3
–1.8
–2.5
–2.9
–3.1
–2.4
Middle East and North Africa
13.5
13.5
10.6
6.0
–4.3
–4.2
–0.3
3.1
–0.5
–0.4
–1.1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
173
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Advanced Economies
–0.3
0.2
1.5
1.6
2.1
2.4
2.9
2.4
1.9
1.6
1.8
United States
–21.0
–19.2
–15.2
–15.4
–18.0
–19.5
–19.1
–18.7
–20.1
–22.1
–17.4
Euro Area
–0.4
5.4
8.8
9.5
10.5
11.8
11.6
10.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
13.6
15.3
14.8
16.3
19.0
18.5
16.9
15.7
14.8
14.2
12.8
France
–3.0
–3.2
–1.7
–3.1
–1.2
–2.4
–1.8
–2.2
–1.1
–0.1
–2.2
Italy
–11.1
–1.2
3.4
6.5
4.9
8.6
8.9
8.2
9.0
7.9
4.4
Spain
–11.0
–0.8
4.7
3.3
3.5
6.8
5.4
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.3
Japan
13.9
6.5
5.5
4.3
17.4
24.0
22.4
18.8
19.6
20.7
21.7
United Kingdom
–6.4
–12.6
–17.3
–17.5
–17.9
–18.5
–11.1
–12.9
–13.6
–13.1
–13.0
Canada
–9.1
–11.9
–10.7
–7.6
–11.2
–10.3
–9.1
–8.3
–10.1
–9.4
–8.5
Other Advanced Economies1
6.7
6.8
8.3
8.6
9.7
9.5
8.2
8.1
7.8
7.6
7.3
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
4.5
3.7
2.0
2.2
–0.6
–1.0
–0.1
–0.3
–1.6
–2.0
–3.8
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
12.1
7.4
2.0
6.8
9.0
0.1
3.3
14.7
11.5
10.2
5.1
Russia
17.0
12.1
5.6
10.2
17.2
7.4
8.1
22.6
18.8
16.5
9.2
Excluding Russia
3.2
–1.2
–5.1
0.0
–7.5
–13.9
–6.3
–2.3
–3.6
–2.6
–3.4
Emerging and Developing Asia
2.8
3.4
2.6
5.7
8.2
6.2
3.7
–0.6
–0.3
–0.9
–2.9
China
6.8
9.9
6.3
9.6
12.9
9.2
6.8
1.9
2.2
1.4
–1.2
India
–17.2
–19.4
–6.9
–5.6
–5.3
–3.2
–9.7
–12.1
–11.9
–11.4
–11.8
ASEAN-53
5.5
0.7
–0.4
2.3
3.4
4.7
4.6
1.2
1.2
0.9
–0.4
Emerging and Developing Europe
–17.2
–11.8
–9.7
–7.5
–5.0
–4.6
–6.0
–4.9
–1.9
–3.0
–4.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
–9.0
–11.5
–13.4
–14.7
–15.6
–9.4
–6.7
–8.0
–8.1
–8.2
–8.1
Brazil
–26.1
–29.8
–28.5
–38.4
–24.3
–11.0
–2.9
–5.3
–11.6
–11.1
–12.7
Mexico
–3.4
–4.8
–8.0
–5.9
–7.5
–6.1
–4.4
–4.6
–4.3
–4.8
–4.4
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
26.8
24.3
20.8
13.6
–10.0
–10.6
–1.9
5.7
–2.4
–1.6
–4.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
–1.8
–5.6
–7.5
–13.8
–26.8
–16.9
–9.0
–10.2
–15.6
–16.0
–12.9
South Africa
–7.3
–17.3
–18.7
–16.1
–15.2
–9.1
–8.0
–11.3
–11.3
–12.4
–12.3
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
25.3
22.5
18.4
13.8
–4.2
–4.7
4.5
13.5
6.1
6.0
2.6
Nonfuel
–4.2
–4.1
–4.6
–2.1
0.3
0.0
–1.4
–4.2
–3.5
–3.9
–5.2
Of Which, Primary Products
–6.5
–14.0
–18.2
–12.8
–16.6
–11.2
–13.1
–15.2
–11.2
–11.8
–10.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–8.6
–10.3
–9.4
–8.6
–8.4
–5.8
–5.4
–6.5
–6.4
–6.4
–6.7
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
–14.6
–21.8
–21.5
–16.7
–25.3
–28.3
–20.6
–16.4
–16.2
–15.6
–13.0
Memorandum
World
1.5
1.5
1.7
1.8
1.1
1.2
1.8
1.4
0.6
0.3
–0.4
European Union
1.0
2.8
3.7
3.8
4.1
4.4
5.6
4.5
4.2
4.1
3.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
–4.8
–6.5
–7.3
–8.5
–16.4
–8.5
–6.0
–8.0
–9.3
–9.7
–7.4
Middle East and North Africa
27.1
24.9
21.4
14.0
–10.1
–10.6
–0.9
7.2
–1.3
–0.7
–2.9
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
3Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
174	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.6
United States
–2.9
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.3
–2.3
–2.4
–2.6
–2.1
Euro Area1
–0.1
1.4
2.3
2.5
2.9
3.2
3.2
3.0
2.9
2.8
2.2
Germany
6.1
7.0
6.7
7.5
8.9
8.5
8.0
7.4
7.1
6.8
6.2
France
–0.9
–1.0
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.8
–0.6
–0.7
–0.4
0.0
–0.8
Italy
–3.0
–0.3
1.0
1.9
1.5
2.5
2.8
2.6
2.9
2.6
1.6
Spain
–3.2
–0.2
1.5
1.1
1.2
2.3
1.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
Netherlands
9.0
10.7
9.7
8.5
6.3
8.0
10.5
9.8
9.3
8.9
7.5
Belgium
–1.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.9
–1.0
–0.6
0.7
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.4
Austria
1.6
1.5
1.9
2.5
1.7
2.5
2.0
2.3
2.0
1.9
1.9
Greece
–10.0
–2.4
–2.6
–2.3
–1.5
–2.3
–2.4
–3.4
–2.7
–2.6
–3.4
Portugal
–6.0
–1.8
1.6
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.5
–0.6
–0.4
–0.5
–1.2
Ireland
–1.6
–3.4
1.6
1.1
4.4
–4.2
8.5
10.0
9.1
8.3
6.4
Finland
–1.7
–2.3
–2.2
–1.8
–0.7
–0.7
–0.7
–0.5
0.1
0.4
0.9
Slovak Republic
–5.0
0.9
1.9
1.1
–1.7
–2.2
–2.0
–2.0
–1.0
–0.7
0.0
Lithuania
–4.5
–1.4
0.8
3.2
–2.8
–0.8
0.9
1.4
1.1
0.6
–1.5
Slovenia
0.2
2.1
4.4
5.8
4.5
5.5
7.2
6.5
4.4
3.4
–0.4
Luxembourg
6.0
5.6
5.4
5.2
5.1
5.1
4.9
5.2
5.0
5.0
4.9
Latvia
–3.2
–3.6
–2.7
–1.7
–0.5
1.6
0.7
–1.0
–1.4
–1.7
–3.0
Estonia
1.3
–1.9
0.5
0.8
1.8
2.0
3.2
1.7
1.5
1.1
–0.4
Cyprus
–4.1
–6.0
–4.9
–4.3
–1.5
–5.1
–8.4
–5.6
–7.3
–6.5
–5.8
Malta
–0.2
1.7
2.7
8.7
2.4
3.4
10.4
10.1
9.3
8.8
8.0
Japan
2.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
3.1
4.0
4.0
3.5
3.5
3.6
3.5
United Kingdom
–2.0
–3.8
–5.1
–4.9
–4.9
–5.2
–3.3
–3.9
–4.2
–4.0
–3.8
Korea
1.4
4.0
5.9
5.9
7.6
6.9
4.9
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.5
Canada
–2.8
–3.6
–3.2
–2.4
–3.5
–3.2
–2.8
–2.6
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
Australia
–3.1
–4.3
–3.4
–3.1
–4.6
–3.3
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–2.1
–2.5
Taiwan Province of China
7.8
8.9
10.0
11.5
14.2
13.7
14.4
11.6
11.4
10.7
9.5
Switzerland
7.8
10.7
11.6
8.5
11.2
9.4
6.7
9.8
9.0
9.0
9.0
Sweden
5.6
5.6
5.2
4.5
4.1
3.8
2.8
2.0
2.4
2.5
2.9
Singapore
21.6
16.9
15.8
17.9
17.0
17.5
16.0
17.7
17.6
17.1
15.0
Hong Kong SAR
5.6
1.6
1.5
1.4
3.3
4.0
4.6
3.5
3.2
3.4
3.5
Norway
12.4
12.5
10.3
10.5
7.9
4.0
5.6
8.1
7.4
7.2
6.8
Czech Republic
–2.1
–1.6
–0.5
0.2
0.2
1.6
1.1
0.2
–0.6
–0.8
–1.8
Israel
2.0
0.6
3.0
4.3
5.3
3.7
2.6
1.9
1.7
1.4
1.7
Denmark
6.6
6.3
7.8
8.9
8.2
7.9
8.0
6.0
5.5
5.1
4.4
New Zealand
–2.8
–3.9
–3.2
–3.1
–3.0
–2.2
–2.9
–4.0
–4.4
–4.3
–3.7
Puerto Rico
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
40.9
39.3
40.2
34.2
25.3
27.2
33.0
35.0
37.4
38.7
41.7
Iceland
–5.1
–3.8
5.8
3.9
5.1
7.5
3.6
2.9
0.8
1.1
1.1
San Marino
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
–0.5
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.2
Memorandum
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Major Advanced Economies
–0.8
–0.9
–0.7
–0.6
–0.4
–0.3
–0.1
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
–0.4
Euro Area2
0.8
2.3
2.8
3.0
3.4
3.4
3.8
3.5
3.5
3.4
2.7
1Data corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
2Data calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
stAtIstIcAL APPenDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
175
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Commonwealth of Independent States1
4.1
2.4
0.6
2.1
2.8
0.0
1.0
5.0
3.8
3.4
1.7
Russia
4.8
3.2
1.5
2.8
5.0
1.9
2.1
7.0
5.7
5.1
3.0
Excluding Russia
1.7
–0.6
–2.2
0.0
–2.8
–5.1
–2.5
–1.0
–1.5
–1.1
–1.2
Armenia
–10.4
–10.0
–7.3
–7.6
–2.6
–2.3
–2.8
–6.2
–4.6
–4.3
–4.5
Azerbaijan
26.0
21.4
16.6
13.9
–0.4
–3.6
4.1
12.6
11.7
13.3
12.8
Belarus
–8.2
–2.8
–10.0
–6.6
–3.3
–3.4
–1.6
–2.3
–4.0
–2.3
–2.3
Georgia
–12.8
–11.9
–5.9
–10.8
–12.6
–13.1
–8.8
–7.9
–8.0
–7.8
–7.0
Kazakhstan
5.3
0.5
0.5
2.8
–2.8
–6.5
–3.3
0.6
0.1
0.6
1.5
Kyrgyz Republic
–2.9
3.7
–13.3
–16.0
–16.0
–11.6
–6.2
–9.8
–10.9
–8.6
–9.3
Moldova
–9.8
–6.4
–4.1
–4.4
–4.8
–3.3
–6.2
–9.9
–7.7
–8.0
–6.8
Tajikistan
–7.3
–9.2
–7.8
–2.8
–6.0
–5.2
2.1
–5.3
–7.0
–6.8
–6.3
Turkmenistan
–0.8
–0.9
–7.3
–6.1
–15.6
–20.2
–10.3
3.1
–2.3
–3.2
–5.7
Ukraine2
–6.3
–8.1
–9.2
–3.9
1.7
–1.5
–2.2
–3.7
–2.5
–2.4
–2.6
Uzbekistan
5.7
1.2
2.8
1.7
0.7
0.3
1.4
–7.8
–5.6
–4.7
–4.4
Emerging and Developing Asia
0.8
1.0
0.7
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.6
Bangladesh
–1.0
0.7
1.2
1.3
1.9
0.6
–2.1
–2.8
–1.9
–1.7
–1.9
Bhutan
–29.8
–21.4
–25.4
–26.4
–28.3
–29.4
–22.8
–22.7
–15.0
–10.6
6.2
Brunei Darussalam
34.7
29.8
20.9
31.9
16.7
12.9
16.7
11.0
17.1
17.4
16.7
Cambodia
–7.9
–8.6
–8.4
–8.5
–8.7
–8.4
–8.0
–10.5
–9.1
–9.0
–7.9
China
1.8
2.5
1.5
2.2
2.7
1.8
1.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
–0.2
Fiji
–5.1
–1.4
–9.7
–6.6
–2.7
–3.2
–6.2
–5.9
–5.1
–4.4
–3.9
India
–4.3
–4.8
–1.7
–1.3
–1.0
–0.6
–1.8
–2.5
–2.5
–2.4
–2.5
Indonesia
0.2
–2.7
–3.2
–3.1
–2.0
–1.8
–1.6
–3.0
–2.7
–2.6
–2.4
Kiribati
–13.1
–4.4
8.3
24.9
46.2
20.1
20.5
10.3
4.3
0.4
–7.2
Lao P.D.R.
–15.3
–29.0
–32.4
–29.3
–26.8
–16.9
–16.9
–17.1
–16.4
–14.9
–10.3
Malaysia
10.9
5.2
3.5
4.4
3.0
2.4
3.0
2.3
2.1
2.1
0.5
Maldives
–14.8
–6.6
–4.3
–3.7
–7.5
–23.5
–22.1
–24.0
–18.9
–13.6
–10.4
Marshall Islands
–2.2
–6.3
–10.7
–1.7
14.4
9.7
4.8
3.8
3.4
2.4
0.9
Micronesia
–20.0
–14.6
–11.6
–0.9
1.6
3.9
7.5
21.3
2.4
2.4
–5.0
Mongolia
–26.5
–27.4
–25.4
–11.3
–4.0
–6.3
–10.1
–14.6
–11.8
–10.8
–4.7
Myanmar
–1.7
–1.7
–0.6
–4.2
–3.1
–4.0
–6.4
–5.2
–4.5
–5.1
–4.3
Nauru
26.1
38.1
18.8
–13.5
–9.5
1.7
4.1
–7.7
–7.5
–7.1
–5.7
Nepal
–1.0
4.8
3.3
4.5
5.0
6.3
–0.4
–8.2
–9.6
–12.5
–4.5
Palau
–10.7
–10.5
–11.3
–13.8
–6.5
–10.5
–17.9
–17.3
–16.0
–15.8
–11.8
Papua New Guinea
–24.0
–36.1
–30.8
1.3
12.0
24.0
23.5
23.5
21.5
18.3
13.5
Philippines
2.5
2.8
4.2
3.8
2.5
–0.4
–0.7
–2.6
–2.2
–1.8
–1.4
Samoa
–6.9
–9.0
–1.7
–8.1
–3.1
–4.7
–1.8
2.3
–0.6
–0.3
–1.2
Solomon Islands
–8.3
1.7
–3.4
–4.3
–3.0
–3.9
–4.2
–6.4
–8.3
–8.8
–6.8
Sri Lanka
–7.1
–5.8
–3.4
–2.5
–2.3
–2.1
–2.6
–3.2
–2.8
–2.6
–2.1
Thailand
2.5
–0.4
–1.2
3.7
8.0
11.7
11.0
7.7
7.1
6.3
4.6
Timor-Leste
39.1
39.7
42.3
27.0
6.6
–21.6
–10.2
–2.4
1.8
–1.8
–7.5
Tonga
–16.9
–12.3
–8.0
–10.0
–10.7
–6.6
–6.3
–9.9
–11.8
–9.6
–8.0
Tuvalu
–37.1
18.2
–6.6
2.9
–52.8
23.2
4.2
3.5
–2.0
–12.5
–4.1
Vanuatu
–7.8
–6.5
–3.3
2.4
–10.7
–4.6
–1.5
–6.9
–8.0
–7.5
–6.0
Vietnam
0.2
6.0
4.5
4.9
–0.1
2.9
3.0
3.0
3.1
2.6
1.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
–6.3
–4.4
–3.6
–2.9
–2.0
–1.8
–2.5
–2.2
–0.9
–1.4
–2.1
Albania
–13.2
–10.1
–9.2
–10.8
–8.6
–7.6
–7.5
–6.3
–6.0
–5.8
–6.1
Bosnia and Herzegovina
–9.5
–8.7
–5.3
–7.4
–5.3
–4.7
–4.7
–4.5
–5.1
–6.2
–5.3
Bulgaria
0.3
–0.9
1.3
1.2
0.0
2.6
6.5
3.9
1.9
1.3
–0.1
Croatia
–0.7
–0.1
0.9
2.0
4.5
2.6
4.0
2.9
2.1
1.6
0.3
Hungary
0.7
1.8
3.8
1.5
2.8
6.2
2.8
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
Kosovo
–12.7
–5.8
–3.4
–6.9
–8.6
–7.9
–6.4
–8.3
–10.5
–10.1
–8.0
Montenegro
–14.8
–15.3
–11.4
–12.4
–11.0
–16.2
–16.1
–18.5
–17.5
–14.5
–9.6
North Macedonia
–2.5
–3.2
–1.6
–0.5
–2.0
–2.9
–1.0
–0.3
–1.2
–1.5
–2.0
Poland
–5.2
–3.7
–1.3
–2.1
–0.6
–0.5
0.1
–0.7
–1.1
–1.5
–1.8
Romania
–5.0
–4.8
–1.1
–0.7
–1.2
–2.1
–3.2
–4.6
–5.2
–4.8
–3.5
Serbia
–8.1
–10.8
–5.7
–5.6
–3.5
–2.9
–5.2
–5.2
–5.5
–5.0
–4.0
Turkey
–8.9
–5.5
–6.7
–4.7
–3.7
–3.8
–5.6
–3.6
0.7
–0.4
–2.4
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
176	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Latin America and the Caribbean
–1.9
–2.5
–2.8
–3.1
–3.2
–1.9
–1.4
–1.9
–1.9
–2.0
–2.0
Antigua and Barbuda
. . .
. . .
. . .
0.0
5.2
–2.2
–6.9
–4.7
–3.5
–3.7
–3.8
Argentina
–1.0
–0.4
–2.1
–1.6
–2.7
–2.7
–4.9
–5.4
–2.0
–2.5
–2.5
Aruba
–10.5
3.5
–12.9
–5.1
4.2
5.1
1.0
0.9
2.6
2.2
0.6
The Bahamas
–11.8
–14.0
–14.1
–17.3
–12.0
–10.6
–16.3
–15.5
–11.3
–8.8
–4.9
Barbados
–11.8
–8.5
–8.4
–9.2
–6.1
–4.3
–3.8
–2.4
–1.2
–1.3
–2.6
Belize
–1.1
–1.2
–4.5
–7.9
–9.8
–9.0
–7.0
–5.9
–5.7
–5.4
–4.8
Bolivia
0.3
7.4
3.5
1.7
–5.9
–5.7
–5.3
–4.7
–5.2
–5.1
–4.7
Brazil
–2.9
–3.4
–3.2
–4.1
–3.0
–1.3
–0.4
–0.8
–1.7
–1.6
–1.9
Chile
–1.7
–3.9
–4.1
–1.7
–2.3
–1.6
–2.1
–3.1
–3.2
–2.8
–1.7
Colombia
–2.9
–3.1
–3.3
–5.2
–6.3
–4.3
–3.3
–3.8
–3.9
–3.8
–3.8
Costa Rica
–5.3
–5.1
–4.8
–4.8
–3.5
–2.2
–3.0
–3.2
–3.2
–3.3
–3.4
Dominica
. . .
. . .
. . .
–6.9
–6.9
–8.4
–7.3
–46.2
–31.0
–22.8
–8.7
Dominican Republic
–7.5
–6.5
–4.1
–3.3
–1.9
–1.1
–0.2
–1.4
–1.2
–1.4
–3.0
Ecuador
–0.5
–0.2
–1.0
–0.7
–2.2
1.3
–0.4
–0.7
0.4
1.4
1.6
El Salvador
–5.5
–5.8
–6.9
–5.4
–3.2
–2.1
–2.0
–4.8
–4.4
–4.5
–5.0
Grenada
. . .
. . .
. . .
–10.9
–11.0
–10.1
–13.8
–14.6
–14.6
–14.0
–15.6
Guatemala
–3.4
–2.6
–2.5
–2.1
–0.2
1.5
1.6
0.3
–0.3
–0.6
–2.0
Guyana
–12.2
–11.3
–13.3
–9.5
–5.1
0.4
–6.7
–7.1
–5.8
8.6
50.3
Haiti
–4.3
–5.7
–6.6
–8.5
–3.1
–1.0
–3.7
–4.1
–3.9
–2.2
–2.3
Honduras
–8.0
–8.5
–9.5
–6.9
–4.7
–2.7
–1.8
–4.2
–3.7
–3.7
–4.0
Jamaica
–12.2
–11.1
–9.2
–7.5
–3.1
–1.4
–2.6
–2.8
–2.3
–2.2
–1.6
Mexico
–1.1
–1.6
–2.5
–1.9
–2.6
–2.3
–1.7
–1.8
–1.7
–1.9
–1.9
Nicaragua
–11.9
–10.7
–10.9
–7.1
–9.1
–7.5
–5.0
–1.0
–0.1
1.2
–1.9
Panama
–13.0
–10.3
–9.7
–13.5
–7.9
–8.0
–7.9
–8.5
–5.3
–4.0
–3.3
Paraguay
0.6
–0.9
1.6
–0.1
–0.4
3.5
3.1
0.5
–0.8
0.4
0.6
Peru
–1.8
–2.8
–4.6
–4.4
–4.8
–2.7
–1.2
–1.5
–1.4
–1.5
–1.6
St. Kitts and Nevis
. . .
. . .
. . .
–0.7
–10.3
–12.6
–8.7
–0.8
–5.4
–9.5
–9.5
St. Lucia
. . .
. . .
. . .
0.8
4.2
–3.4
–2.6
–1.2
–2.5
–0.4
0.4
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
. . .
. . .
. . .
–25.8
–14.5
–15.2
–17.2
–15.8
–14.4
–13.5
–11.7
Suriname
9.8
3.3
–3.8
–7.9
–16.4
–5.4
–0.1
–2.9
–3.8
–3.2
–2.1
Trinidad and Tobago
16.9
12.9
19.9
14.6
7.4
–4.0
4.9
4.9
0.6
1.1
2.7
Uruguay
. . .
–4.0
–3.6
–3.2
–0.9
0.6
0.7
–0.6
–0.8
–1.2
–1.9
Venezuela
4.9
0.8
2.0
2.3
–5.0
–1.4
6.1
6.0
1.4
–1.9
–2.1
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
12.7
12.4
9.8
5.5
–4.0
–3.9
–0.6
2.3
–0.9
–0.7
–1.5
Afghanistan
26.6
10.9
0.3
5.8
2.9
7.2
4.7
4.8
1.0
1.2
–1.7
Algeria
9.9
5.9
0.4
–4.4
–16.4
–16.5
–13.2
–9.1
–12.5
–9.3
–2.5
Bahrain
8.8
8.4
7.4
4.6
–2.4
–4.6
–4.5
–5.8
–3.6
–3.4
–3.0
Djibouti
–13.1
–18.8
–23.3
–25.1
–31.8
–9.4
–13.8
–14.3
–14.9
–15.4
–9.6
Egypt
–2.5
–3.6
–2.2
–0.9
–3.7
–6.0
–6.1
–2.4
–2.4
–1.7
–1.0
Iran
10.4
6.0
6.7
3.2
0.3
4.0
3.8
4.3
–0.4
–0.6
–0.6
Iraq
10.9
5.1
1.1
2.6
–6.5
–7.8
2.1
4.9
–6.7
–2.9
–4.8
Jordan
–10.2
–15.0
–10.3
–7.2
–9.0
–9.4
–10.6
–7.4
–8.2
–8.0
–6.0
Kuwait
42.9
45.5
40.3
33.4
3.5
–4.6
5.9
12.7
7.4
8.0
5.5
Lebanon
–15.7
–25.2
–27.4
–28.2
–19.3
–23.1
–25.7
–27.0
–28.2
–28.4
–22.1
Libya3
9.9
29.9
0.0
–78.4
–54.4
–24.7
7.9
2.0
–0.2
–7.8
–3.6
Mauritania
–5.0
–24.2
–22.0
–27.3
–19.8
–15.1
–14.4
–18.0
–17.1
–17.8
–5.2
Morocco
–7.6
–9.3
–7.6
–5.9
–2.1
–4.2
–3.6
–4.5
–4.1
–3.5
–3.3
Oman
13.0
10.2
6.6
5.2
–15.9
–18.7
–15.2
–5.9
–8.7
–5.4
–6.5
Pakistan
0.1
–2.1
–1.1
–1.3
–1.0
–1.7
–4.1
–6.1
–5.2
–4.3
–5.4
Qatar
31.1
33.2
30.4
24.0
8.5
–5.5
3.8
9.3
4.6
4.1
3.1
Saudi Arabia
23.6
22.4
18.1
9.8
–8.7
–3.7
1.4
8.3
3.5
2.8
–0.9
Somalia
. . .
. . .
–1.8
–5.0
–4.4
–5.9
–5.6
–5.6
–5.3
–5.2
–4.2
Sudan4
–4.0
–12.8
–11.0
–5.8
–8.4
–7.6
–10.5
–11.5
–9.9
–10.0
–9.9
Syria5
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tunisia
–8.4
–9.1
–9.7
–9.8
–9.7
–9.3
–10.2
–11.2
–10.1
–9.1
–5.8
United Arab Emirates
12.6
19.7
19.0
13.5
4.9
3.7
6.9
6.6
5.9
5.1
3.5
Yemen
–3.0
–1.7
–3.1
–0.7
–6.1
–2.8
–0.1
0.0
0.7
–1.9
–3.9
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
177
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2024
Sub-Saharan Africa
–0.6
–1.7
–2.2
–3.6
–5.9
–3.7
–2.1
–2.6
–3.7
–3.7
–2.8
Angola
11.7
10.8
6.1
–2.6
–8.8
–4.8
–0.3
1.3
–3.8
–1.9
–1.2
Benin
–7.3
–7.4
–8.4
–9.9
–10.0
–9.4
–9.9
–8.9
–8.4
–7.4
0.2
Botswana
3.1
0.3
8.9
15.4
7.8
13.7
12.3
9.6
8.6
8.0
9.6
Burkina Faso
–4.0
–7.1
–11.3
–8.1
–8.6
–7.6
–9.4
–7.5
–5.8
–4.8
–7.0
Burundi
–14.4
–18.6
–19.3
–18.5
–17.7
–13.1
–12.3
–13.4
–12.6
–11.9
–8.8
Cabo Verde
–16.3
–12.6
–4.9
–9.1
–3.2
–2.4
–6.2
–7.1
–7.3
–6.5
–5.0
Cameroon
–2.7
–3.3
–3.6
–4.0
–3.8
–3.2
–2.7
–4.0
–3.7
–3.4
–3.1
Central African Republic
–7.6
–6.5
–3.3
–14.8
–9.7
–5.5
–8.3
–8.6
–6.1
–6.0
–4.5
Chad
–5.8
–7.8
–9.1
–8.9
–13.6
–9.2
–5.7
–4.8
–6.1
–4.3
–5.6
Comoros
–6.0
–5.5
–7.0
–6.3
–0.4
–6.5
–4.0
–9.1
–8.9
–8.8
–8.4
Democratic Republic of the Congo
–5.2
–4.6
–5.0
–4.6
–3.7
–3.1
–0.5
–0.5
–1.8
–2.9
–2.3
Republic of Congo
13.9
17.7
13.8
1.3
–54.2
–46.2
–3.9
5.5
4.7
5.9
–1.1
Côte d’Ivoire
10.4
–1.2
–1.4
1.4
–0.6
–1.2
–2.8
–3.4
–3.0
–2.8
–2.5
Equatorial Guinea
–5.7
–1.1
–2.4
–4.3
–16.4
–13.0
–5.8
–3.6
–4.7
–5.7
–9.4
Eritrea
3.2
2.7
3.6
4.0
–1.4
–2.1
–2.4
–1.6
–2.0
–2.0
–2.5
Eswatini
1.0
12.2
17.0
17.5
18.0
14.3
12.5
9.9
10.0
11.6
10.7
Ethiopia
–2.5
–7.1
–6.1
–6.6
–10.4
–9.3
–8.6
–6.5
–6.0
–5.4
–3.4
Gabon
24.0
17.9
7.3
7.6
–5.6
–9.9
–4.4
–1.9
–3.6
–1.2
3.0
The Gambia
–7.5
–4.5
–6.8
–7.2
–9.8
–9.4
–7.1
–11.5
–9.8
–12.7
–10.5
Ghana
–6.6
–8.7
–9.0
–7.0
–5.8
–5.2
–3.4
–3.2
–3.0
–3.5
–3.1
Guinea
–18.4
–19.9
–12.5
–12.9
–12.9
–31.6
–6.8
–16.1
–20.1
–17.3
–9.4
Guinea-Bissau
–1.3
–8.4
–4.6
0.5
1.9
1.3
–0.6
–1.6
–3.9
–3.3
–2.7
Kenya
–9.2
–8.4
–8.8
–10.4
–6.7
–5.2
–6.3
–5.4
–5.0
–4.9
–4.8
Lesotho
–13.4
–8.4
–5.1
–4.8
–3.9
–8.4
–4.6
–5.8
–12.6
–4.3
–3.3
Liberia
–17.6
–17.3
–21.7
–26.4
–26.7
–18.6
–23.4
–23.3
–23.4
–23.6
–17.8
Madagascar
–7.7
–8.9
–6.3
–0.3
–1.9
0.6
–0.5
0.3
–1.4
–3.5
–4.2
Malawi
–8.6
–9.2
–8.4
–8.2
–8.9
–12.9
–11.0
–9.2
–6.8
–7.6
–7.7
Mali
–5.1
–2.2
–2.9
–4.7
–5.3
–7.2
–5.9
–7.3
–5.6
–6.1
–6.9
Mauritius
–13.5
–7.1
–6.2
–5.4
–3.6
–4.0
–5.6
–6.2
–7.4
–6.7
–5.0
Mozambique
–25.3
–44.7
–42.9
–38.2
–40.3
–39.3
–20.2
–34.4
–51.1
–63.8
–34.7
Namibia
–3.0
–5.7
–4.0
–10.8
–12.4
–12.8
–6.2
–4.3
–3.9
–3.2
–5.0
Niger
–22.3
–14.7
–15.0
–15.8
–20.5
–15.5
–15.7
–16.3
–21.0
–23.1
–12.3
Nigeria
2.6
3.8
3.7
0.2
–3.2
0.7
2.8
2.1
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
Rwanda
–7.5
–10.0
–8.7
–11.8
–13.3
–14.3
–6.8
–7.8
–9.2
–8.7
–8.0
São Tomé and Príncipe
–27.7
–21.9
–15.2
–22.1
–12.3
–6.5
–12.7
–10.6
–9.4
–8.2
–5.1
Senegal
–6.5
–8.7
–8.2
–7.0
–5.6
–4.0
–7.3
–7.2
–7.3
–10.2
–4.1
Seychelles
–23.0
–21.1
–11.9
–23.1
–18.6
–20.1
–20.5
–16.3
–16.0
–15.7
–16.0
Sierra Leone
–65.0
–31.8
–17.5
–9.3
–15.5
–2.3
–10.9
–13.8
–10.9
–9.7
–6.0
South Africa
–2.2
–5.1
–5.8
–5.1
–4.6
–2.8
–2.4
–3.4
–3.4
–3.7
–3.7
South Sudan
18.2
–15.9
–3.9
–1.5
–7.1
0.1
–6.6
–12.5
–12.0
–19.3
–10.1
Tanzania
–10.8
–11.5
–10.3
–9.7
–8.1
–4.4
–3.3
–3.7
–3.9
–4.2
–4.4
Togo
–7.8
–7.6
–13.2
–10.0
–11.0
–9.7
–7.9
–7.9
–6.2
–5.2
–4.9
Uganda
–9.9
–6.7
–7.2
–8.1
–7.3
–3.4
–5.0
–6.8
–8.2
–9.1
–3.0
Zambia
4.7
5.4
–0.6
2.1
–3.9
–4.5
–3.9
–5.0
–2.9
–2.7
–0.2
Zimbabwe6
–17.2
–10.7
–13.2
–11.6
–7.6
–3.6
–1.3
–4.0
–3.0
–4.6
–4.7
1Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
2Starting in 2014, data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
3See country-specific note for Libya in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
5Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
6The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar 
values may differ from authorities’ estimates.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
178	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
–261.7
–155.0
224.6
354.6
332.3
434.0
439.9
355.9
311.9
282.2
Direct Investment, Net
359.2
109.8
154.9
220.8
–27.9
–191.6
190.8
–37.3
83.7
125.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–1,112.1
–246.0
–552.6
76.3
263.4
492.5
63.6
203.3
354.8
325.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–5.4
–97.8
74.8
–11.0
–104.7
21.7
6.8
5.6
–30.5
–55.0
Other Investment, Net
146.9
–194.3
394.6
–66.3
–25.0
–67.4
–65.6
60.1
–193.5
–211.0
Change in Reserves
349.8
273.2
153.1
134.9
226.8
178.6
244.3
124.4
97.4
98.0
United States
Financial Account Balance
–526.0
–448.2
–400.3
–297.3
–325.9
–385.1
–331.9
–465.2
–507.1
–574.4
Direct Investment, Net
173.1
126.9
104.7
135.7
–202.0
–181.5
24.4
–373.4
–178.8
–178.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–226.3
–498.3
–30.7
–114.9
–53.5
–195.1
–212.5
–44.0
–274.0
–230.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
–35.0
7.1
2.2
–54.3
–27.0
7.8
23.1
–2.4
9.3
9.0
Other Investment, Net
–453.7
–88.4
–473.4
–260.1
–37.1
–18.4
–165.2
–48.2
–63.6
–174.8
Change in Reserves
15.9
4.5
–3.1
–3.6
–6.3
2.1
–1.7
2.9
0.0
0.0
Euro Area
Financial Account Balance
–40.9
182.6
439.0
337.6
296.5
381.5
473.2
466.7
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
124.9
58.9
13.5
69.1
158.3
196.2
140.6
354.0
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
–383.3
–177.0
–168.5
75.4
221.1
529.5
300.8
80.9
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
5.5
38.9
41.8
65.8
90.9
20.4
19.3
109.1
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
197.7
242.8
544.2
123.0
–185.6
–381.7
14.1
–106.7
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
14.3
19.0
8.0
4.4
11.8
17.1
–1.6
29.3
. . .
. . .
Germany
Financial Account Balance
167.7
194.3
300.0
317.8
264.9
284.3
316.3
274.7
279.6
282.0
Direct Investment, Net
10.3
33.6
26.0
95.3
74.8
33.2
47.1
59.3
48.9
55.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–51.4
66.8
209.6
177.7
213.5
228.8
228.1
134.5
189.9
179.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
39.8
30.9
31.8
43.3
29.0
35.8
10.3
25.2
22.8
18.8
Other Investment, Net
165.1
61.1
31.4
4.8
–49.9
–15.4
32.3
55.4
18.0
28.5
Change in Reserves
3.9
1.7
1.2
–3.3
–2.4
1.9
–1.5
0.5
0.0
0.0
France
Financial Account Balance
–78.6
–48.0
–19.2
–10.3
–0.8
–14.4
–36.0
–45.7
–7.9
1.8
Direct Investment, Net
19.8
19.4
–13.9
47.2
7.9
28.1
8.3
45.1
47.9
52.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–335.1
–50.6
–79.3
–23.8
43.2
23.8
22.4
18.6
67.9
83.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
–19.4
–18.4
–22.3
–31.8
14.5
–17.6
–1.4
–20.1
–27.8
–37.9
Other Investment, Net
263.8
–3.6
98.2
–2.9
–74.2
–51.1
–61.9
–101.5
–98.3
–99.3
Change in Reserves
–7.7
5.2
–1.9
1.0
8.0
2.5
–3.4
12.3
2.5
2.6
Italy
Financial Account Balance
–79.9
–4.1
29.0
68.5
39.1
66.3
58.0
40.0
60.2
55.7
Direct Investment, Net
17.2
6.8
0.9
3.1
2.7
–10.7
3.7
11.7
12.3
13.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
25.6
–22.4
–5.4
5.5
108.2
176.5
98.8
138.9
93.2
24.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
–10.1
7.5
4.0
–4.8
2.6
–3.3
–8.2
–3.0
–1.2
–0.4
Other Investment, Net
–113.9
2.1
27.5
65.9
–75.0
–95.0
–39.2
–110.8
–44.1
18.6
Change in Reserves
1.3
1.9
2.0
–1.3
0.6
–1.3
3.0
3.1
0.0
0.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
179
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Spain
Financial Account Balance
–43.4
0.5
41.6
14.8
21.1
26.0
24.6
14.7
15.3
16.2
Direct Investment, Net
12.8
–27.2
–24.6
8.6
28.4
16.0
19.1
17.3
17.4
18.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
43.1
53.7
–83.6
–12.1
11.8
56.1
28.6
19.4
19.3
17.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
2.9
–10.7
1.4
1.7
–1.3
–3.3
–2.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Investment, Net
–116.2
–18.2
147.8
11.5
–23.3
–52.0
–24.5
–22.0
–21.4
–19.8
Change in Reserves
13.9
2.8
0.7
5.1
5.6
9.1
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Japan
Financial Account Balance
158.4
53.9
–4.3
58.9
180.9
263.7
158.0
183.8
177.4
192.9
Direct Investment, Net
117.8
117.5
144.7
118.6
133.3
134.4
149.7
134.4
144.6
157.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
–162.9
28.8
–280.6
–42.2
131.5
276.5
–53.5
88.1
69.6
62.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–17.1
6.7
58.1
34.0
17.7
–16.1
30.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
Other Investment, Net
43.4
–61.1
34.8
–60.1
–106.7
–125.4
7.7
–63.3
–48.4
–38.7
Change in Reserves
177.3
–37.9
38.7
8.5
5.1
–5.7
23.6
24.0
11.0
11.5
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
–43.3
–92.6
–132.5
–154.2
–142.6
–145.8
–115.7
–85.8
–120.0
–118.6
Direct Investment, Net
53.4
–34.8
–11.2
–176.1
–106.0
–219.5
16.3
–14.6
–0.8
–12.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–215.5
275.0
–284.2
16.4
–201.8
–195.4
–134.9
–361.7
0.0
0.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
7.4
–65.8
63.4
31.2
–128.6
29.3
13.3
17.7
–5.2
–11.2
Other Investment, Net
103.4
–279.1
91.8
–37.5
261.6
231.0
–19.2
248.1
–129.5
–111.7
Change in Reserves
7.9
12.1
7.8
11.7
32.2
8.8
8.8
24.8
15.6
16.9
Canada
Financial Account Balance
–49.4
–62.7
–56.9
–42.2
–56.2
–49.5
–40.4
–37.8
–53.7
–51.7
Direct Investment, Net
12.5
12.8
–12.0
1.3
23.6
34.0
55.0
10.8
–5.0
–2.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–104.3
–63.8
–27.1
–32.9
–48.1
–118.6
–80.5
–8.8
–33.0
–34.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
34.3
–13.4
–22.5
–15.9
–40.2
29.5
–15.6
–38.2
–15.7
–14.7
Change in Reserves
8.1
1.7
4.7
5.3
8.5
5.6
0.8
–1.5
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
283.6
251.5
373.9
345.0
293.4
333.9
310.3
314.4
332.0
340.2
Direct Investment, Net
–6.2
–33.7
30.8
–6.3
–100.8
–71.1
–77.3
–49.3
–42.8
–40.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
47.2
150.0
139.6
181.5
337.0
265.9
190.8
263.5
203.7
210.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
31.1
–28.8
–33.5
–23.5
–12.7
3.4
–7.9
16.7
2.8
–1.0
Other Investment, Net
86.4
–110.7
135.9
87.0
–105.9
–14.7
–8.4
30.1
105.3
110.0
Change in Reserves
125.1
274.7
101.3
106.3
175.9
150.2
213.1
53.4
63.0
61.1
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Financial Account Balance
234.0
110.5
28.4
19.0
–270.8
–413.7
–255.6
–83.8
–106.0
–158.7
Direct Investment, Net
–531.7
–494.4
–485.8
–432.6
–344.5
–256.8
–325.5
–381.0
–380.2
–401.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–144.7
–233.7
–157.5
–106.2
105.7
–57.0
–180.2
–51.1
–33.4
–57.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
161.7
410.0
86.5
418.4
475.4
390.2
82.8
273.2
185.5
182.8
Change in Reserves
744.6
431.4
589.4
128.6
–512.6
–476.8
164.3
74.6
115.2
109.7
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
180	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Financial Account Balance
100.7
52.1
2.5
12.2
53.1
2.7
22.8
113.3
84.8
79.1
Direct Investment, Net
–15.3
–27.7
–3.7
19.1
–0.2
–35.8
–4.3
13.7
11.3
15.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
17.9
3.5
–0.2
28.8
12.0
–2.4
–17.4
9.7
5.4
3.8
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
64.3
44.3
27.5
73.0
38.8
30.4
15.2
46.5
10.6
17.3
Change in Reserves
32.1
30.5
–21.5
–114.1
–4.9
10.1
28.9
43.2
57.1
42.5
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
64.5
16.9
35.6
146.9
85.8
–32.0
–95.2
–95.5
–11.3
–39.5
Direct Investment, Net
–277.5
–220.5
–273.4
–203.6
–139.8
–26.9
–144.1
–188.4
–187.9
–199.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–58.0
–115.6
–64.8
–124.4
81.7
30.9
–47.5
–27.1
–23.0
–27.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–0.3
1.5
–2.0
0.7
–1.3
–10.0
2.6
1.7
2.0
2.2
Other Investment, Net
–29.3
215.6
–73.6
279.1
460.6
356.5
–102.3
110.4
136.4
119.3
Change in Reserves
431.3
139.1
450.6
195.3
–316.1
–381.8
197.1
8.4
61.5
65.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
–107.2
–66.7
–62.7
–43.6
–9.6
–12.2
–48.5
–4.5
–3.1
–14.9
Direct Investment, Net
–39.9
–27.7
–26.5
–32.0
–36.1
–30.0
–30.8
–38.4
–27.5
–29.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–53.5
–70.2
–40.0
–19.4
24.3
–4.0
–24.2
7.1
6.4
–5.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
1.6
–3.0
–1.4
0.3
–1.8
0.2
–2.7
–3.7
3.6
3.2
Other Investment, Net
–30.1
6.4
–13.3
7.8
14.3
–1.8
20.8
24.5
17.2
4.1
Change in Reserves
14.6
27.8
18.5
–0.2
–10.4
23.5
–11.7
6.0
–2.7
12.0
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
–128.0
–154.8
–194.2
–200.5
–188.9
–100.4
–85.9
–110.0
–102.4
–109.0
Direct Investment, Net
–146.4
–158.5
–150.6
–138.5
–131.8
–125.9
–121.1
–141.2
–133.5
–135.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–106.7
–79.8
–100.7
–112.3
–57.1
–51.7
–39.0
–8.8
6.2
–11.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
5.5
2.5
1.8
7.0
1.3
–2.9
3.9
3.9
3.6
4.1
Other Investment, Net
11.7
21.9
43.6
4.0
27.6
59.6
53.1
26.0
18.6
20.8
Change in Reserves
108.1
59.1
11.8
39.1
–28.8
20.5
17.2
10.2
2.8
13.6
Middle East, North Africa, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Financial Account Balance
317.7
287.5
301.1
180.7
–131.4
–205.6
–14.6
66.3
–21.9
–15.3
Direct Investment, Net
–20.0
–25.4
–7.9
–28.8
0.7
–7.0
–4.3
–2.5
–7.4
–12.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
75.0
56.7
70.6
130.3
68.0
–12.5
–24.7
–3.9
–11.4
–2.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
125.5
101.4
111.4
62.9
–61.4
–47.1
94.8
69.7
0.2
28.2
Change in Reserves
137.8
155.0
127.2
16.2
–138.2
–138.6
–80.1
3.8
–2.5
–27.9
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
–13.7
–24.5
–54.0
–76.6
–79.8
–66.4
–34.2
–53.6
–52.2
–59.1
Direct Investment, Net
–32.7
–34.6
–23.7
–48.8
–37.2
–31.3
–20.9
–24.2
–35.0
–40.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–19.4
–28.4
–22.3
–9.3
–23.2
–17.3
–27.3
–28.1
–16.9
–15.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.7
–1.7
–0.8
–1.5
–0.4
0.9
0.3
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
Other Investment, Net
19.7
20.4
–9.3
–8.4
–4.5
–7.3
1.1
–3.8
2.5
–6.8
Change in Reserves
20.8
20.0
2.8
–7.8
–14.2
–10.5
12.9
3.1
–1.1
4.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
181
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
513.5
445.7
374.5
226.5
–85.7
–156.6
71.2
246.9
121.2
121.6
Direct Investment, Net
–24.0
–29.3
13.0
6.0
5.9
–24.7
16.3
31.9
19.0
22.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
90.1
50.4
78.9
164.0
81.2
–9.5
–31.9
7.4
–10.1
4.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
252.0
188.0
182.9
157.6
9.0
31.5
138.9
153.3
65.7
82.8
Change in Reserves
194.7
235.2
99.2
–106.6
–189.1
–154.4
–52.6
54.2
46.6
12.2
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
–279.5
–335.2
–346.1
–207.5
–185.1
–257.2
–326.8
–330.7
–227.3
–280.3
Direct Investment, Net
–507.7
–465.1
–498.8
–438.6
–350.5
–232.1
–341.8
–412.9
–399.2
–423.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–234.8
–284.1
–236.5
–270.2
24.5
–47.5
–148.3
–58.5
–23.3
–61.8
Financial Derivatives, Net
5.8
–0.9
–2.4
6.5
–2.2
–11.7
4.1
1.7
8.9
9.3
Other Investment, Net
–90.2
222.0
–96.4
260.8
466.5
358.7
–56.1
120.0
119.8
100.0
Change in Reserves
549.9
196.2
490.2
235.2
–323.6
–322.4
216.8
20.4
68.6
97.6
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
–363.2
–414.8
–409.4
–373.4
–282.0
–231.7
–243.4
–290.5
–269.7
–293.5
Direct Investment, Net
–278.1
–282.0
–274.4
–283.5
–292.7
–285.1
–270.5
–300.6
–309.6
–327.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–189.2
–218.8
–176.3
–191.4
–34.8
–53.3
–111.9
–15.8
–26.8
–44.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–72.8
–29.9
–22.4
–8.6
45.4
31.5
28.3
31.7
20.5
–10.0
Change in Reserves
174.1
121.1
67.6
103.3
1.8
90.2
108.3
–6.5
39.1
79.6
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Financial Account Balance
–31.2
–58.8
–52.7
–33.3
–43.0
–52.6
–40.0
–36.9
–35.1
–35.9
Direct Investment, Net
–21.4
–28.1
–24.5
–19.8
–26.9
–23.7
–24.7
–23.3
–27.8
–31.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
1.0
–1.6
–12.1
–5.4
0.5
–1.9
–24.3
–18.9
3.7
–3.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
1.6
–5.2
–19.0
–0.1
–22.8
–23.4
8.6
–0.9
–15.8
–7.9
Change in Reserves
–12.0
–23.7
4.0
–7.0
6.9
–2.2
0.9
7.1
6.7
8.5
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance
–27.7
–44.5
253.0
373.6
61.5
20.3
184.4
272.1
205.9
123.5
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available 
because of data constraints.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
182	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2001–10
2005–12
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021–24
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.7
–0.6
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
Current Account Balance
–0.8
–0.6
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
Savings
21.6
21.4
21.9
22.5
22.7
22.2
22.7
22.7
22.7
22.7
22.9
Investment
22.3
22.0
21.1
21.4
21.5
21.3
21.6
21.9
22.1
22.2
22.5
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.4
–4.0
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.2
–2.3
–2.4
–2.6
–2.4
Current Account Balance
–4.4
–4.0
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.3
–2.3
–2.4
–2.6
–2.4
Savings
17.3
16.8
19.2
20.3
20.1
18.6
18.9
19.0
19.2
18.9
19.2
Investment
21.5
20.8
20.4
20.8
21.0
20.3
20.6
21.1
21.6
21.6
21.7
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Euro Area
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.1
0.1
2.4
2.6
3.1
3.2
3.1
3.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
0.0
0.0
2.3
2.5
2.9
3.2
3.2
3.0
2.9
2.8
2.4
Savings
22.7
22.6
22.4
22.9
23.7
24.2
24.7
24.8
24.8
24.9
25.1
Investment
22.3
22.0
19.6
19.9
20.4
20.8
20.9
21.5
21.5
21.7
22.3
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.2
0.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.1
5.9
6.7
7.6
8.9
8.6
8.0
7.4
7.1
6.8
6.3
Current Account Balance
4.1
5.9
6.7
7.5
8.9
8.5
8.0
7.4
7.1
6.8
6.3
Savings
24.0
25.7
26.2
27.1
28.1
28.2
28.1
28.6
28.2
28.3
28.6
Investment
19.9
19.8
19.5
19.6
19.2
19.7
20.1
21.2
21.1
21.5
22.2
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.7
–0.3
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.7
–0.5
–0.6
–0.3
0.1
–0.2
Current Account Balance
0.7
–0.3
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.8
–0.6
–0.7
–0.4
0.0
–0.2
Savings
23.0
22.5
21.8
21.8
22.3
21.9
22.9
22.1
22.2
22.5
22.7
Investment
22.4
22.9
22.3
22.7
22.7
22.7
23.5
22.8
22.6
22.6
22.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.2
–1.8
0.9
2.1
1.7
2.4
2.7
2.5
3.0
2.7
2.0
Current Account Balance
–1.3
–1.9
1.0
1.9
1.5
2.5
2.8
2.6
2.9
2.6
2.0
Savings
19.9
18.7
17.9
18.9
18.8
20.1
20.4
20.6
20.6
20.5
20.1
Investment
21.1
20.7
17.0
17.0
17.3
17.6
17.6
18.0
17.7
17.9
18.2
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
–5.5
–5.4
2.2
1.6
1.8
2.5
2.1
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.1
Current Account Balance
–6.1
–5.9
1.5
1.1
1.2
2.3
1.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
Savings
21.9
20.7
20.2
20.5
21.6
22.7
22.9
22.7
22.9
23.0
23.1
Investment
28.0
26.5
18.7
19.5
20.4
20.4
21.1
21.9
22.0
22.1
22.3
Capital Account Balance
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.2
3.0
0.7
0.7
3.1
3.8
4.0
3.5
3.4
3.5
3.4
Current Account Balance
3.3
3.1
0.9
0.8
3.1
4.0
4.0
3.5
3.5
3.6
3.5
Savings
27.4
26.3
24.1
24.7
27.1
27.4
27.9
27.9
28.4
28.6
28.6
Investment
24.1
23.2
23.2
23.9
24.0
23.4
23.9
24.4
24.9
25.0
25.1
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.9
–3.2
–5.2
–5.0
–5.0
–5.3
–3.4
–4.0
–4.2
–4.1
–3.9
Current Account Balance
–2.9
–3.2
–5.1
–4.9
–4.9
–5.2
–3.3
–3.9
–4.2
–4.0
–3.8
Savings
14.3
13.4
11.1
12.3
12.3
12.0
13.9
13.3
13.1
13.2
13.8
Investment
17.2
16.6
16.2
17.3
17.2
17.3
17.2
17.2
17.2
17.2
17.6
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
183
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2001–10
2005–12
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021–24
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.4
–1.1
–3.2
–2.4
–3.5
–3.2
–2.8
–2.6
–3.1
–2.8
–2.6
Current Account Balance
0.5
–1.1
–3.2
–2.4
–3.5
–3.2
–2.8
–2.6
–3.1
–2.8
–2.6
Savings
22.6
22.5
21.7
22.5
20.3
19.7
20.7
20.4
19.8
20.5
21.0
Investment
22.1
23.6
24.9
24.9
23.8
22.9
23.5
23.0
22.9
23.3
23.6
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.0
4.0
5.1
5.0
5.3
5.4
4.5
4.7
4.5
4.4
4.2
Current Account Balance
4.0
4.0
5.0
5.2
5.7
5.3
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.4
4.3
Savings
29.8
30.3
30.3
30.5
30.8
30.1
30.1
29.9
29.6
29.4
29.1
Investment
25.5
26.0
25.1
25.2
24.8
24.7
25.2
25.2
25.0
24.9
24.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.5
2.7
0.7
0.6
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.4
–0.7
Current Account Balance
2.5
2.6
0.6
0.6
–0.2
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
Savings
30.3
32.6
32.8
33.0
32.4
31.9
32.2
32.7
32.1
31.8
31.3
Investment
28.1
30.3
32.4
32.6
32.8
32.1
32.4
32.8
32.6
32.4
32.1
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.9
4.2
0.6
0.6
2.8
0.0
1.0
5.0
3.9
3.5
2.3
Current Account Balance
5.6
4.5
0.6
2.1
2.8
0.0
1.0
5.0
3.8
3.4
2.2
Savings
26.7
26.8
24.2
25.0
25.9
24.4
25.4
29.0
29.1
29.1
28.5
Investment
21.2
22.4
23.5
22.8
22.7
23.9
24.3
24.0
25.1
25.5
26.1
Capital Account Balance
–0.7
–0.3
0.0
–1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.7
3.7
0.8
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.5
Current Account Balance
3.6
3.6
0.7
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.5
Savings
39.7
43.0
43.1
43.6
42.5
41.1
41.0
40.1
39.3
38.7
37.5
Investment
36.4
39.6
42.3
42.1
40.5
39.7
40.1
40.2
39.4
38.9
38.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.5
–5.1
–2.5
–1.6
–0.7
–1.2
–1.9
–1.3
–0.1
–0.6
–1.4
Current Account Balance
–4.8
–5.7
–3.6
–2.9
–2.0
–1.8
–2.5
–2.2
–0.9
–1.4
–1.9
Savings
19.6
20.0
21.4
22.0
22.9
22.3
22.9
23.1
22.4
21.9
21.1
Investment
24.2
25.7
24.9
24.9
24.8
24.1
25.4
24.8
23.2
23.1
22.9
Capital Account Balance
0.4
0.6
1.1
1.3
1.3
0.6
0.6
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.1
–0.5
–2.8
–3.0
–3.2
–1.9
–1.4
–1.9
–1.9
–1.9
–2.0
Current Account Balance
–0.2
–0.6
–2.8
–3.1
–3.2
–1.9
–1.4
–1.9
–1.9
–2.0
–2.0
Savings
20.4
21.0
19.1
17.9
16.5
16.9
16.8
17.6
17.6
17.5
17.9
Investment
20.6
21.6
22.3
21.5
21.1
18.5
18.5
19.6
19.5
19.5
19.9
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
Net Lending and Borrowing
7.8
10.0
10.0
6.3
–3.7
–3.7
–0.7
2.4
–0.8
–0.5
–1.0
Current Account Balance
8.2
10.6
9.8
5.5
–4.0
–3.9
–0.6
2.3
–0.9
–0.7
–1.2
Savings
35.0
37.9
36.1
32.9
24.8
24.6
26.7
29.3
27.0
26.7
25.7
Investment
27.7
28.2
26.1
27.0
28.7
28.1
27.5
27.1
27.5
26.9
26.4
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.8
2.0
–1.7
–3.2
–5.5
–3.0
–1.6
–2.2
–3.2
–3.3
–2.8
Current Account Balance
0.5
0.5
–2.2
–3.6
–5.9
–3.7
–2.1
–2.6
–3.7
–3.7
–3.2
Savings
20.7
21.6
19.4
19.2
17.2
18.0
18.9
17.8
17.1
17.4
18.4
Investment
20.7
21.5
21.6
22.5
22.7
21.2
21.0
20.2
20.8
21.1
21.2
Capital Account Balance
1.3
1.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
184	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2001–10
2005–12
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021–24
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
8.7
10.0
7.4
4.7
–1.5
–1.5
1.6
5.2
2.2
2.1
1.3
Current Account Balance
9.1
10.4
7.3
5.1
–1.6
–1.6
1.6
5.2
2.2
2.0
1.2
Savings
33.5
35.1
32.0
30.2
24.7
24.9
27.0
30.4
28.5
28.2
27.0
Investment
24.8
25.2
24.8
25.3
27.3
25.4
25.5
25.1
25.9
25.7
25.4
Capital Account Balance
–0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.6
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.8
0.6
–1.0
–0.4
0.3
0.1
–0.2
–0.9
–0.8
–0.9
–1.1
Current Account Balance
0.6
0.4
–1.2
–0.6
0.1
0.0
–0.3
–1.1
–0.9
–1.0
–1.1
Savings
29.4
31.9
33.1
33.7
33.9
33.2
33.2
33.1
32.7
32.4
32.0
Investment
29.0
31.7
34.3
34.3
33.9
33.2
33.6
34.1
33.7
33.4
33.1
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.7
–1.3
–2.4
–2.2
–2.0
–1.4
–1.3
–1.8
–1.8
–1.8
–1.9
Current Account Balance
–1.0
–1.7
–2.7
–2.4
–2.3
–1.6
–1.5
–2.0
–2.0
–2.0
–2.0
Savings
22.8
23.8
22.7
22.8
22.5
22.5
22.9
22.9
23.0
23.2
23.6
Investment
24.1
25.6
25.4
25.2
24.7
24.1
24.4
24.8
25.0
25.1
25.6
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing 
Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.8
–2.8
–5.9
–4.1
–5.4
–5.8
–5.0
–4.3
–4.1
–4.0
–3.7
Current Account Balance
–1.4
–3.4
–6.1
–4.4
–5.7
–5.9
–5.3
–4.5
–4.3
–4.2
–4.0
Savings
20.4
19.1
13.2
14.3
12.2
12.4
13.4
15.4
16.1
17.0
18.3
Investment
22.1
22.5
19.3
18.8
18.2
18.5
18.9
19.9
20.5
21.2
22.3
Capital Account Balance
0.5
0.6
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.1
0.4
0.6
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.0
Current Account Balance
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1
–0.1
Savings
24.0
25.0
26.2
26.7
26.5
26.0
26.5
26.7
26.5
26.4
26.5
Investment
23.9
24.7
25.5
25.8
25.9
25.4
25.8
26.2
26.3
26.3
26.5
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted by 
GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’ 
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of 
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S ) minus investment (I ) is equal to 
the current account balance (CAB ) (S I = CAB ). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB ) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB ) (NLB = CAB + KAB ). In 
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
185
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
Averages
2001–10
2011–20
2017
2018
2019
2020
2017–20
2021–24
World Real GDP
3.9
3.6
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.6
3.6
3.6
Advanced Economies
1.7
1.9
2.4
2.2
1.8
1.7
2.0
1.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.2
4.9
4.8
4.5
4.4
4.8
4.6
4.9
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
1.8
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.4
World Trade, Volume1
5.0
3.9
5.4
3.8
3.4
3.9
4.1
3.8
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.5
3.4
4.3
3.3
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
5.0
7.5
5.6
4.6
5.3
5.7
5.1
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.9
3.5
4.4
3.1
2.7
3.1
3.3
3.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8.1
4.5
7.2
4.3
4.0
4.8
5.0
4.5
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
–0.6
–0.3
0.1
–0.2
0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.0
–0.2
0.8
1.3
–0.9
0.0
0.3
0.1
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
1.9
–0.1
–0.3
2.7
1.0
0.2
0.9
0.9
Oil
10.8
–2.9
23.3
29.4
–13.4
–0.2
8.3
–0.5
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
8.9
–1.2
6.4
1.6
–0.2
1.1
2.2
0.6
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.6
1.7
2.0
1.6
2.1
1.8
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.6
5.1
4.3
4.8
4.9
4.7
4.7
4.4
Interest Rates
Real Six-Month LIBOR2
0.7
–0.3
–0.4
0.2
1.4
1.8
0.8
0.9
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3
1.9
0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.5
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
–0.8
0.5
0.9
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.5
0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
–0.5
–0.3
–0.8
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
30.4
28.6
30.3
29.9
30.1
29.3
29.9
27.6
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
10.2
9.8
10.3
10.4
10.2
10.2
9.6
1Data refer to trade in goods and services.
2London interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits minus percent change in US GDP deflator.
3GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United 
States.
Percent of GDP
Percent
Annual Percent Change
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
This page intentionally left blank 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
1
CHAPTER
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
187
World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Financial Systems and Economic Cycles	
September 2006
World Economic Outlook: Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy	
April 2007
World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality	
October 2007
World Economic Outlook: Housing and the Business Cycle	
April 2008
World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries	
October 2008
World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery	
April 2009
World Economic Outlook: Sustaining the Recovery	
October 2009
World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth	
April 2010
World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing	
October 2010
World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment, Commodities,  
and Capital Flows 	
April 2011
World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks 	
September 2011
World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain 	
April 2012
World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth	
October 2012
World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks	
April 2013
World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions	
October 2013
World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven	
April 2014
World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties	
October 2014
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors	
April 2015
World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices	
October 2015
World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long 	
April 2016
World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies	
October 2016
World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?	
April 2017
World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, Long-term Challenges	
October 2017
World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change	
April 2018
World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth	
October 2018
World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery	
April 2019
I.  Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting  
Measuring Inequality: Conceptual, Methodological, and Measurement Issues	
October 2007, Box 4.1
New Business Cycle Indices for Latin America: A Historical Reconstruction	
October 2007, Box 5.3
Implications of New PPP Estimates for Measuring Global Growth	
April 2008, Appendix 1.1
Measuring Output Gaps	
October 2008, Box 1.3
Assessing and Communicating Risks to the Global Outlook	
October 2008, Appendix 1.1
Fan Chart for Global Growth	
April 2009, Appendix 1.2
Indicators for Tracking Growth	
October 2010, Appendix 1.2
Inferring Potential Output from Noisy Data: The Global Projection Model View	
October 2010, Box 1.3
Uncoordinated Rebalancing	
October 2010, Box 1.4
World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios	
April 2011, Box 1.2
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK  
SELECTED TOPICS
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
188	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement	
October 2014, Box 3.3
Tariff Scenarios	
October 2016, Scenario Box
World Growth Projections over the Medium Term	
October 2016, Box 1.1
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices	
April 2019, Box 1.2
On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis	
April 2019, Box 3.3
II.  Historical Surveys
Historical Perspective on Growth and the Current Account	
October 2008, Box 6.3
A Historical Perspective on International Financial Crises	
October 2009, Box 4.1
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
What Is the Effect of Recessions?	
October 2015, Box 1.1
III.  Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
Asia Rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth	
September 2006, Chapter 3
Japan’s Potential Output and Productivity Growth	
September 2006, Box 3.1
The Evolution and Impact of Corporate Governance Quality in Asia	
September 2006, Box 3.2
Decoupling the Train? Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy	
April 2007, Chapter 4
Spillovers and International Business Cycle Synchronization: A Broader Perspective	
April 2007, Box 4.3
The Discounting Debate	
October 2007, Box 1.7
Taxes versus Quantities under Uncertainty (Weitzman, 1974)	
October 2007, Box 1.8
Experience with Emissions Trading in the European Union	
October 2007, Box 1.9
Climate Change: Economic Impact and Policy Responses	
October 2007, Appendix 1.2
What Risks Do Housing Markets Pose for Global Growth?	
October 2007, Box 2.1
The Changing Dynamics of the Global Business Cycle	
October 2007, Chapter 5
Major Economies and Fluctuations in Global Growth	
October 2007, Box 5.1
Improved Macroeconomic Performance—Good Luck or Good Policies?	
October 2007, Box 5.2
House Prices: Corrections and Consequences	
October 2008, Box 1.2
Global Business Cycles	
April 2009, Box 1.1
How Similar Is the Current Crisis to the Great Depression?	
April 2009, Box 3.1
Is Credit a Vital Ingredient for Recovery? Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2009, Box 3.2
From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How Strong?	
April 2009, Chapter 3
What’s the Damage? Medium-Term Output Dynamics after Financial Crises	
October 2009, Chapter 4
Will the Recovery Be Jobless?	
October 2009, Box 1.3
Unemployment Dynamics during Recessions and Recoveries: Okun’s Law and Beyond	
April 2010, Chapter 3
Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Economies?	
October 2010, Box 1.1
The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?	
April 2012, Box 1.2
How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?	
October 2012, Box 1.3
Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?	
October 2012, Chapter 4
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe	
April 2013, Chapter 2, 
	
	
	 Spillover Feature
Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?	
April 2013, Chapter 4
What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?	
October 2013, Box 1.2
Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages	
October 2013, Chapter 3
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
189
Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the  
Caucasus and Central Asia	
October 2013, Box 3.1
Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy	
October 2013, Box 3.2
Saving and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 3.1
On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,  
and after the Global Financial Crisis 	
April 2014, Chapter 4
The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies	
April 2014, Box 4.1
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011	
October 2014, Box 1.2
Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	
October 2014, Chapter 2,
	
	
	 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output  	
April 2015, Chapter 3
Steady As She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output	
April 2015, Box 3.1
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries— 
The Role of External Factors	
April 2016, Box 1.2
Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market  
Reforms in Advanced Economies	
April 2016, Chapter 3
Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated  
External Environment	
April 2017, Chapter 3 
Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2017, Box 2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence  
Over the Forecast Horizon	
October 2017, Box 1.3
Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality	
April 2018, Chapter 3
Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?	
April 2018, Chapter 4
Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth	
April 2018, Box 1.3
Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.2
Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.3
The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008	
October 2018, Chapter 2
IV.  Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
The Boom in Nonfuel Commodity Prices: Can It Last?	
September 2006, Chapter 5
International Oil Companies and National Oil Companies in a Changing Oil Sector Environment	
September 2006, Box 1.4
Commodity Price Shocks, Growth, and Financing in Sub-Saharan Africa	
September 2006, Box 2.2
Has Speculation Contributed to Higher Commodity Prices?	
September 2006, Box 5.1
Agricultural Trade Liberalization and Commodity Prices	
September 2006, Box 5.2
Recent Developments in Commodity Markets	
September 2006, Appendix 2.1
Who Is Harmed by the Surge in Food Prices?	
October 2007, Box 1.1
Refinery Bottlenecks	
October 2007, Box 1.5
Making the Most of Biofuels	
October 2007, Box 1.6
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2008, Appendix 1.2
Dollar Depreciation and Commodity Prices	
April 2008, Box 1.4
Why Hasn’t Oil Supply Responded to Higher Prices?	
April 2008, Box 1.5
Oil Price Benchmarks	
April 2008, Box 1.6
Globalization, Commodity Prices, and Developing Countries	
April 2008, Chapter 5
The Current Commodity Price Boom in Perspective	
April 2008, Box 5.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
190	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Is Inflation Back? Commodity Prices and Inflation	
October 2008, Chapter 3 
Does Financial Investment Affect Commodity Price Behavior?	
October 2008, Box 3.1
Fiscal Responses to Recent Commodity Price Increases: An Assessment	
October 2008, Box 3.2
Monetary Policy Regimes and Commodity Prices	
October 2008, Box 3.3
Assessing Deflation Risks in the G3 Economies	
April 2009, Box 1.3
Will Commodity Prices Rise Again When the Global Economy Recovers?	
April 2009, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2009, Appendix 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
October 2009, Appendix 1.1
What Do Options Markets Tell Us about Commodity Price Prospects?	
October 2009, Box 1.6
What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatility?	
October 2009, Box 1.7
How Unusual Is the Current Commodity Price Recovery?	
April 2010, Box 1.2
Commodity Futures Price Curves and Cyclical Market Adjustment	
April 2010, Box 1.3
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
October 2010, Appendix 1.1
Dismal Prospects for the Real Estate Sector	
October 2010, Box 1.2
Have Metals Become More Scarce and What Does Scarcity Mean for Prices?	
October 2010, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2011, Appendix 1.2
Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances	
April 2011, Chapter 3
Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production	
April 2011, Box 3.1
Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?	
April 2011, Box 3.2
Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity	
April 2011, Box 3.3
Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends	
April 2011, Appendix 3.1
The Energy and Oil Empirical Models	
April 2011, Appendix 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
September 2011, Appendix 1.1
Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices	
September 2011, Box 1.4
Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy	
September 2011, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Review	
April 2012, Chapter 1,
	
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters	
April 2012, Chapter 4
Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.1
Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.2
Commodity Market Review	
October 2012, Chapter 1,
	
	
	 Special Feature
Unconventional Energy in the United States	
October 2012, Box 1.4
Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?	
October 2012, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Review	
April 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
	
	 Special Feature
The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?	
April 2013, Chapter 3
Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?	
April 2013, Box 3.1
Commodity Market Review	
October 2013, Chapter 1,
	
	
	 Special Feature
Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.1
Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.2
Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting	
April 2014, Box 1.3
Commodity Prices and Forecasts	
April 2014, Chapter 1,
	
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas	
October 2014, Chapter 1, 
in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
191
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment	
April 2015, Chapter 1,  
in an Era of Low Oil Prices	
	 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?  	
April 2015, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy	
October 2015, Chapter 1,
	
	
	 Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift	
October 2015, Chapter 1,
	
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath  
of the Commodity Boom	
October 2015, Chapter 2
The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon	
October 2015, Box 2.1
Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?	
October 2015, Box 2.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the 	
April 2016, Chapter 1, 
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	
	 Special Feature	
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and 	
October 2016, Chapter 1, 
Markets in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?	
October 2016, Box 3.3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and 	
April 2017, Chapter 1, 
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2017, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?	
April 2018, Box 1.2
The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles	
April 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
October 2018, Box 1.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand	
October 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
October 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
October 2018, Chapter 3
Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 3.1
Commodity Special Feature	
April 2019, Chapter 1,
	
	
	 Special Feature
V.  Fiscal Policy
Improved Emerging Market Fiscal Performance: Cyclical or Structural?	
September 2006, Box 2.1
When Does Fiscal Stimulus Work?	
April 2008, Box 2.1
Fiscal Policy as a Countercyclical Tool	
October 2008, Chapter 5
Differences in the Extent of Automatic Stabilizers and Their Relationship with Discretionary Fiscal Policy	
October 2008, Box 5.1
Why Is It So Hard to Determine the Effects of Fiscal Stimulus?	
October 2008, Box 5.2
Have the U.S. Tax Cuts Been “TTT” [Timely, Temporary, and Targeted]?	
October 2008, Box 5.3
Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation	
October 2010, Chapter 3
Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances	
September 2011, Chapter 4
Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?	
October 2012, Box 1.1
The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies	
October 2012, Box 1.2
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance	
April 2013, Box 1.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
192	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.5
Commodity Booms and Public Investment	
October 2015, Box 2.2
Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant	
October 2017, Chapter 4
The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions	
October 2017, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes	
April 2018, Box 1.5
VI.  Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
How Do Financial Systems Affect Economic Cycles?	
September 2006, Chapter 4
Financial Leverage and Debt Deflation	
September 2006, Box 4.1
Financial Linkages and Spillovers	
April 2007, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Conditions in Industrial Countries and Financial Flows to Emerging Markets  	
April 2007, Box 4.2
Macroeconomic Implications of Recent Market Turmoil: Patterns from Previous Episodes	
October 2007, Box 1.2
What Is Global Liquidity?	
October 2007, Box 1.4
The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for Monetary Policy	
April 2008, Chapter 3
Is There a Credit Crunch?	
April 2008, Box 1.1
Assessing Vulnerabilities to Housing Market Corrections	
April 2008, Box 3.1
Financial Stress and Economic Downturns	
October 2008, Chapter 4
The Latest Bout of Financial Distress: How Does It Change the Global Outlook?	
October 2008, Box 1.1
Policies to Resolve Financial System Stress and Restore Sound Financial Intermediation	
October 2008, Box 4.1
How Vulnerable Are Nonfinancial Firms?	
April 2009, Box 1.2
The Case of Vanishing Household Wealth	
April 2009, Box 2.1
Impact of Foreign Bank Ownership during Home-Grown Crises	
April 2009, Box 4.1
A Financial Stress Index for Emerging Economies	
April 2009, Appendix 4.1
Financial Stress in Emerging Economies: Econometric Analysis	
April 2009, Appendix 4.2
How Linkages Fuel the Fire	
April 2009, Chapter 4
Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations	
October 2009, Chapter 3
Were Financial Markets in Emerging Economies More Resilient than in Past Crises?	
October 2009, Box 1.2
Risks from Real Estate Markets	
October 2009, Box 1.4
Financial Conditions Indices	
April 2011, Appendix 1.1
House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets	
April 2011, Box 1.1
International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking	
April 2011, Box 1.3
Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications	
September 2011, Box 1.2
Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?	
September 2011, Box 1.3
Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging	
April 2012, Chapter 2, 
	
	
	 Spillover Feature
The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy	
October 2012, Chapter 2,
	
	
	 Spillover Feature
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening	
October 2013, Box 1.1
Credit Supply and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 1.1 
Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	
April 2014, Chapter 2,
	
	
	 Spillover Feature
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
193
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates	
April 2014, Chapter 3
Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update	
October 2014, Box 1.1
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Box 2.2
A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Box 3.5
Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?	
October 2017, Box 1.2
The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
October 2018, Box 2.3
Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
October 2018, Box 3.2
VII.  Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
The Globalization of Labor	
April 2007, Chapter 5
Emigration and Trade: How Do They Affect Developing Countries?	
April 2007, Box 5.1
Labor Market Reforms in the Euro Area and the Wage-Unemployment Trade-Off	
October 2007, Box 2.2
Globalization and Inequality	
October 2007, Chapter 4
The Dualism between Temporary and Permanent Contracts: Measures, Effects, and Policy Issues	
April 2010, Box 3.1
Short-Time Work Programs	
April 2010, Box 3.2
Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies	
September 2011, Box 1.1
The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession	
April 2012, Box 1.1
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment	
April 2016, Box 3.2
Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment After the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects	
April 2018, Chapter 2
Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus  
Advanced Economies	
April 2018, Box 2.1
Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates	
April 2018, Box 2.4
Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil	
April 2018, Box 3.3
The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
October 2018, Box 2.1
The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:  	
October 2018, Box 2.2 
the Case of Industrial Robots
Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies	
April 2019, Box 1.1
Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities	
April 2019, Box 1.3
VIII.  Exchange Rate Issues
How Emerging Market Countries May Be Affected by External Shocks	
September 2006, Box 1.3
Exchange Rates and the Adjustment of External Imbalances	
April 2007, Chapter 3
Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices and External Adjustment	
April 2007, Box 3.3
Depreciation of the U.S. Dollar: Causes and Consequences	
April 2008, Box 1.2
Lessons from the Crisis: On the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime	
April 2010, Box 1.1
Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets	
April 2014, Box 1.4
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?	
October 2015, Chapter 3
The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade	
October 2015, Box 3.1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
194	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains	
October 2015, Box 3.2
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
IX.  External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Capital Flows to Emerging Market Countries: A Long-Term Perspective	
September 2006, Box 1.1
How Will Global Imbalances Adjust?	
September 2006, Box 2.1
External Sustainability and Financial Integration	
April 2007, Box 3.1
Large and Persistent Current Account Imbalances	
April 2007, Box 3.2
Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances	
October 2007, Box 1.3
Managing the Macroeconomic Consequences of Large and Volatile Aid Flows	
October 2007, Box 2.3
Managing Large Capital Inflows	
October 2007, Chapter 3
Can Capital Controls Work?	
October 2007, Box 3.1
Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances: Progress Report	
April 2008, Box 1.3
How Does the Globalization of Trade and Finance Affect Growth? Theory and Evidence	
April 2008, Box 5.1
Divergence of Current Account Balances across Emerging Economies	
October 2008, Chapter 6
Current Account Determinants for Oil-Exporting Countries	
October 2008, Box 6.1
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Implications for Global Financial Markets	
October 2008, Box 6.2
Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis	
April 2009, Box 1.4
Trade Finance and Global Trade: New Evidence from Bank Surveys	
October 2009, Box 1.1
From Deficit to Surplus: Recent Shifts in Global Current Accounts	
October 2009, Box 1.5
Getting the Balance Right: Transitioning out of Sustained Current Account Surpluses	
April 2010, Chapter 4
Emerging Asia: Responding to Capital Inflows	
October 2010, Box 2.1
Latin America-5: Riding Another Wave of Capital Inflows	
October 2010, Box 2.2
Do Financial Crises Have Lasting Effects on Trade?	
October 2010, Chapter 4
Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery	
April 2011, Box 2.1
International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?	
April 2011, Chapter 4
External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points	
September 2011, Box 1.5
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
External Rebalancing in the Euro Area	
October 2013, Box 1.3
The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows	
October 2013, Chapter 4
Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions	
October 2013, Box 4.1
The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom	
October 2014, Box 1.SF.1
Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?	
October 2014, Chapter 4
Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment	
October 2014, Box 4.1
A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area	
October 2014, Box 4.2
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2015, Box 1.2
Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits	
October 2015, Box 1.2
Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies	
October 2015, Box 1.3
Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2016, Box 1.1
Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Chapter 2
Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2016, Box 2.1
The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization	
April 2016, Box 3.3
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?	
October 2016, Chapter 2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
195
The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with  
China’s Final Demand	
April 2017, Box 2.3
Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and  
Developing Economies	
April 2017, Box 2.4
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters	
October 2017, Box 1.4
Remittances and Consumption Smoothing	
October 2017, Box 1.5
A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators	
April 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Services Trade	
April 2018, Box 3.2
Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2018, Box 4.3
Global Trade Tensions	
October 2018, Scenario Box
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?	
April 2019, Chapter 3
Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries	
April 2019, Box 3.2
Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia	
April 2019, Box 3.4
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs	
April 2019, Chapter 4
Gross versus Value-Added Trade	
April 2019, Box 4.1
Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
April 2019, Box 4.2
Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?	
April 2019, Box 4.3
The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a US–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models	
April 2019, Box 4.4
A No-Deal Brexit	
April 2019, Scenario Box
X.  Regional Issues
EMU: 10 Years On	
October 2008, Box 2.1
Vulnerabilities in Emerging Economies	
April 2009, Box 2.2
East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe	
April 2012, Box 2.1
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions	
April 2018, Box 2.3
XI.  Country-Specific Analyses
Why Is the U.S. International Income Account Still in the Black, and Will This Last?	
September 2005, Box 1.2
Is India Becoming an Engine for Global Growth?	
September 2005, Box 1.4
Saving and Investment in China	
September 2005, Box 2.1
China’s GDP Revision: What Does It Mean for China and the Global Economy?	
April 2006, Box 1.6
What Do Country Studies of the Impact of Globalization on Inequality Tell Us?  
Examples from Mexico, China, and India	
October 2007, Box 4.2
Japan after the Plaza Accord	
April 2010, Box 4.1
Taiwan Province of China in the Late 1980s	
April 2010, Box 4.2
Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?	
April 2011, Box 1.4
Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?	
April 2012, Box 1.3
The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation	
April 2012, Box 3.1
Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland	
April 2012, Box 3.2
Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?	
October 2013, Box 1.4
Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?	
April 2014, Box 1.2
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade	
October 2014, Box 3.1
Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?	
October 2015, Box 3.3
The Japanese Experience with Deflation	
October 2016, Box 3.2
Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in US States and Metropolitan Areas	
April 2018, Box 2.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
196	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
XII.  Special Topics
Climate Change and the Global Economy	
April 2008, Chapter 4
Rising Car Ownership in Emerging Economies: Implications for Climate Change	
April 2008, Box 4.1
South Asia: Illustrative Impact of an Abrupt Climate Shock	
April 2008, Box 4.2
Macroeconomic Policies for Smoother Adjustment to Abrupt Climate Shocks	
April 2008, Box 4.3
Catastrophe Insurance and Bonds: New Instruments to Hedge Extreme Weather Risks	
April 2008, Box 4.4
Recent Emission-Reduction Policy Initiatives	
April 2008, Box 4.5
Complexities in Designing Domestic Mitigation Policies	
April 2008, Box 4.6
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up Human Development?	
October 2015, Box 2.3
Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms	
April 2016, Box 3.1
Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method	
April 2016, Box 3.4
A Global Rush for Land	
October 2016, Box 1.SF.1
Conflict, Growth, and Migration 	
April 2017, Box 1.1
Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity 	
April 2017, Box 1.2
Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Case of the Brazil, Russia, India, China,  
and South Africa 	
April 2017, Box 2.1
Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview	
April 2017, Box 3.1
The Elasticity of Substitution Between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation	
April 2017, Box 3.2
Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World	
April 2017, Box 3.3
Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income	
April 2017, Box 3.4
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?	
October 2017, Chapter 3
The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones	
October 2017, Box 3.1
The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis	
October 2017, Box 3.2
Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies	
October 2017, Box 3.3
Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets	
October 2017, Box 3.4
Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution	
October 2017, Box 3.5
Mitigating Climate Change	
October 2017, Box 3.6
Smartphones and Global Trade	
April 2018, Box 1.1
Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?	
April 2018, Box 1.4
The Changing Service Content of Manufactures	
April 2018, Box 3.1
Patent Data and Concepts	
April 2018, Box 4.1
International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers	
April 2018, Box 4.2
Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation	
April 2018, Box 4.4
Increasing Market Power	
October 2018, Box 1.1
Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
October 2018, Box 1.5
Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
October 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects	
April 2019, Chapter 2
The Comovement Between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving	
April 2019, Box 2.1
Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power	
April 2019, Box 2.2
The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies	
April 2019, Box 3.1 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019	
197
E
xecutive Directors broadly shared the assess-
ment of global economic prospects and risks. 
They observed that global economic activ-
ity had recently lost momentum, reflecting 
a confluence of factors in a number of large economies. 
Global trade had slowed sharply, and concerns over 
trade tensions weakened business confidence. Directors 
noted that while growth is expected to level off in the 
first half of this year and firm up thereafter, this short-
term outlook is subject to considerable uncertainty. 
Directors noted that, over the medium term, growth 
is expected to moderate further in advanced econo-
mies, as population aging constrains the expansion of 
the labor force and labor productivity growth remains 
tepid. In emerging market and developing economies, 
growth is expected to increase modestly. Convergence 
toward advanced economy income levels, however, 
remains slow for many of these economies, due to 
structural bottlenecks and, in some cases, high debt, 
subdued commodity prices, and civil strife.
Directors agreed that risks to the global outlook 
remain skewed to the downside amid high policy 
uncertainty. These include a reescalation of trade ten-
sions and disruptions from a no-deal Brexit. Given 
still-accommodative financial conditions, the global 
economy also remains susceptible to a sudden shift in 
market sentiment and associated tightening in financial 
conditions. Downside risks in systemic economies, if 
they were to materialize, also weigh on the outlook. 
On the upside, if recent tariff increases are rolled back 
and trade tensions resolved, rising business confidence 
could lift growth. Over the medium term, many 
Directors noted risks from rising inequality, climate 
change, cyber risks, political uncertainty, and declining 
trust in institutions. 
Directors noted that the current conjuncture 
highlights the urgent need for strong global coopera-
tion and coordination to tackle shared challenges. 
Many Directors attached priority to resolving trade 
disagreements cooperatively without raising further 
distortionary barriers, and reiterated the importance of 
strengthening the open, rules-based multilateral trading 
system. Directors stressed that broadening the gains 
from global economic integration would also require 
closer cooperation in the areas of financial regulatory 
reforms, the global financial safety net, international 
corporate taxation, and climate change. Progress on 
external rebalancing relies on macroeconomic and 
structural policies, mindful of countries’ domestic con-
ditions and objectives, to increase demand and growth 
potential in surplus countries, and initiatives to boost 
supply and potential output in deficit countries. 
Against the backdrop of waning global growth 
momentum and limited policy space in many coun-
tries, Directors underscored the need to avoid policy 
missteps, contain risks, and enhance resilience while 
raising inclusive growth prospects. Macroeconomic 
policies should be carefully calibrated, aiming to sup-
port growth where output may fall below potential and 
policy space exists, and ensuring a soft landing where 
policy support needs to be withdrawn. In the event 
of a deeper or protracted downturn, policies should 
become more accommodative where feasible.
Directors stressed that fiscal policy should strike the 
right balance between growth and debt sustainability 
objectives as appropriate in individual countries. In 
countries with high debt, gradual fiscal adjustment 
is needed, particularly if financing risks are large. In 
countries with fiscal space, fiscal policy should boost 
aggregate demand where there is slack and raise 
potential growth where the economy is operating above 
potential. In this regard, a few Directors noted the role 
of automatic stabilizers during cyclical downswings. In 
the event of a more protracted slowdown in growth, 
care should be taken to avoid a procyclical fiscal stance. 
Directors concurred that fiscal policy should also adapt 
to shifting demographics, advancing technology, and 
deepening global integration. Where there is limited 
The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the  
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on March 21, 2019.
IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK, 
APRIL 2019
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: GROWTH SLOWDOWN, PRECARIOUS RECOVERY
198	
International Monetary Fund | April 2019
budgetary room, such a response will have to occur 
through budget recomposition and reprioritization.
Amid signs of weakening growth and muted inflation 
in most advanced economies, Directors welcomed the 
more gradual approach to monetary policy normaliza-
tion by major central banks since the beginning of this 
year, which has helped boost positive market sentiment. 
They urged policymakers to clearly communicate any 
reassessment of the pace of monetary policy normaliza-
tion that reflects either changes in the economic outlook 
or risks surrounding the outlook, to avoid excessive 
market swings or unduly compressed market volatility. 
With financial conditions still accommodative as 
the credit cycle matures, Directors noted that financial 
vulnerabilities would likely continue to build in differ-
ent parts of the global economy. These include rising 
corporate debt, sovereign–financial sector nexus, matu-
rity and liquidity mismatches, house price misalign-
ment, and sensitivity of portfolio flows and asset prices 
in emerging markets to changes in global financial 
conditions. The tightening in financial conditions late 
last year was too short-lived to meaningfully slow the 
buildup of vulnerabilities, leaving medium-term risks 
to global financial stability broadly unchanged. Where 
needed, policymakers should deploy prudential tools 
proactively, expand macroprudential toolkits, and con-
tinue to repair public and private balance sheets.
Across all economies, growth-enhancing structural 
reforms remain key to improving potential output, 
inclusiveness, and resilience. Directors emphasized that 
high debt levels in many countries require a multi-
pronged approach, including to enhance debt trans-
parency and management. Broader structural reforms 
should aim to lift productivity, encourage labor force 
participation, and upgrade skills. Further deregulation 
in product markets and services, supported by stronger 
competition law and policy, could help deter the rise 
in corporate market power in advanced economies. 
Noting that corruption could undermine inclu-
sive growth, public finances, and poverty reduction 
efforts, Directors highlighted the need to improve 
fiscal institutions, transparency, and governance in the 
public sector. Greater cooperation is also essential at 
the global level, including combating foreign bribery 
and money laundering of proceeds from corrupt activi-
ties, as well as improving the sharing of information to 
fight tax evasion and prosecute corrupt acts. 
Directors stressed that, with external conditions 
remaining uncertain, emerging market and developing 
economies should focus monetary policy on anchor-
ing inflation expectations where inflation remains 
high, and support domestic activity as needed where 
expectations are well anchored. Depending on country 
circumstances, efforts should continue to raise revenue, 
reduce debt-related vulnerabilities, and make steady 
progress on economic and financial rebalancing. 
Directors underscored the need for low-income 
developing economies to adopt policies that focus on 
drivers of growth, raise resilience to volatile external 
conditions, durably reduce debt vulnerabilities, and 
advance toward the 2030 Sustainable Development 
Goals, with continued support from the international 
community. Priorities include improving macro-
economic and macroprudential policy frameworks, 
strengthening domestic resource mobilization, and 
gearing fiscal policy toward supporting growth and 
development objectives, including protection for social 
spending and carefully selected capital projects. Com-
modity exporters need to continue diversifying their 
economies through policies that improve education 
quality, narrow infrastructure gaps, enhance financial 
inclusion, and boost private investment. 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
Highlights from IMF Publications
Visit bookstore.imf.org
$30. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48432-594-0. 260pp. 
imfbk.st/24708
$25. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51355-890-5. 311pp. 
imfbk.st/23550
$30. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48433-974-9. 382pp. 
imfbk.st/24306
$30. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48437-5-686. 318pp. 
imfbk.st/25455
$40. English. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-48437-2-142. 418pp. 
imfbk.st/25402
$29 annual subscription fee. 
Free to developing countries.
English ISSN 0145-1707
r.imfbk.st/FandD
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
