WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
2023
APR
A Rocky Recovery
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
A Rocky Recovery
2023
APR
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
©2023 International Monetary Fund
 
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
Composition: Absolute Service, Inc.; and AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
 
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
IMF Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and 
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some 
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional 
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial 
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. | 
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80	
ISBN 979-8-40022-411-9 (English Paper)
	
979-8-40023-813-0 (English ePub)
	
979-8-40022-442-3 (English Web PDF)
Disclaimer: The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published 
twice a year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has ben-
efited from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion 
of the report on March 30, 2023. The views expressed in this publication are those of 
the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors 
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2023. World Economic Outlook: 
A Rocky Recovery. Washington, DC. April.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail: 
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services 
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.bookstore.imf.org
www.elibrary.imf.org
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
iii
CONTENTS
Assumptions and Conventions	
ix
Further Information	
xi
Data	
xii
Preface	
xiii
Foreword	
xiv
Executive Summary	
xvi
Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies	
1
A Rocky Recovery	
1
A Challenging Outlook	
6
Downside Risks Dominate	
14
Policy Priorities: Walking a Narrow Path	
17
Box 1.1. House Prices: Coming off the Boil	
23
Box 1.2. Monetary Policy: Speed of Transmission, Heterogeneity, and Asymmetries	
25
Box 1.3. Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projections	
27
Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and the Macroeconomic Impact of  
Declines in Fossil Fuel Extraction	
30
References	
42
Chapter 2. The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy	
45
Introduction	
45
Trends in Real Rates over the Long Term	
47
Measuring the Natural Rate	
48
Drivers of the Natural Rate	
52
The Outlook for the Natural Rate	
55
Policy Implications	
57
Conclusion	
58
Box 2.1. The Natural Rate of Interest and the Green Transition	
60
Box 2.2. Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Natural Interest Rate	
62
Box 2.3. Spillovers to Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
64
References	
66
Chapter 3. Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt	
69
Introduction	
69
Macroeconomic Drivers of the Debt-to-GDP Ratio	
72
Debt Restructuring and Its Effects	
77
Going Granular: Case Studies of Debt Restructuring	
81
Conclusions and Policy Implications	
83
Box 3.1. Market Reforms to Promote Growth and Debt Sustainability	
86
Box 3.2. Monetary and Fiscal Interactions	
87
References	
88
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
iv	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Chapter 4. Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment	
91
Introduction	
91
Early Signs of FDI Fragmentation	
94
Which Host Countries Are More Vulnerable to FDI Relocation?	
97
FDI Spillovers to Host Countries	
99
A Model-Based Quantification of the Costs of FDI Fragmentation	
101
Policy Implications	
104
Box 4.1. Rising Trade Tensions	
107
Box 4.2. Balance Sheet Exposure to Fragmentation Risk	
109
Box 4.3. Geopolitical Tensions, Supply Chains, and Trade	
110
References	
112
Statistical Appendix	
115
Assumptions	
115
What’s New	
116
Data and Conventions	
116
Country Notes	
117
Classification of Countries	
119
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook  
Classification	
119
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in  
Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2022	
120
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup	
121
Table C. European Union	
121
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source  
of Export Earnings	
122
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position,  
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification 	
123
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods	
125
Table G. Key Data Documentation	
126
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies	
136
List of Tables	
141
Output (Tables A1–A4)	
142
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)	
149
Financial Policies (Table A8)	
154
Foreign Trade (Table A9)	
155
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)	
157
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)	
164
Flow of Funds (Table A14)	
168
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)	
171
World Economic Outlook Selected Topics	
173
IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, March 2023	
183
Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections	
9
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at  
Market Exchange Rate Weights	
11
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
36
contents
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
v
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
37
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
38
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP,  
Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
39
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
40
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 	
41
Table 2.1. Required Fiscal Adjustment under Different Scenarios	
58
Table 3.1. Average Nominal Effective Interest Rate and Inflation during Reduction Episodes	
73
Table 3.2. Structural Vector Autoregression Sign Restrictions	
74
Table 3.3. Historical Decomposition of Debt Reduction	
75
Table 3.4. Summary Statistics of Restructuring	
78
Table 3.5. Restructurings with Face Value Reduction	
80
Table 3.6. Impact of Restructuring and Consolidation	
81
Table 3.7. Case Study Summary	
82
Table 4.1. Modeled Fragmentation Scenarios	
103
Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor  
Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing  
and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of  
Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of  
Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of  
External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region:  
External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria:  
External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term  
Baseline Scenario: Selected Economic Indicators
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
vi	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Figures
Figure 1.1. Broad Equity and Bank Equity Indices for Selected Major Economies	
2
Figure 1.2. Early 2023 Activity Indicators Strengthened but Confidence  
Remained Depressed	
2
Figure 1.3. Inflation Turning Down or Plateauing?	
3
Figure 1.4. Monetary Policy Tightening Rapidly across Many Economies	
3
Figure 1.5. Labor Markets Have Tightened in Selected Advanced Economies	
4
Figure 1.6. Wage-Price Spiral Risks Appear Contained So Far	
4
Figure 1.7. Anchored Inflation Expectations	
4
Figure 1.8. Shifting Market-Implied US Policy Rate Expectations by Vintage and  
Repricing Risks	
5
Figure 1.9. Sovereign Spreads in Emerging Market and Developing Economies  
Have Narrowed	
5
Figure 1.10. China’s Reopening and Recovery	
6
Figure 1.11. Shares of Economies’ Total Exports Directed to China in 2021	
7
Figure 1.12. Assumptions on Monetary and Fiscal Policy Stances	
7
Figure 1.13. Growth Outlook: Feeble and Uneven	
8
Figure 1.14. Projected Unemployment Rate Rises in Advanced Economies	
8
Figure 1.15. Real GDP Level in Plausible Alternative Scenario in 2023–24	
12
Figure 1.16. Inflation Coming Down over Time	
12
Figure 1.17. Inflation Slowly Converging to Target	
13
Figure 1.18. Five-Year-Ahead Real Growth Projections by World Economic Outlook  
Forecast Vintage	
13
Figure 1.19. Current Account and International Investment Positions	
14
Figure 1.20. External Debt Vulnerabilities for Emerging Market and Developing  
Economies Are High	
16
Figure 1.21. Geopolitical and Trade Tensions Rising over Time	
17
Figure 1.22. Real Policy Rates in Selected Advanced Economies	
18
Figure 1.23. Is US Unemployment Unnaturally Low?	
18
Figure 1.24. Sticky Inflation and Premature Easing: The US Experience in the 1980s	
19
Figure 1.25. US Dollar Remains Strong Despite Some Moderation	
20
Figure 1.26. Europe’s Energy Crisis: Status and Costs of Fiscal Support in 2022–23	
20
Figure 1.27. Vulnerability to Food Insecurity: The Case of Wheat	
21
Figure 1.1.1. Global Average Real House Index	
23
Figure 1.1.2. Indicators of Housing Market Risk	
23
Figure 1.1.3. Household Indebtedness Rates in Selected Economies	
24
Figure 1.2.1. Years-to-Trough Responses of Prices to Monetary Tightening	
25
Figure 1.3.1. Distribution of Forecast Uncertainty around World Growth and 
Inflation Projections	
27
Figure 1.3.2. Impact of Downside Scenario on GDP and Core Inflation	
29
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments	
30
Figure 1.SF.2. EU Gas Storage and Futures Contract Prices	
31
Figure 1.SF.3. Global Fossil Fuel Production Declines 60 Percent in a  
Net Zero Emissions Scenario	
32
Figure 1.SF.4. Top Twenty Countries by Share of Fossil Fuel Production and  
Net Exports in GDP	
33
Figure 1.SF.5. Episodes of Extraction Declines	
33
Figure 1.SF.6. Responses of Macroeconomic Variables to an Extraction Decline Shock	
34
Figure 1.SF.7. Response of Institutional Quality Interacted with Manufacturing  
Sector Size to an Extraction Decline Shock	
34
contents
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
vii
Figure 2.1. Real Interest Rate Trends	
47
Figure 2.2. (Ex Post) Real Interest Rates in Advanced and Emerging Market and  
Developing Economies	
48
Figure 2.3. Kalman Filter Estimates of the Natural Rate of Interest for Selected  
Advanced Economies	
49
Figure 2.4. Real Rates and Natural Rates: Contemporaneous and Current Estimates for  
Selected Advanced Economies	
50
Figure 2.5. Measuring the Natural Rate: The Role of International Spillovers	
51
Figure 2.6. Natural Rate Estimates: Model Comparison	
54
Figure 2.7. Drivers of Natural Rate Changes from 1975–79 to 2015–19 for  
Selected Economies	
54
Figure 2.8. Simulated Path for Natural Rate of Interest: Baseline and Scenarios	
55
Figure 2.1.1. The Global Natural Rate of Interest and the Green Transition	
60
Figure 2.2.1. Regional Impact of Trade Fragmentation Scenario	
62
Figure 2.2.2. Regional Impact of Financial Fragmentation Scenario	
63
Figure 2.3.1. Natural Rate Spillovers at Different Horizons	
64
Figure 2.3.2. Estimated Impact of Capital Openness on Strength of US Spillovers	
65
Figure 3.1. Public Debt Trends	
70
Figure 3.2. Contribution to Change in Debt to GDP during Reduction Episodes	
72
Figure 3.3. Effect of Fiscal Consolidation on Debt to GDP	
74
Figure 3.4. Impulse Responses to a 1 Percentage Point of GDP Primary Balance Shock,  
Advanced Economies	
75
Figure 3.5. Factors Affecting the Probability of Consolidations Reducing Debt Ratios	
77
Figure 3.6. Share of Observations with Positive Change in Primary Balance to GDP	
78
Figure 3.7. Contribution to Change in Debt-to-GDP Ratio during Reduction Episodes  
with and without Restructuring	
79
Figure 3.8. Risk of Restructuring	
79
Figure 3.9. Impact of Restructuring on Debt to GDP	
80
Figure 3.10. Decomposition of Cumulative Change in Debt to GDP	
83
Figure 3.1.1. Empirical Impulse Response upon Structural Reforms	
86
Figure 3.2.1. Estimated Response of Effective Real Interest Rate	
87
Figure 4.1. “Slowbalization”	
92
Figure 4.2. Rising Geopolitical Tensions and Foreign Direct Investment Fragmentation	
92
Figure 4.3. Interest in Reshoring and Firm Characteristics	
93
Figure 4.4. Foreign Direct Investment Fragmentation	
95
Figure 4.5. Foreign Direct Investment Reallocation across Regions, 2020:Q2–22:Q4  
versus 2015:Q1–20:Q1	
95
Figure 4.6. Change in Outward US Foreign Direct Investment, 2020:Q2–22:Q4  
versus 2015:Q1–20:Q1	
96
Figure 4.7. Foreign Direct Investment between Geographically and Geopolitically  
Close Countries	
96
Figure 4.8. Gravity Model for Ideal Point Distance and Foreign Direct Investment	
97
Figure 4.9. Vulnerability Index	
98
Figure 4.10. Geopolitical Index and Strategic Index	
99
Figure 4.11. Vulnerability Index and Regulatory Quality	
100
Figure 4.12. Foreign Direct Investment and Growth: Horizontal versus Vertical	
101
Figure 4.13. Firm-Level Foreign Direct Investment Spillovers: within Industries  
versus across Industries	
101
Figure 4.14. Impact of Investment Flow Barriers on GDP	
104
Figure 4.15. Long-Term GDP Losses, with Uncertainty for Nonaligned Economies	
104
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
viii	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Figure 4.16. Impact on GDP for Bloc Members: Tripolar World and Nonaligned  
Joining Blocs	
105
Figure 4.17. Impact on GDP for Bloc Members: Nonaligned Joining Blocs	
105
Figure 4.1.1. A Timeline of US-China Trade Tensions	
107
Figure 4.2.1. Gross Exposures to Fragmentation, Assets and Liabilities	
109
Figure 4.3.1. Impact of One-Standard-Deviation Decrease in Geopolitical Alignment  
on Tariff-Equivalent Trade Barrier	
110
Figure 4.3.2. Change in Real Per Capita Income Due to Fragmentation	
111
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
ix
ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook 
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during 
February 15, 2023, to March 15, 2023, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange 
rate mechanism II, which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that estab-
lished policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies 
for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $73.13 a barrel 
in 2023 and $68.90 a barrel in 2024; that the three-month government bond yield for the United States will average 
5.1 percent in 2023 and 4.5 percent in 2024, that for the euro area will average 2.8 percent in 2023 and 3.0 
percent in 2024, and that for Japan will average –0.1 percent in 2023 and 0.0 percent in 2024; and that the 
10-year government bond yield for the United States will average 3.8 percent in 2023 and 3.6 percent in 2024, 
that for the euro area will average 2.5 percent in 2023 and 2.8 percent in 2024, and that for Japan will aver-
age 0.6 percent in 2023 and 2024. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncer-
tainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would, in any event, be involved in the projections. The 
estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through March 28, 2023.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
•	 . . .  to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
•	 –  between years or months (for example, 2022–23 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered, 
including the beginning and ending years or months; and
•	 /  between years or months (for example, 2022/23) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
•	 “Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
•	 “Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 
1 percentage point).
•	 Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in 
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and 
government finance data for each country.
•	 For some countries, the figures for 2022 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please 
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments for each country.
What is new in this publication:
•	 Beginning with the April 2023 WEO, ASEAN-5 comprises the five ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations) founding member nations: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
•	 On January 1, 2023, Croatia became the 20th country to join the euro area. Data for Croatia are now included 
in aggregates for the euro area and for advanced economies and relevant subgroups.
•	 For Ecuador, fiscal sector projections are excluded from publication for 2023–28 because of ongoing program 
discussions.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
•	 Tables and figures in this report that list their source as “IMF staff calculations” or “IMF staff estimates” draw 
on data from the WEO database.
•	 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
•	 Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
x	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
•	 Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or 
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of 
the weighted group data.
•	 The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on maps do not imply, on the part of 
the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is 
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities 
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
xi
FURTHER INFORMATION
Corrections and Revisions 
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the 
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are 
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and 
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.
Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/525724.
Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the 
IMF eLibrary at http://www.elibrary.imf.org/APR23WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at  
www.imf.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly:
Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.
xii	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
DATA
This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compi-
lation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most 
frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histori-
cal data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context 
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each 
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural 
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF 
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a 
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International 
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their 
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a 
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are 
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF 
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and 
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, or online forum 
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
xiii
PREFACE
The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s 
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international 
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a 
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information 
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out 
in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, 
European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—
together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and 
the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Pierre-
Olivier Gourinchas, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Petya Koeva 
Brooks, Deputy Director, Research Department, and Daniel Leigh, Division Chief, Research Department. Shekhar 
Aiyar, Division Chief, Research Department, and Head of the Spillovers Task Force, supervised Chapter 4.
The primary contributors to this report are JaeBin Ahn, Sakai Ando, Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi, Tamon 
Asonuma, John Bluedorn, Philip Barrett, Rachel Brasier, Benjamin Carton, Giovanni Ganelli, Ashique Habib, 
Niels-Jakob Hanson, Christoffer Koch, Toh Kuan, Chiara Maggi, Davide Malacrino, Prachi Mishra, Dirk Vaughn 
Muir, Jean-Marc Natal, Diaa Noureldin, Nikhil Patel, Adrian Peralta Alva, Josef Platzer, Andrea Presbitero, Andrea 
Pescatori, Alexandre Balduino Sollaci, and Martin Stuermer.
Other contributors include Silvia Albrizio, Michal Andrle, Carlos Angulo, Gavin Asdorian, Jared Bebee, 
Nina Biljanovska, Lukas Boehnert, Christian Bogmans, Zhuo Chen, Shan Chen, Moya Chin, Yaniv Cohen, 
Gabriela Cugat, Allan Dizioli, Wenchuan Dong, Rebecca Eyassu, Angela Espiritu, Pedro Henrique Gagliardi, 
Giovanni Ganelli, Sergio Garcia, Francesco Grigoli, Shushanik Hakobyan, Ziyan Han, Jinjin He, Youyou Huang, 
Nicole Jales, Eduard Laurito, Jungjin Lee, Yang Liu, Rui Mano, Sergii Meleshchuk, Carlos Morales, Futoshi 
Narita, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, Augustus Panton, Ilse Peirtsegaele, Clarita Phillips, Carlo 
Pizzinelli, Rafael Portillo, Ervin Prifti, Evgenia Pugacheva, Damien Puy, Tianchu Qi, Aneta Radzikowski, Shrihari 
Ramachandra, Francisco Roch, Max Rozycki, Ariadne Checo de Los Santos, Muhammad Ahsan Shafique, Nicholas 
Tong, Petia Topalova, Christoph Ungerer, Isaac Warren, Yarou Xu, Chao Wang, Fujie Wang, Jiaqi Zhao, Canran 
Zheng, and Robert Zymek.
Gemma Rose Diaz from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with 
production and editorial support from Michael Harrup, and additional assistance from Lucy Scott Morales, James 
Unwin, Nancy Morrison, David Einhorn, Grauel Group, and Absolute Service, Inc.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, as 
well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on March 30, 2023. However, estimates, 
projections, and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive 
Directors or to their national authorities.
xiv	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
FOREWORD
It Was Never Going to Be an Easy Ride 
On the surface, the global economy appears poised 
for a gradual recovery from the powerful blows of the 
pandemic and of Russia’s unprovoked war on Ukraine. 
China is rebounding strongly following the reopening 
of its economy. Supply-chain disruptions are unwind-
ing, while the dislocations to energy and food markets 
caused by the war are receding. Simultaneously, the 
massive and synchronous tightening of monetary 
policy by most central banks should start to bear fruit, 
with inflation moving back toward its targets.
In our latest forecast, global growth will bottom 
out at 2.8 percent this year before rising modestly to 
3.0 percent in 2024. Global inflation will decrease, 
although more slowly than initially anticipated, from 
8.7 percent in 2022 to 7.0 percent this year and 4.9 
percent in 2024.
Notably, emerging market and developing econo-
mies are already powering ahead in many cases, with 
growth rates (fourth quarter over fourth quarter) 
jumping from 2.8 percent in 2022 to 4.5 percent 
this year. The slowdown is concentrated in advanced 
economies, especially the euro area and the United 
Kingdom, where growth (also fourth quarter over 
fourth quarter) is expected to fall to 0.7 percent and 
–0.4 percent, respectively, this year before rebounding 
to 1.8 and 2.0 percent in 2024. 
Below the surface, however, turbulence is building, 
and the situation is quite fragile, as the recent bout of 
banking instability reminded us.
Inflation is much stickier than anticipated even a 
few months ago. While global inflation has declined, 
that reflects mostly the sharp reversal in energy and 
food prices. But core inflation, excluding the volatile 
energy and food components, has not yet peaked 
in many countries. It is expected to decline to 5.1 
percent this year (fourth quarter over fourth quarter), 
a sizable upward revision of 0.6 percentage point from 
our January update, well above target. 
Activity too shows signs of resilience as labor mar-
kets remain historically tight in most advanced econo-
mies. At this point in the tightening cycle, we would 
expect to see stronger signs of output and employ-
ment softening. Instead, both output and inflation 
estimates have been revised upward for the past two 
quarters, suggesting stronger-than-expected demand, 
which may require monetary policy to tighten further 
or to stay tighter for longer.
Should we worry about the risk of an uncontrolled 
wage-price spiral? At this point, I remain uncon-
vinced. Nominal wage inflation continues to lag far 
behind price inflation, implying a steep and unprec-
edented decline in real wages. Given the tightness in 
labor markets, this is unlikely to continue, and real 
wages should recover. Corporate margins have surged 
in recent years—this is the flip side of steeply higher 
prices but only modestly higher wages—and should 
be able to absorb rising labor costs on average. As long 
as inflation expectations remain well anchored, that 
process should not spin out of control. It may well, 
however, take some time. 
More worrisome is that the sharp policy tightening 
of the past 12 months is starting to have serious side 
effects for the financial sector, as we have repeatedly 
warned might happen (October 2022 Global Financial 
Stability Report; January 2023 World Economic Outlook 
[WEO] Update). Following a prolonged period of 
muted inflation and extremely low interest rates, last 
year’s rapid tightening of monetary policy has trig-
gered sizable losses on long-term fixed-income assets. 
The stability of any financial system hinges on its 
ability to absorb losses without recourse to taxpay-
ers’ money. The financial instability last fall in the 
gilt market in the United Kingdom and the recent 
banking turbulence in the United States with the col-
lapse of a few regional banks illustrate that significant 
vulnerabilities exist both among banks and nonbank 
financial institutions. In both cases the authorities 
took quick and strong action and have been able to 
contain the spread of the crisis so far (April 2023 
Global Financial Stability Report). Yet the financial 
system may well be tested again.
Once again, downside risks dominate. Nervous 
investors often look for the next weakest link, as 
they did with Credit Suisse, a globally systemic but 
ailing European bank. Financial institutions with 
excess leverage, credit risk or interest rate exposure, 
too much dependence on short-term funding, or 
located in jurisdictions with limited fiscal space could 
become the next target. So could countries with 
weaker perceived fundamentals. A sharp tightening 
of global financial conditions—a “‘risk-off” shock—
could have a dramatic impact on credit conditions 
and public finances especially in emerging market and 
developing economies, with large capital outflows, a 
sudden increase in risk premia, a dollar appreciation 
in a rush toward safety, and major declines in global 
activity amid lower confidence, household spending, 
and investment. In such a severe downside scenario, 
global GDP per capita could come close to falling—
an outcome whose probability we estimate at about 
15 percent. 
We are therefore entering a perilous phase during 
which economic growth remains low by historical 
standards and financial risks have risen, yet inflation 
has not yet decisively turned the corner. More than 
ever, policymakers will need a steady hand and clear 
communication. The appropriate course of action is 
contingent on the state of the financial system. As 
long as the latter remains reasonably stable, as it is 
now, monetary policy should stay firmly focused on 
bringing inflation down. A silver lining is that the 
banking turmoil will help slow aggregate activity as 
banks curtail lending in the face of rising funding 
costs and of the need to act more prudently. In and 
of itself, this should partially mitigate the need for 
further monetary policy tightening. But any expecta-
tion that central banks will abandon the fight against 
inflation would have the opposite effect: lowering 
yields, supporting activity beyond what is warranted, 
and complicating the task of central banks. Tighter 
fiscal policy can also play an active role. By cooling 
off economic activity, it would support monetary 
policy, allowing real interest rates to return faster to 
their low natural level (April 2023 WEO ­Chapter 2). 
Appropriately designed fiscal consolidations will 
also help rebuild much needed fiscal buffers and 
help strengthen financial stability (April 2023 WEO 
­Chapter 3; April 2023 Fiscal Monitor).
Should a systemic financial crisis loom large, a 
careful and timely recalibration of policy will be 
needed to safeguard both the financial system and 
economic activity. It is important to stress that this is 
not where we are, even if more financial tremors are 
bound to occur. Regulators and supervisors should 
act now to ensure these do not morph into a full-
blown financial crisis by actively managing market 
strains and strengthening oversight. For emerging 
market and developing economies, this also means 
ensuring proper access to the global financial safety 
net, including the IMF’s precautionary arrangements, 
and access to the Federal Reserve repurchase facility 
for Foreign and International Monetary Authori-
ties or to central bank swap lines, where relevant. 
Exchange rates should adjust as much as possible 
unless doing so raises financial stability risks or 
threatens price stability, in line with our Integrated 
Policy Framework.
Finally, our latest projections also indicate an over-
all slowdown in medium-term growth forecasts. Five-
year-ahead growth forecasts declined steadily from 
4.6 percent in 2011 to 3.0 percent in 2023. Some of 
this decline reflects the growth slowdown of previously 
rapidly growing economies such as China and Korea. 
This is predictable: Growth slows down as countries 
converge. But some of the more recent slowdown may 
also reflect more ominous forces: the scarring impact 
of the pandemic; a slower pace of structural reforms, 
as well as the rising threat of geoeconomic fragmenta-
tion leading to more trade tensions; less direct invest-
ment; and a slower pace of innovation and technology 
adoption across fragmented ‘blocs’ (April 2023 WEO 
Chapter 4). A fragmented world is unlikely to achieve 
progress for all or to allow us to tackle global chal-
lenges such as climate change or pandemic prepared-
ness. We must avoid that path at all costs.
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Economic Counsellor
FOREWORD
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
xv
xvi	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Tentative signs in early 2023 that the world 
economy could achieve a soft landing—with inflation 
coming down and growth steady—have receded amid 
stubbornly high inflation and recent financial sector 
turmoil. Although inflation has declined as central 
banks have raised interest rates and food and energy 
prices have come down, underlying price pressures are 
proving sticky, with labor markets tight in a number 
of economies. Side effects from the fast rise in policy 
rates are becoming apparent, as banking sector vulner-
abilities have come into focus and fears of contagion 
have risen across the broader financial sector, includ-
ing nonbank financial institutions. Policymakers have 
taken forceful actions to stabilize the banking system. 
As discussed in depth in the Global Financial Stability 
Report, financial conditions are fluctuating with the 
shifts in sentiment. 
In parallel, the other major forces that shaped the 
world economy in 2022 seem set to continue into 
this year, but with changed intensities. Debt levels 
remain high, limiting the ability of fiscal policymakers 
to respond to new challenges. Commodity prices that 
rose sharply following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine 
have moderated, but the war continues, and geopoliti-
cal tensions are high. Infectious COVID-19 strains 
caused widespread outbreaks last year, but economies 
that were hit hard—most notably China—appear 
to be recovering, easing supply-chain disruptions. 
Despite the fillips from lower food and energy prices 
and improved supply-chain functioning, risks are 
firmly to the downside with the increased uncertainty 
from the recent financial sector turmoil. 
The baseline forecast, which assumes that the recent 
financial sector stresses are contained, is for growth 
to fall from 3.4 percent in 2022 to 2.8 percent in 
2023, before rising slowly and settling at 3.0 percent 
five years out––the lowest medium-term forecast in 
decades. Advanced economies are expected to see 
an especially pronounced growth slowdown, from 
2.7 percent in 2022 to 1.3 percent in 2023. In a plau-
sible alternative scenario with further financial sector 
stress, global growth declines to about 2.5 percent in 
2023––the weakest growth since the global downturn 
of 2001, barring the initial COVID-19 crisis in 2020 
and during the global financial crisis in 2009––with 
advanced economy growth falling below 1 percent. 
The anemic outlook reflects the tight policy stances 
needed to bring down inflation, the fallout from 
the recent deterioration in financial conditions, the 
ongoing war in Ukraine, and growing geoeconomic 
fragmentation. Global headline inflation is set to fall 
from 8.7 percent in 2022 to 7.0 percent in 2023 on 
the back of lower commodity prices, but underlying 
(core) inflation is likely to decline more slowly. Infla-
tion’s return to target is unlikely before 2025 in most 
cases. Once inflation rates are back to targets, deeper 
structural drivers will likely reduce interest rates 
toward their pre-pandemic levels (Chapter 2). 
Risks to the outlook are heavily skewed to the 
downside, with the chances of a hard landing having 
risen sharply. Financial sector stress could amplify and 
contagion could take hold, weakening the real econ-
omy through a sharp deterioration in financing condi-
tions and compelling central banks to reconsider their 
policy paths. Pockets of sovereign debt distress could, 
in the context of higher borrowing costs and lower 
growth, spread and become more systemic. The war 
in Ukraine could intensify and lead to more food and 
energy price spikes, pushing inflation up. Core infla-
tion could turn out more persistent than anticipated, 
requiring even more monetary tightening to tame. 
Fragmentation into geopolitical blocs has the scope 
to generate large output losses, including through its 
effects on foreign direct investment (Chapter 4). 
Policymakers have a narrow path to walk to 
improve prospects and minimize risks. Central banks 
need to remain steady with their tighter anti-inflation 
stance, but also be ready to adjust and use their 
full set of policy instruments—including to address 
financial stability concerns—as developments demand. 
Fiscal policymakers should buttress monetary and 
financial policymakers’ actions in getting inflation 
back to target while maintaining financial stability. 
In most cases, governments should aim for an overall 
tight stance while providing targeted support to those 
struggling most with the cost-of-living crisis. In a 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
severe downside scenario, automatic stabilizers should 
be allowed to operate fully and temporary support 
measures be utilized as needed, fiscal space permitting. 
Medium-term debt sustainability will require well-
timed fiscal consolidation but also debt restructur-
ing in some cases (Chapter 3). Currencies should 
be allowed to adjust to changing fundamentals, but 
deploying capital flow management policies on out-
flows may be warranted in crisis or imminent crisis 
circumstances, without substituting for needed mac-
roeconomic policy adjustment. Measures to address 
structural factors impeding supply could ameliorate 
medium-term growth. Steps to strengthen multilateral 
cooperation are essential to make progress in creating 
a more resilient world economy, including by bolster-
ing the global financial safety net, mitigating the costs 
of climate change, and reducing the adverse effects of 
geoeconomic fragmentation.
Executive Summary
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
xvii
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
1
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
A Rocky Recovery
The global economy is yet again at a highly uncer-
tain moment, with the cumulative effects of the 
past three years of adverse shocks—most notably, 
the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine—manifesting in unforeseen ways. Spurred by 
pent-up demand, lingering supply disruptions, and 
commodity price spikes, inflation reached multidecade 
highs last year in many economies, leading central 
banks to tighten aggressively to bring it back toward 
their targets and keep inflation expectations anchored.
Although telegraphed by central banks, the rapid 
rise in interest rates and anticipated slowing of eco-
nomic activity to put inflation on a downward path 
have, together with supervisory and regulatory gaps 
and the materialization of bank-specific risks, con-
tributed to stresses in parts of the financial system, 
raising financial stability concerns. Banks’ generally 
strong liquidity and capital positions suggested that 
they would be able to absorb the effects of monetary 
policy tightening and adapt smoothly. However, some 
financial institutions with business models that relied 
heavily on a continuation of the extremely low nom-
inal interest rates of the past years have come under 
acute stress, as they have proved either unprepared or 
unable to adjust to the fast pace of rate rises.
The unexpected failures of two specialized regional 
banks in the United States in mid-March 2023 and 
the collapse of confidence in Credit Suisse—a globally 
significant bank—have roiled financial markets, with 
bank depositors and investors reevaluating the safety 
of their holdings and shifting away from institutions 
and investments perceived as vulnerable. The loss of 
confidence in Credit Suisse resulted in a brokered 
takeover. Broad equity indices across major markets 
have fallen below their levels prior to the turmoil, 
but bank equities have come under extreme pressure 
(Figure 1.1). Despite strong policy actions to sup-
port the banking sector and reassure markets, some 
depositors and investors have become highly sensitive 
to any news, as they struggle to discern the breadth 
of vulnerabilities across banks and nonbank finan-
cial institutions and their implications for the likely 
near-term path of the economy. Financial conditions 
have tightened, which is likely to entail lower lending 
and activity if they persist (see also Chapter 1 of the 
April 2023 Global Financial Stability Report).
Prior to recent financial sector ructions, activity 
in the world economy had shown nascent signs of 
stabilizing in early 2023 after the adverse shocks of 
last year (Figure 1.2, panels 1 and 2). Russia’s invasion 
of Ukraine and the ongoing war caused severe com-
modity and energy price shocks and trade disruptions, 
provoking the beginning of a significant reorientation 
and adjustment across many economies. More conta-
gious COVID-19 strains emerged and spread widely. 
Outbreaks particularly affected activity in economies 
in which populations had lower levels of immunity 
and in which strict lockdowns were implemented, 
such as in China. Although these developments 
imperiled the recovery, activity in many economies 
turned out better than expected in the second half of 
2022, typically reflecting stronger-than-anticipated 
domestic conditions. Labor markets in advanced 
economies—most notably, the United States—have 
stayed very strong, with unemployment rates his-
torically low. Even so, confidence remains depressed 
across all regions compared with where it was at the 
beginning of 2022, before Russia invaded Ukraine and 
the resurgence of COVID-19 in the second quarter 
(Figure 1.2, panel 3).
With the recent increase in financial market vol-
atility and multiple indicators pointing in different 
directions, the fog around the world economic outlook 
has thickened. Uncertainty is high, and the balance of 
risks has shifted firmly to the downside so long as the 
financial sector remains unsettled. The major forces 
that affected the world in 2022—central banks’ tight 
monetary stances to allay inflation, limited fiscal buf-
fers to absorb shocks amid historically high debt levels, 
commodity price spikes and geoeconomic fragmenta-
tion with Russia’s war in Ukraine, and China’s eco-
nomic reopening—seem likely to continue into 2023. 
But these forces are now overlaid by and interacting 
with new financial stability concerns. A hard landing—
particularly for advanced economies—has become 
1
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
2
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
a much larger risk. Policymakers may face difficult 
trade-offs to bring sticky inflation down and maintain 
growth while also preserving financial stability.
Inflation Is Declining with Rapid Rate Rises but Remains 
Elevated amid Financial Sector Stress
Global headline inflation has been declining since 
mid-2022 at a three-month seasonally adjusted annual-
ized rate (Figure 1.3). A fall in fuel and energy com-
modity prices, particularly for the United States, euro 
area, and Latin America, has contributed to this decline 
(see Figure 1.SF.1). To dampen demand and reduce 
underlying (core) inflation, the lion’s share of central 
banks around the world have been raising interest 
rates since 2021, both at a faster pace and in a more 
synchronous manner than in the previous global mon-
etary tightening episode just before the global financial 
crisis (Figure 1.4). This more restrictive monetary policy 
has started to show up in a slowdown in new home 
construction in many countries (see Box 1.1). Infla-
tion excluding volatile food and energy prices has been 
declining at a three-month rate—although at a slower 
pace than headline inflation—in most (though not all) 
major economies since mid-2022.
Even so, both headline and core inflation rates 
remain at about double their pre-2021 levels on 
average and far above target among almost all 
US S&P 500
US S&P Banks Select
Euro Area EURO
STOXX 50
Euro Area EURO
STOXX Banks
Japan TOPIX
Japan TOPIX Banks
Figure 1.1.  Broad Equity and Bank Equity Indices for 
Selected Major Economies
(Index; January 1, 2023 = 100)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Latest data available are for March 28, 2023.
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Jan.
2023
Feb.
23
Mar.
23
World
AEs
EMDEs
World
AEs
EMDEs
World
United States
Euro area
China
Figure 1.2.  Early 2023 Activity Indicators Strengthened but 
Conﬁdence Remained Depressed
(Indices)
40
45
50
55
60
1. Manufacturing Output PMI
(Above 50 expanding; below 50 contracting)
2. Services’ Business Activity PMI
(Above 50 expanding; below 50 contracting)
3. Consumer Conﬁdence
(September 2021 = 100)
Sep.
2021
Jan.
22
May
22
Sep.
22
Feb.
23
40
45
50
55
60
Sep.
2021
Jan.
22
May
22
Sep.
22
Feb.
23
Sep.
2021
Jan.
22
May
22
Sep.
22
Feb.
23
80
90
100
110
Sources: Haver Analytics; IHS Markit; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: For AEs in panel 1, sample comprises AUS, AUT, CAN, CHE, DEU, DNK, ESP, 
FRA, GBR, GRC, ITA, IRL, JPN, NLD, NZL, and USA. Contribution to AE 
manufacturing GVA is used as weights. For EMDEs in panel 1, sample comprises 
ARE, BRA, CHN, CZE, COL, EGY, GHA, IND, IDN, KEN, LBN, MYS, MEX, NGA, PHL, 
POL, RUS, SAU, THA, TUR, VNM, and ZAF. For AEs in panel 2, sample comprises 
AUS, DEU, ESP, FRA, GBR, ITA, IRL, JPN, NZL, and USA. Contribution to AE services 
GVA is used as weights. For EMDEs in panel 2, sample comprises BRA, CHN, CZE, 
COL, EGY, GHA, IND, IDN, KEN, LBN, MYS, MEX, NGA, PHL, POL, RUS, SAU, THA, 
TUR, VNM, and ZAF. Economy list uses International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; GVA = gross value added. 
PMI = purchasing managers’ index.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
3
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
inflation-targeting countries. Moreover, differences 
across economies reflect their varying exposure to 
underlying shocks. For example, headline inflation 
is running at nearly 7 percent (year over year) in the 
euro area—with some member states seeing rates 
near 15 percent—and above 10 percent in the United 
Kingdom, leaving household budgets stretched.
The effects of earlier cost shocks and historically 
tight labor markets are also translating into more 
persistent underlying price pressures and stickier 
inflation. The labor market tightness in part reflects 
a slow post-pandemic recovery in labor supply, with, 
in particular, fewer older workers participating in 
the labor force (Duval and others 2022). The ratios 
of job openings to the number of people unem-
ployed in the United States and the euro area at the 
end of 2022 were at their highest levels in decades 
(Figure 1.5). At the same time, the cost pressures 
from wages have so far remained contained despite 
the tightness of labor markets, with no signs of a 
wage-price spiral dynamic—in which both wages and 
prices accelerate in tandem for a sustained period—
taking hold. In fact, real wage growth in advanced 
economies has been lower than it was at the end of 
2021, unlike what took place in most of the earlier 
historical episodes with circumstances similar to 
those prevailing in 2021, when prices were accelerat-
ing and real wage growth was declining, on average 
(Figure 1.6).
Inflation expectations have so far remained 
anchored, with professional forecasters maintaining 
their five-year-ahead projected inflation rates near 
their pre-pandemic levels (Figure 1.7). To ensure this 
remains the case, major central banks have generally 
stayed firm in their communications about the need 
for a restrictive monetary policy stance, signaling that 
interest rates will stay higher for longer than previously 
expected to address sticky inflation.
Euro area
United States
Median
Figure 1.3.  Inﬂation Turning Down or Plateauing?
(Percent, three-month moving average; SAAR)
1. Headline CPI Inﬂation
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2. Core CPI Inﬂation
Jan.
2019
Jul.
19
Jan.
20
Jul.
20
Jan.
21
Jul.
21
Jan.
22
Jul.
22
Jan.
23
Jan.
2019
Jul.
19
Jan.
20
Jul.
20
Jan.
21
Jul.
21
Jan.
22
Jul.
22
Jan.
23
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution of headline and core CPI inﬂation 
developments across 18 advanced economies and 17 emerging market and 
developing economies. Core inﬂation is the percent change in the consumer price 
index for goods and services, but excluding food and energy (or the closest 
available measure). For the euro area (and other European economies for which 
data are available), energy, food, alcohol, and tobacco are excluded. The shaded 
band depicts the 25th to the 75th percentiles of the cross-economy distribution of 
the indicated inﬂation measure. The 35 economies in the sample for the ﬁgure 
account for about 81 percent of 2022 world output. CPI = consumer price index; 
SAAR = seasonally adjusted annualized rate.
Interquartile range
Median
PPPGDP-weighted average pace
–0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
0.0
AEs
pre-GFC
EMDEs
pre-GFC
AEs
post-COVID
EMDEs
post-COVID
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution (25th to 75th percentiles, median, and 
weighted average) of the annualized average percentage point change in policy 
rates by economy group over two episodes: May 2004 to July 2007 (pre-GFC) and 
Jan. 2022 to Jan. 2023 (post-COVID). AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; GFC = global ﬁnancial 
crisis; PPPGDP = nominal gross domestic product in purchasing-power-parity 
international dollars.
Figure 1.4.  Monetary Policy Tightening Rapidly across Many 
Economies
(Percentage point change a year by episode, distribution by economy 
group)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
4
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
As of early 2023, however, financial markets antici-
pated that less policy tightening would be needed than 
central banks suggested, leading to a divergence that 
raised the risks for a significant market repricing. This 
is most clearly evident in the case of the United States 
(Figure 1.8, blue versus dashed black lines). A repricing 
materialized in early March, with the market-implied 
policy path shifting up to close much of the gap 
with the Federal Reserve’s announced expected policy 
path as markets responded to news about inflation 
(Figure 1.8, green line). But recent financial sector 
turbulence and the associated tightening of credit 
conditions have pushed the market-implied policy 
rate path back down, reopening the gap in the United 
States (Figure 1.8, red line). This may reflect in part 
the emergence of liquidity and safety premiums in 
response to financial market volatility rather than pure 
policy expectations. Nevertheless, the risks to financial 
2010:Q1–20:Q1
2020:Q2–22:Q4
Jan. 2010–Mar. 2020
Apr. 2020–Jan. 2023
1. Euro Area
(Quarterly job openings rate, percent)
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
2022:Q4
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
1
3
5
7
9
Jan. 2023
2. United States
(Monthly job openings rate, percent)
Sources: Eurostat; US Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the evolution of the Beveridge curve in the indicated 
economy, before and after the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. The relationship 
describes how the job openings rate (vacancies as a proportion of employment 
plus vacancies, y-axes) varies with the unemployment rate (number of 
unemployed as a proportion of the labor force, x-axes). Curves that are farther out 
from the origin may indicate greater labor market frictions. Labor markets are tight 
when the unemployment rate is low and the job openings rate is high.
Figure 1.5.  Labor Markets Have Tightened in Selected 
Advanced Economies
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
United States, 1979:Q2 = 0
COVID-19 average, 2021:Q4 = 0
Median
10th–90th percentile range
Percentage point difference since episode start
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Quarters since episode start
Sources: International Labour Organization; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the evolution over time of historical episodes similar to 
2021 in which three of the preceding four quarters had (1) rising price inﬂation, 
(2) falling real wages, and (3) stable or falling unemployment. Twenty-two such 
episodes are identiﬁed for a sample of 30 advanced economies from 1960 to 
2021. See Chapter 2 of the October 2022 World Economic Outlook for more 
details. The COVID-19 line shows the average behavior for economies in the 
sample starting in 2021:Q4.
Figure 1.6.  Wage-Price Spiral Risks Appear Contained So Far
(Distribution of real wage growth across historical episodes similar to 
today)
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Pre-pandemic (2019) survey
Latest survey (January 2023)
Figure 1.7. Anchored Inﬂation Expectations
(Percent, average ﬁve-year-ahead CPI inﬂation expectations)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Sources: Consensus Economics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the average ﬁve-year-ahead inﬂation expectation for the 
indicated economy group from the indicated survey vintage. The sample covers 
economies in the indicated economy group for which Consensus Economics 
surveys are available. The pre-pandemic survey is from long-term consensus 
forecasts in 2019. AEs = advanced economies; CPI = consumer price index;  
EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income economies; LIDCs = low-income 
developing countries.
AEs
EMMIEs
LIDCs
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
5
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
markets from sudden repricing due to policy rate 
expectation changes—also highlighted in the January 
2023 World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update—remain 
highly relevant (see also Chapter 1 of the April 2023 
Global Financial Stability Report).
Indebtedness Staying High
As a result of the pandemic and economic upheaval 
over the past three years, private and public debt have 
reached levels not seen in decades in most economies 
and remain high, despite their fall in 2021–22 on the 
back of the economic rebound from COVID-19 and 
the rise in inflation (see Chapter 1 of the April 2023 
Fiscal Monitor and Chapter 3 of this report). Monetary 
policy tightening—particularly by major advanced 
economies—has led to sharp increases in borrowing 
costs, raising concerns about the sustainability of some 
economies’ debts. Among the group of emerging mar-
ket and developing economies, the average level and 
distribution of sovereign spreads increased markedly 
in the summer of 2022, before coming down in early 
2023 (Figure 1.9). The effects of the latest financial 
market turmoil on emerging market and developing 
economy sovereign spreads have been limited so far, 
but there is a tangible risk of a surprise increase in 
coming months should global financial conditions 
tighten further. The share of economies at high risk of 
debt distress remains high in historical context, leaving 
many of them susceptible to unfavorable fiscal shocks 
in the absence of policy actions (see Chapter 3).
Commodity Shocks Unwinding Even as Russia’s War in 
Ukraine Persists
The shock of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 
February 2022 continues to reverberate around the 
world. Economic activity in Europe in 2022 was 
more resilient than expected given the large negative 
terms-of-trade fallout from the war and associated 
economic sanctions. Large budgetary support mea-
sures for households and firms—on the order of 
about 1.3 percent of GDP (net budgetary cost) in 
the case of the European Union—were deployed to 
help them weather the energy crisis. The stinging 
hike in prices galvanized a reorientation of gas flows, 
with marked increases in non-Russian pipeline and 
liquefied natural gas deliveries to Europe, alongside 
Jan. 24, 2023
Mar. 8, 2023
Mar. 27, 2023
Federal funds target level, end-2023
Figure 1.8.  Shifting Market-Implied US Policy Rate 
Expectations by Vintage and Repricing Risks
(Annualized percent)
Mar.
2023
Apr.
23
May
23
Jun.
23
Jul.
23
Aug.
23
Sep.
23
Oct.
23
Nov.
23
Dec.
23
3
4
5
6
Sources: Federal Reserve Board; and Haver Analytics.
Note: The three solid lines plot the market-implied federal funds rate expectations 
for the United States over the next months by vintage (indicated in the legend). 
Expectations are calculated based on federal funds futures and forward overnight 
index swaps. The dashed, black line is the median federal funds rate target level 
for end-2023, taken from the Federal Reserve’s Mar. 22, 2023 Summary of 
Economic Projections. US = United States.
August 2021
August 2022
March 2023
Figure 1.9.  Sovereign Spreads in Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies Have Narrowed
(Basis points, distribution by economy group)
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution (box-whisker plot) by economy group and 
date of sovereign spreads. Line in the middle is the median, upper limit of the box 
is the third quartile, and lower limit of the box is the ﬁrst quartile. Whiskers show 
the maximum and minimum within the boundary of 1.5 times the interquartile 
range from upper and lower quartiles, respectively. A country’s sovereign spread is 
the par-value weighted average of all a country’s bonds with more than one year 
remaining maturity. Y-axis is cut off at 2,500 basis points. The box-whisker plots 
for March 2023 are computed with daily data until March 17, 2023. 
EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; LAC = Latin America and the 
Caribbean; ME&CA = Middle East and Central Asia; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.
EMDE Asia
LAC
SSA
ME&CA
EMDE Europe
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
6
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
demand compression in the context of a mild winter 
and adjustments by industries to substitute for gas and 
to change production processes where feasible. Oil 
and gas prices also began trending downward from 
their peaks in mid-2022. Together, these actions and 
channels have dampened the negative effects of the 
energy crisis in Europe, with better-than-expected 
levels of consumption and investment in the third 
quarter of 2022.
Beyond Europe, a broad decline in food and energy 
prices in the fourth quarter of 2022—although prices 
are still high—has brought some relief to consumers 
and commodity importers, contributing to the fall 
in headline inflation. Sustaining lower prices this 
year will depend on the absence of further negative 
supply shocks.
China’s Economic Reopening
The evolution of especially contagious SARS-CoV-2 
variants kindled a surge in COVID-19 around the 
world in 2022. Eventually, these variants made their 
way to China, which had hitherto escaped much of 
the disease’s spread, partly through strict contain-
ment measures. As the country’s COVID restrictions 
were ultimately lifted, multiple large outbreaks led 
to declines in mobility and economic activity in the 
fourth quarter of 2022 due to the disease’s direct 
effects on human health and heightened fears of con-
tagion (Figure 1.10). Supply disruptions also returned 
to the fore, even if temporarily, leading to a rise in 
supplier delivery times. The surge in infections com-
pounded the headwinds from property market stresses 
in China. Declining property sales and real estate 
investment posed a drag on economic activity last year. 
There remains a large backlog of presold unfinished 
housing to be delivered, generating downward pressure 
on house prices, which price floors have so far limited 
in some regions.
The Chinese authorities have responded with a 
variety of measures, including additional monetary 
easing, tax relief for firms, new vaccination targets for 
the elderly, and measures to encourage the comple-
tion and delivery of unfinished real estate projects. As 
COVID-19 waves subsided in January of this year, 
mobility normalized, and high-frequency economic 
indicators—such as retail sales and travel bookings—
started picking up (Figure 1.10). With China absorb-
ing about a quarter of exports from Asia and between 
5 and 10 percent from other geographic regions, the 
reopening and growth of its economy will likely gener-
ate positive spillovers (Figure 1.11; see also Srinivasan, 
Helbling, and Peiris 2023), with even greater spillovers 
for countries with stronger trade links and reliance on 
Chinese tourism.
A Challenging Outlook
A return of the world economy to the pace of 
economic growth that prevailed before the bevy of 
shocks in 2022 and the recent financial sector turmoil 
is increasingly elusive. More than a year after Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine and the outbreak of more conta-
gious COVID-19 variants, many economies are still 
absorbing the shocks. The recent tightening in global 
financial conditions is also hampering the recovery. 
As a result, many economies are likely to experi-
ence slower growth in incomes in 2023, amid rising 
joblessness. Moreover, even with central banks having 
driven up interest rates to reduce inflation, the road 
back to price stability could be long. Over the medium 
term, the prospects for growth now seem dimmer 
than in decades.
This section first describes the baseline projec-
tions for the global economy and the assumptions 
on which they are predicated. The baseline scenario 
Mobility index
Retail sales volume
Planned international ﬂights (right scale)
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China; Wind Data Service; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The blue line shows the percent deviation of the seven-day moving average 
of national average mobility index from its average behavior over the lunar years 
2017–19. The red line shows the percent deviation of the national retail sales 
volume index from its 2017–19 linear trend. The gold line shows the seven-day 
moving average of planned international ﬂights into and out of China by day. Data 
for all series are as of February 16, 2023.
Figure 1.10.  China’s Reopening and Recovery
(Percent deviation from trend; right scale is international ﬂights a day)
Jan.
2022
Apr.
22
Jul.
22
Oct.
22
Feb.
23
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
7
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
assumes that the recent financial sector turmoil is 
contained and does not generate material disrup-
tions to global economic activity with widespread 
recession (a broad-based contraction in economic 
activity that usually lasts more than a few months). 
Fuel and nonfuel commodity prices are generally 
expected to decline in 2023, amid slowing global 
demand (see the Commodity Special Feature). Crude 
oil prices are projected to fall by about 24 percent 
in 2023 and a further 5.8 percent in 2024, while 
nonfuel commodity prices are expected to remain 
broadly unchanged. The forecasts are also based on 
the assumption that global interest rates will stay 
elevated for longer than expected at the time the 
October 2022 WEO was published, as central banks 
remain focused on returning inflation to targets 
while deploying tools to maintain financial stability 
as needed (Figure 1.12). Governments are on average 
expected to gradually withdraw fiscal policy support, 
including, as commodity prices decline, by scaling 
back packages designed to shield households and 
firms from the effects of the fuel and energy price 
spikes in 2022.
At the same time, in consideration of the elevated 
risks and uncertainties stemming from the recent 
global financial market turmoil, this section also places 
strong emphasis on a plausible alternative scenario that 
illustrates the impact of downside risks materializing.
Feeble and Uneven Growth
Baseline Scenario
The baseline forecast is for global output growth, 
estimated at 3.4 percent in 2022, to fall to 2.8 percent 
in 2023, 0.1 percentage point lower than predicted 
in the January 2023 WEO Update (Table 1.1), before 
rising to 3.0 percent in 2024. This forecast for the 
coming years is well below what was expected before 
the onset of the adverse shocks since early 2022. 
Compared with the January 2022 WEO Update 
forecast, global growth in 2023 is 1.0 percentage point 
Interquartile range
Median
Mean
Figure 1.11.  Shares of Economies’ Total Exports Directed to 
China in 2021
(Percent of total exports, distribution by economy group)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
East Asia
& Paciﬁc
Sub-
Saharan
Africa
Latin
America &
Caribbean
USA and
Canada
Europe &
Central
Asia
South Asia
Middle
East &
North
Africa
Sources: United Nations Comtrade Database; World Bank; and IMF staff 
calculations. 
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution (box-whisker plot) of total export shares to 
China in 2021 by geographic region. Line and diamond inside the box denote 
median and simple mean, respectively; upper limit of the box is the third quartile, 
lower limit of the box is the ﬁrst quartile. Whiskers show the maximum and 
minimum within the boundary of 1.5 times the interquartile range from upper and 
lower quartiles, respectively. Geographic groupings come from the World Bank.
United States
Euro area
Japan
October 2022 WEO
January 2022 WEO Update
Cyclically adjusted primary balance (percent of GDP)
Figure 1.12.  Assumptions on Monetary and Fiscal Policy 
Stances
1. Policy Rates in Selected AEs
(Percent, annualized; dashed lines are October 2022 WEO vintage)
–2
0
2
4
6
8
2022:Q1
23:Q1
24:Q1
25:Q1
26:Q1
27:Q1
2. Fiscal Stance, 2021–24
(Change in structural primary ﬁscal balance, percent of
potential GDP)
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
2021
22
23
24
2021
22
23
24
AEs
EMDEs
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 2, cyclically adjusted primary balance is the general government 
balance (excluding interest income or expenses) adjusted for the economic cycle. 
Structural primary ﬁscal balance is the cyclical adjusted primary balance corrected 
for a broader range of noncyclical factors, such as asset and commodity price 
changes. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
8
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
lower, and this growth gap is expected to close only 
gradually in the coming two years (Figure 1.13). The 
baseline prognosis is also weak by historical standards. 
During the two pre-pandemic decades (2000–09 and 
2010–19), world growth averaged 3.9 and 3.7 percent 
a year, respectively.
For advanced economies, growth is projected to 
decline by half in 2023 to 1.3 percent, before rising to 
1.4 percent in 2024. Although the forecast for 2023 
is modestly higher (by 0.1 percentage point) than in 
the January 2023 WEO Update, it is well below the 
2.6 percent forecast of January 2022. About 90 percent 
of advanced economies are projected to see a decline in 
growth in 2023. With the sharp slowdown, advanced 
economies are expected to see higher unemployment: 
a rise of 0.5 percentage point on average from 2022 to 
2024 (Figure 1.14).
For emerging market and developing economies, 
economic prospects are on average stronger than 
for advanced economies, but these prospects vary 
more widely across regions. On average, growth 
is expected to be 3.9 percent in 2023 and to rise 
to 4.2 percent in 2024. The forecast for 2023 is 
modestly lower (by 0.1 percentage point) than in 
the January 2023 WEO Update and significantly 
below the 4.7 percent forecast of January 2022. In 
low-income developing countries, GDP is expected to 
grow by 5.1 percent, on average, over 2023–24, but 
projected per capita income growth averages only 
2.8 percent during 2023–24, below the average for 
middle-income economies (3.2 percent) and so below 
the path needed for standards of living to converge 
with those in middle-income economies.
Plausible Alternative Scenario
Recent events have revealed how greater-than- 
expected fragilities in segments of the banking systems 
of the United States and of other regions can cause 
financial sector turmoil. The fragilities come from a 
combination of unrealized losses, which reflect the 
speed and magnitude of monetary policy tightening, 
and reliance on uninsured or wholesale funding. Fur-
ther shocks stemming from such fragilities are plausi-
ble, with potentially significant impact on the global 
economy. This subsection uses the IMF’s Group of 
Twenty (G20) Model to analyze the economic conse-
quences of a scenario in which pertinent and plausible 
risks materialize.
The plausible alternative scenario assumes a mod-
erate additional tightening in credit conditions. The 
tightening stems from further stress in individual banks 
that are vulnerable on two metrics: share of nonretail 
or uninsured depositors and unrealized losses. Funding 
conditions for all banks tighten, due to greater con-
cern for bank solvency and potential exposures across 
the financial system. Stricter supervision also adds to 
more cautious bank behavior. The overall impact is a 
decrease in the supply of credit and higher spreads for 
nonfinancial firms and for households. It is assumed 
that the stock of real bank lending in the United States 
World
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
Figure 1.13.  Growth Outlook: Feeble and Uneven
(Percent; dashed lines are from January 2022 WEO Update vintage)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the projected evolution of real GDP growth for the 
indicated economy groups. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
2021
22
23
24
25
Advanced Economies
United Kingdom
United States
Japan
Euro area
Canada
Figure 1.14.  Projected Unemployment Rate Rises in 
Advanced Economies
(Percentage point difference from 2022 level)
2022
23
24
25
26
27
28
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Source: IMF staff calculations.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
9
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Projections
Difference from January 
2023 WEO Update1
Difference from October 
2022 WEO1
2022
2023
2024
2023
2024
2023
2024
World Output
3.4
2.8
3.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
Advanced Economies
2.7
1.3
1.4
0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.2
United States 
2.1
1.6
1.1
0.2
0.1
0.6
–0.1
Euro Area
3.5
0.8
1.4
0.1
–0.2
0.3
–0.4
Germany
1.8
–0.1
1.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.2
–0.4
France
2.6
0.7
1.3
0.0
–0.3
0.0
–0.3
Italy
3.7
0.7
0.8
0.1
–0.1
0.9
–0.5
Spain
5.5
1.5
2.0
0.4
–0.4
0.3
–0.6
Japan 
1.1
1.3
1.0
–0.5
0.1
–0.3
–0.3
United Kingdom
4.0
–0.3
1.0
0.3
0.1
–0.6
0.4
Canada
3.4
1.5
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
Other Advanced Economies2
2.6
1.8
2.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.5
–0.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.0
3.9
4.2
–0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.4
5.3
5.1
0.0
–0.1
0.4
–0.1
China
3.0
5.2
4.5
0.0
0.0
0.8
0.0
India3
6.8
5.9
6.3
–0.2
–0.5
–0.2
–0.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
0.8
1.2
2.5
–0.3
–0.1
0.6
0.0
Russia
–2.1
0.7
1.3
0.4
–0.8
3.0
–0.2
Latin America and the Caribbean 
4.0
1.6
2.2
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
Brazil
2.9
0.9
1.5
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
Mexico
3.1
1.8
1.6
0.1
0.0
0.6
–0.2
Middle East and Central Asia
5.3
2.9
3.5
–0.3
–0.2
–0.7
0.0
Saudi Arabia
8.7
3.1
3.1
0.5
–0.3
–0.6
0.2
Sub-Saharan Africa 
3.9
3.6
4.2
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
0.1
Nigeria
3.3
3.2
3.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.1
South Africa
2.0
0.1
1.8
–1.1
0.5
–1.0
0.5
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
3.0
2.4
2.4
0.0
–0.1
0.3
–0.2
European Union
3.7
0.7
1.6
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.5
ASEAN-54
5.5
4.5
4.6
0.2
–0.1
0.0
–0.3
Middle East and North Africa
5.3
3.1
3.4
–0.1
–0.1
–0.5
0.1
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.9
3.9
4.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.3
–0.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.0
4.7
5.4
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
5.1
2.4
3.5
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
Imports
Advanced Economies
6.6
1.8
2.7
–0.1
0.2
–0.2
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.5
3.3
5.1
0.2
0.7
0.3
0.4
Exports
Advanced Economies
5.2
3.0
3.1
0.4
0.2
0.5
–0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.1
1.6
4.3
–0.6
–0.4
–1.3
–0.2
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
39.2
–24.1
–5.8
–7.9
1.3
–11.2
0.4
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import 
weights) 
7.4
–2.8
–1.0
3.5
–0.6
3.4
–0.3
World Consumer Prices6
8.7
7.0
4.9
0.4
0.6
0.5
0.8
Advanced Economies7
7.3
4.7
2.6
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
9.8
8.6
6.5
0.5
1.0
0.5
1.2
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during February 15, 2023–March 15, 2023. Economies are listed 
on the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2023 WEO Update, and October 2022 WEO forecasts. 
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a 
base year. Quarterly data are non-seasonally adjusted and differences from the January 2023 WEO Update and October 2022 WEO are not available.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
10
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (continued)
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Q4 over Q48
Projections
Difference from January 
2023 WEO Update1
Difference from October 
2022 WEO1
2022
2023
2024
2023
2024
2023
2024
World Output
2.0
2.9
3.1
–0.3
0.1
0.2
. . .
Advanced Economies
1.2
1.1
1.6
0.0
0.0
–0.2
. . .
United States 
0.9
1.0
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
. . .
Euro Area
1.9
0.7
1.8
0.0
–0.3
–0.7
. . .
Germany
0.9
0.2
1.8
0.2
–0.5
–0.3
. . .
France
0.5
0.8
1.4
–0.1
–0.4
–0.1
. . .
Italy
1.4
0.4
1.1
0.3
0.1
–0.1
. . .
Spain
2.7
1.3
2.1
0.0
–0.7
–0.7
. . .
Japan 
0.6
1.3
1.0
0.3
0.0
0.4
. . .
United Kingdom
0.4
–0.4
2.0
0.1
0.2
–0.6
. . .
Canada
2.1
1.4
1.8
0.2
–0.1
0.1
. . .
Other Advanced Economies2
1.0
1.9
1.8
–0.2
–0.4
–0.4
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.8
4.5
4.4
–0.5
0.3
0.6
. . .
Emerging and Developing Asia
3.8
5.8
5.3
–0.4
0.4
1.6
. . .
China
3.0
5.8
4.7
–0.1
0.6
3.2
. . .
India3
4.5
6.2
6.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging and Developing Europe
–1.7
2.4
2.5
–1.1
–0.3
–2.1
. . .
Russia
–4.0
0.9
1.4
–0.1
–0.6
–0.1
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean 
2.5
1.2
2.1
–0.7
0.2
–1.0
. . .
Brazil
2.3
0.9
2.0
0.1
–0.2
0.2
. . .
Mexico
3.7
1.2
1.9
0.1
0.0
0.0
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
5.5
3.1
3.2
0.4
–0.3
–0.6
. . .
Sub-Saharan Africa 
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
3.1
3.0
3.7
–0.1
0.8
0.7
. . .
South Africa
1.3
1.1
1.7
0.6
–0.1
0.1
. . .
Memorandum
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
1.7
2.4
2.6
–0.1
0.1
0.3
. . .
European Union
1.8
1.0
1.9
–0.2
–0.1
–1.0
. . .
ASEAN-54
4.7
4.3
5.3
–1.4
1.3
–1.3
. . .
Middle East and North Africa
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
2.7
4.5
4.3
–0.5
0.2
0.6
. . .
Low-Income Developing Countries
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
8.8
–17.3
–3.4
–7.5
2.5
–9.0
. . .
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import 
weights) 
–0.7
3.5
–0.5
2.1
–0.3
3.8
. . .
World Consumer Prices6
9.2
5.6
3.7
0.6
0.2
0.9
. . .
Advanced Economies
7.7
3.2
2.2
0.1
–0.1
0.1
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
10.5
7.6
5.0
1.0
0.5
1.5
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during February 15, 2023–March 15, 2023. Economies are listed 
on the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
5Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $96.36 in 
2022; the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $73.13 in 2023 and $68.90 in 2024.
6Excludes Venezuela. See the country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7The inflation rates for 2023 and 2024, respectively, are as follows: 5.3 percent and 2.9 percent for the euro area, 2.7 percent and 2.2 percent for Japan, and 
4.5 percent and 2.3 percent for the United States.
8For world output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 85 percent of annual emerging market 
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
11
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
declines by 2 percent in 2023, relative to the baseline––
about one-tenth of the decrease experienced during 
2008–09 and equivalent to a 150 basis point increase 
in corporate spreads, on average, in 2023. The tighten-
ing gradually dissipates after 2023. A similar decrease 
in credit and a similar increase in spreads occur in the 
euro area and in Japan. Other countries also experience 
a tightening in financial conditions, with the magnitude 
related to how closely correlated their respective finan-
cial conditions are with conditions in the United States. 
Countries are also affected through trade spillovers and 
the impact on global commodity prices.
The scenario assumes that monetary policy responds to 
the resulting decline in economic activity and inflation-
ary pressures, with policy rates lower than in the baseline. 
Regarding fiscal policy, it is assumed that automatic sta-
bilizers operate but that there is no additional legislated 
stimulus. Balance sheet policies and other interventions 
by central banks and regulators, to preserve the stability 
of the financial system, are not explicitly modeled but are 
implicitly assumed to help avert a larger crisis.
Figure 1.15 summarizes the global effects of this 
plausible alternative scenario on the level of real GDP in 
2023 and 2024. Results are presented as percent devia-
tions from the baseline forecast. The moderate tightening 
in financial conditions leads to a decrease in the level 
of world output by 0.3 percent in 2023, implying real 
growth of about 2.5 percent instead of 2.8 percent in the 
baseline forecast––the lowest outcome since the global 
slowdown of 2001, excluding the initial COVID-19 
crisis in 2020 and the global financial crisis in 2009. 
Real GDP is 0.2 percent lower than the baseline in 
2024 and gradually recovers thereafter. The effects are 
generally larger in advanced economies than in emerging 
market economies, with growth falling below 1 percent 
compared with 1.3 percent in the baseline forecast. 
The United States, the euro area, and Japan have the 
largest declines in growth compared with the baseline: 
about 0.4 percentage point lower in 2023. Countries 
with greater trade exposures to the United States (such as 
Mexico and Canada) experience a sharper impact; those 
with smaller exposures (such as China) are less affected.
Inflation: Still High but Falling
The baseline forecast is for global headline (consumer 
price index) inflation to decline from 8.7 percent in 
2022 to 7.0 percent in 2023. This forecast is higher (by 
0.4 percentage point) than that of January 2023 but 
nearly double the January 2022 forecast (Figure 1.16). 
Disinflation is expected in all major country groups, with 
about 76 percent of economies expected to experience 
lower headline inflation in 2023. Initial differences in 
the level of inflation between advanced economies and 
emerging market and developing economies are, however, 
expected to persist. The projected disinflation reflects 
declining fuel and nonfuel commodity prices as well as 
the expected cooling effects of monetary tightening on 
economic activity. At the same time, inflation excluding 
that for food and energy is expected to decline globally 
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Exchange Rate Weights
(Percent change)
Projections
Difference from January 
2023 WEO Update1
Difference from October 
2022 WEO1
2022
2023
2024
2023
2024
2023
2024
World Output
3.0
2.4
2.4
0.0
–0.1
0.3
–0.2
Advanced Economies
2.6
1.2
1.3
0.0
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.6
4.0
4.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.4
0.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
3.9
5.2
4.8
0.0
–0.1
0.5
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
0.3
1.0
2.3
–0.2
–0.2
0.8
–0.1
Latin America and the Caribbean 
3.7
1.5
2.1
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
Middle East and Central Asia
5.6
3.0
3.5
–0.2
0.0
–0.3
0.5
Sub-Saharan Africa 
3.8
3.4
4.0
–0.3
0.1
–0.2
0.2
Memorandum
European Union
3.5
0.7
1.5
0.0
–0.2
0.1
–0.5
Middle East and North Africa
5.8
3.1
3.3
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.4
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.5
3.9
3.9
–0.1
–0.1
0.4
–0.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.9
4.7
5.4
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, in which a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years 
is used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2023 WEO Update, and October 2022 WEO forecasts.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
12
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
much more gradually in 2023: by only 0.2 percentage 
point, to 6.2 percent, reflecting the aforementioned stick-
iness of underlying inflation. This forecast is higher (by 
0.5 percentage point) than that of January 2023. 
Overall, returning inflation to target is expected to 
take until 2025 in most cases. A comparison of official 
inflation targets with the latest forecasts for 72 infla-
tion-targeting economies (34 advanced economies and 
38 major emerging market and developing economies) 
suggests that annual average inflation will exceed tar-
gets (or the midpoints of target ranges) in 97 percent 
of cases in 2023 (Figure 1.17). The median deviation 
from target is expected to be 3.3 percentage points. 
In 2024, inflation is still expected to exceed targets in 
91 percent of cases, with an expected median deviation 
of about 1 percentage point. Among countries with an 
inflation target range, however, inflation is expected to 
be in the target range in about 50 percent of cases in 
2024. By 2025, inflation is expected to be close to tar-
gets (or the midpoints of target ranges), with a median 
deviation of only 0.2 percentage point.
In the aforementioned plausible alternative scenario, 
with additional tightening in credit conditions, global 
headline inflation decreases by about 0.2 percentage 
point more in 2023, partly on the back of lower global 
commodity prices. Oil prices decline by 3 percent 
more, on average, in 2023 than in the baseline. 
There is a modest additional fall in inflation excluding 
food and energy.
The Medium Term: Not What It Used to Be
The world economy is not currently expected to 
return over the medium term to the rates of growth 
that prevailed before the pandemic. Looking out to 
2028, global growth is forecast at 3.0 percent––the 
lowest medium-term growth forecast published in all 
WEO reports since 1990 (Figure 1.18). Forecasts of 
medium-term growth peaked at about 4.9 percent 
Figure 1.15.  Real GDP Level in Plausible Alternative Scenario 
in 2023–24
(Percent deviation from baseline)
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
World
United
States
AEs ex. US
EMDEs ex.
China 
China
World
United
States
AEs ex. US
EMDEs ex.
China 
China
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs ex. US = advanced economies excluding United States; EMDEs ex. 
China = emerging market and developing economies excluding China.
1. Year 2023
2. Year 2024
World
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
Figure 1.16.  Inﬂation Coming Down over Time
(Percent; dashed lines from January 2022 WEO Update vintage)
1. Headline Inﬂation
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2021
22
23
24
25
2. Core Inﬂation
0
2
4
6
8
10
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Inﬂation is based on the consumer price index. Core inﬂation excludes 
volatile food and energy prices. Emerging market and developing economies’ core 
inﬂation from January 2022 WEO Update is estimated using available data. 
WEO = World Economic Outlook.
2021
22
23
24
25
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
13
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
in 2008. The decline in medium-term global growth 
prospects reflects the progress that several economies, 
such as China and Korea, have made in increasing 
their living standards and the associated decline in the 
rate of change (see Chapter 2 and Kremer, Willis, and 
You 2022). It also reflects slower global labor force 
growth––United Nations medium-term population 
growth projections have declined since 2010 by about 
one-quarter of a percentage point. Geoeconomic 
fragmentation, including developments stemming from 
Brexit, ongoing US-China trade disputes, and Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine (Aiyar and others 2023), has also 
contributed to the weaker outlook, as has a slower 
expected pace of supply-enhancing reforms. Dimmer 
prospects for growth in China and other large emerging 
market economies will weigh on the prospects of trading 
partners through the world’s highly integrated supply 
chains. It will also complicate the efforts of middle- and 
low-income countries seeking to converge to higher 
standards of living.
Moreover, with global growth over the coming years 
not expected to overshoot pre-2022 shock forecasts, 
the level of global output is unlikely to recover to its 
previous path. The shortfall of global GDP in 2022 
compared with January 2022 WEO Update forecasts is 
about 1 percent. By 2026, the output loss (cumulative 
growth gap) is projected to widen to 2.7 percent: more 
than double the initial impact. Persistent effects 
are consistent with economic fluctuations affecting 
investments in capital, training, and research and 
development.
Global Trade Slowdown, with Narrowing Balances
Growth in the volume of world trade is expected 
to decline from 5.1 percent in 2022 to 2.4 percent in 
2023, echoing the slowdown in global demand after 
two years of rapid catch-up growth from the pandemic 
Advanced economies
Emerging market 
and developing economies
Figure 1.17.  Inﬂation Slowly Converging to Target
(Percentage point, distribution of gap from inﬂation target)
–3
0
3
6
9
12
Sources: Central banks’ websites; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. 
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution (box-whisker plot) for the indicated 
economy group by year. Line in the middle is the median, upper limit of the box is 
the third quartile, and lower limit of the box is the ﬁrst quartile. Whiskers show the 
maximum and minimum within the boundary of 1.5 times the interquartile range 
from upper and lower quartiles respectively. The y-axis is cut at 12 percentage 
points.
2022
23
24
25
26
US
China
Euro area
India
Other
World
United
States
Germany
Japan
United 
Kingdom
Korea
China
Brazil
India
Russia
Figure 1.18.  Five-Year-Ahead Real Growth Projections by 
World Economic Outlook Forecast Vintage
(Percent; unless noted otherwise)
1. Economy Contributions to Five-Year-Ahead World Growth
(PPP-weighted contributions; percentage points)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2010 11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
2. Selected Advanced Economies
1990
95
2000
05
10
15
20
23
0
2
4
6
8
10
1990
95
2000
05
10
15
20
23
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, US = United States and Other = all other economies excluding 
China, India, United States, and the euro area. Spring World Economic Outlook 
forecast vintages in the indicated years are used across all ﬁgures. 
PPP = purchasing power parity.
3. Selected Emerging Market Economies
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
14
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
recession and the shift in the composition of spend-
ing from traded goods back toward domestic services. 
Rising trade barriers and the lagged effects of US dollar 
appreciation in 2022, which made traded products 
more costly for numerous economies given the dollar’s 
dominant role in invoicing, are also expected to 
weigh on trade growth in 2023. Overall, the out-
look is for weaker trade growth than during the two 
pre-pandemic decades (2000–19), when it averaged 
4.9 percent.
Meanwhile, global current account balances––the 
sums of absolute surpluses and deficits––are expected 
to narrow in 2023, following their significant increase 
in 2022 (Figure 1.19). As reported in the IMF’s 2022 
External Sector Report, the rise in current account 
balances in 2022 largely reflected commodity price 
increases triggered by the war in Ukraine, which 
caused a widening in oil and other commodity trade 
balances. Over the medium term, global balances 
are expected to narrow gradually as commodity 
prices decline.
Creditor and debtor stock positions remained histor-
ically elevated in 2022, reflecting the offsetting effects 
of widening current account balances and the dollar’s 
strength, which caused valuation gains in countries 
with long positions in foreign currency. Over the 
medium term, elevated positions are expected to mod-
erate only slightly as current account balances narrow.
Downside Risks Dominate
Risks to the outlook are squarely to the downside. 
Much uncertainty clouds the short- and medium-term 
outlook as the global economy adjusts to the shocks 
of 2020–22 and the recent financial sector turmoil. 
Recession concerns have gained prominence, while 
worries about stubbornly high inflation persist.
There is a significant risk that the recent banking 
system turbulence will result in a sharper and more 
persistent tightening of global financial conditions than 
anticipated in the baseline and plausible alternative 
scenarios, which would further deteriorate business 
and consumer confidence. Additional downside risks 
include sharper contractionary effects than expected 
from the synchronous central bank rate hikes amid 
historically high private and public debt levels (see 
Box 1.2). The combination of higher borrowing costs 
and lower growth could cause systemic debt distress 
in emerging market and developing economies. In 
addition, inflation may prove stickier than expected, 
prompting further monetary tightening than currently 
anticipated. Other adverse risks include a faltering 
in China’s post–COVID-19 recovery, escalation of 
the war in Ukraine, and geoeconomic fragmenta-
tion further hindering multilateral efforts to address 
economic challenges. With debt levels, inflation, and 
financial market volatility elevated, policymakers have 
limited space to offset new negative shocks, especially 
in low-income countries.
On the upside, the global economy could prove 
more resilient than expected, just as it did in 2022. 
With a stock of excess savings from the pandemic 
years and tight labor markets in a number of econo-
mies, household consumption could again overshoot 
forecasts, although this would complicate the fight 
against inflation. A renewed easing in supply-chain 
European creditors
United States
China
Euro area debtors
Japan
Others
Oil exporters
Discrepancy
Figure 1.19.  Current Account and International Investment 
Positions
(Percent of global GDP)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: European creditors = Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, 
Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland; euro area debtors = 
Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain; oil exporters = Algeria, 
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, 
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela.
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27 28
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27 28
2. Global International Investment Position
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
1. Global Current Account Balance
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
15
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
bottlenecks––the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s 
Global Supply Chain Pressure Index recently eased to 
more normal levels, for example––and a cooling in 
labor markets from falling vacancies rather than rising 
unemployment could allow for a softer-than-expected 
landing, requiring less monetary tightening.
Overall, the estimated probability of global growth 
in 2023 falling below 2.0 percent—an outcome that 
has occurred on only five occasions since 1970 (in 
1973, 1981, 1982, 2009, and 2020)––is now about 
25 percent: more than double the normal probability 
(see Box 1.3). Growth falling below 2.0 percent could 
occur in the case of a severe credit disruption or from 
a combination of shocks materializing together. A con-
traction in global per capita real GDP in 2023—which 
often happens when there is a global recession—has 
an estimated probability of about 15 percent. Turning 
to prices, the probability of global headline inflation 
exceeding its 2022 level in 2023, is less than 10 per-
cent, as Box 1.3 explains. However, for core inflation, 
which is set to decline more gradually in 2023, the 
probability is higher, at 30 percent. Stickier services 
inflation, amid still-overheating labor markets, could 
push core inflation above its 2022 level. In what 
follows, the most prominent downside risks to the 
outlook are discussed.
A severe tightening in global financial conditions: In 
many countries, the financial sector will remain highly 
vulnerable to the realized rise in real interest rates in 
the coming months, both in banks and in nonbank 
financial institutions (see Chapter 1 of the April 2023 
Global Financial Stability Report). In a severe downside 
scenario in which risks stemming from bank balance 
sheet fragilities materialize, bank lending in the United 
States and other advanced economies could sharply 
decline, with macroeconomic effects amplified by a 
number of channels. Household and business confi-
dence would deteriorate, leading to higher household 
precautionary saving and lower investment. Depressed 
activity in the most affected economies would spill 
over to the rest of the world through lower demand 
for imports and lower commodity prices. As in past 
episodes of global financial stress, a broad-based 
outflow of capital from emerging market and devel-
oping ­economies could occur, causing further dollar 
appreciation, which would worsen vulnerabilities in 
economies with dollar-denominated external debt. The 
dollar appreciation would further depress global trade, 
as many products are invoiced in dollars. In an envi-
ronment of elevated financial fragility, contagion could 
occur, with a sharp loss of investor appetite spreading 
across geographic regions and asset types. The market 
for safe assets (such as US or German government 
bonds) could also seize up, with reduced ease of trad-
ing amid a rush out of riskier assets.
Box 1.3 provides a quantification of such a sce-
nario of severe financial sector stress and concludes 
that, even with monetary policy responding to the 
decline in economic activity and inflation and even 
with fiscal automatic stabilizers operating, global real 
GDP growth in 2023 could be 1.8 percentage points 
below the baseline. Such an outcome would imply 
near-zero growth in global GDP per capita. The 
downturn in global aggregate demand would have 
a strong disinflationary impulse, with global head-
line and core inflation lower by about 1 percentage 
point in 2023.
Sharper monetary policy impact amid high debt: 
The interaction between rising real interest rates and 
historically elevated corporate and household debt is 
another source of downside risk, as debt servicing costs 
rise amid weaker income growth. This can lead to debt 
overhang, with lower-than-expected investment and 
consumption, higher unemployment, and widespread 
bankruptcies, especially in economies with elevated 
house prices and high levels of household debt issued 
at floating rates (see Box 1.1). In such a case, inflation 
would decline faster and growth would be lower than 
in the baseline forecast.
Stickier inflation: With labor markets remain-
ing exceptionally tight in many countries, the 
incipient decline in headline and core infla-
tion could stall before reaching target levels, 
amid stronger-than-expected wage growth. An 
even-stronger-than-predicted economic rebound in 
China could––especially if combined with an esca-
lation of the war in Ukraine—reverse the expected 
decline in commodity prices, raise headline inflation, 
and pass through into core inflation and inflation 
expectations. Such conditions could prompt central 
banks in major economies to tighten policies further 
and keep a restrictive stance for longer, with adverse 
effects on growth and financial stability.
Systemic sovereign debt distress in emerging market 
and developing economies: Several emerging market 
and developing economies still face sovereign credit 
spreads above 1,000 basis points. The easing in spreads 
since October, which partly reflects the depreciation 
of the US dollar and lower import bills from declin-
ing commodity prices, has provided some relief. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
16
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
But vulnerabilities remain high. About 56 percent 
of low-income developing countries are estimated to 
be either already in debt distress or at high risk of it 
(Figure 1.20, panel 3), and about 25 percent of emerg-
ing market economies are also estimated to be at high 
risk. While the level of external debt as a share of gross 
national income is on average one-third lower today 
than in the 1980s and 1990s (Figure 1.20, panel 1), 
some vulnerabilities are more acute. A higher share of 
external debt is now issued at variable interest rates and 
in US dollars, implying greater exposure to mone-
tary tightening in advanced economies (Figure 1.20, 
panel 2). And for low-income countries, comparisons 
with the situation in the mid-1990s are increasingly rel-
evant (IMF 2022a). A new wave of debt-restructuring 
requests could take place, but the creditor landscape has 
become more complex, making restructuring poten-
tially more difficult than in the past (see Chapter 3). 
The share of external debt owed to Paris Club offi-
cial bilateral creditors fell from 39 percent in 1996 
to 12 percent in 2020, and that owed to non–Paris 
Club official bilateral creditors rose from 8 percent to 
22 percent; the share of private creditors doubled from 
8 percent to 16 percent (IMF 2022a).
Faltering growth in China: With a substantial 
share of economies’ exports absorbed by China, a 
weaker-than-expected recovery in China would have 
significant cross-border effects, especially for com-
modity exporters and tourism-dependent economies. 
Risks to the outlook include the ongoing weakness 
in the Chinese real estate market, which could pose 
a larger-than-expected drag on growth and poten-
tially lead to financial stability risks (see Box 1.1 
and IMF 2023).
Escalation of the war in Ukraine: An escalation of 
Russia’s war in Ukraine––now in its second year––
could trigger a renewed energy crisis in Europe and 
exacerbate food insecurity in low-income coun-
tries. For the winter of 2022–23, a gas crisis was 
averted, with ample storage at European facilities 
thanks to higher liquefied natural gas imports, lower 
gas demand amid high prices, and atypically mild 
weather. The risks of price spikes, however, remain for 
next winter (see the Commodity Special Feature). A 
possible increase in food prices from a failed exten-
sion of the Black Sea Grain Initiative would weigh 
further on food importers, particularly those that lack 
fiscal space to cushion the impact on households and 
businesses. Amid elevated food and fuel prices, social 
unrest might increase.
Fragmentation further hampers multilateral cooperation: 
The ongoing retreat from cross-border economic inte-
gration began more than a decade ago after the global 
financial crisis, with notable developments including 
Brexit and China-US trade tensions. The war in Ukraine 
has reinforced this trend by raising geopolitical tensions 
(Figure 1.21, panel 1) and splitting the world economy 
into geopolitical blocs. Barriers to trade are steadily 
External debt over gross national income
External debt over exports (right scale)
Short term
US dollar denominated (right scale)
Variable rate
Low
High
Moderate
In debt distress
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1. External Debt Measures
(Percent)
1970
80
90
2000
10
20
0
150
300
450
600
2. Selected External Debt Characteristics
(Percent of total external debt, left scale;
percent of total PPG external debt, right scale)
0
10
20
30
40
0
20
40
60
80
1970
80
90
2000
10
20
3. Risks of Debt Distress in LIDCs
(Percent of PRGT-eligible countries)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2009–19
20
21
22
23
Sources: IMF-World Bank LIDC Debt Sustainability Analysis Database; World Bank 
International Debt Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: X-axes show the calendar year across panels. Panels 1 and 2 show 
unweighted averages across emerging market and developing economies. For 
panel 3, details on the classiﬁcation of debt riskiness in LIDCs can be found in IMF 
(2018). LIDCs = low-income developing countries; PPG = public and publicly 
guaranteed; PRGT = Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust.
Figure 1.20.  External Debt Vulnerabilities for Emerging 
Market and Developing Economies Are High
17
16
16
14
39
42
43
41
27
33
32
30
30
38
14
25
10 
10
10
10
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
17
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
increasing (Figure 1.21, panel 2). They range from the 
imposition of export bans on food and fertilizers in 
response to the commodity price spike following Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine to restrictions on trade in micro-
chips and semiconductors (as in the US Creating Help-
ful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors and Science 
Act) and on green investment that are aimed at prevent-
ing the transfer of technology and include local-content 
requirements. Further geoeconomic fragmentation risks 
not only lower cross-border flows of labor, goods, and 
capital (see Chapter 4 of this report and Chapter 3 of 
the April 2023 Global Financial Stability Report) but 
also reduced international action on vital global public 
goods, such as climate change mitigation and pandemic 
resilience. Some countries may benefit from an associ-
ated rearrangement in global production, but the overall 
impact on economic well-being would likely be negative 
(see Aiyar and others 2023 and Chapter 3 of the 
October 2022 Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and the 
Pacific), with costs particularly high in the short term, as 
replacing disrupted flows takes time.
Policy Priorities: Walking a Narrow Path
With the fog around current and prospective 
economic conditions thickening, policymakers have 
a narrow path to walk toward restoring price stability 
while avoiding a recession and maintaining financial 
stability. Achieving strong, sustainable, and inclusive 
growth will require policymakers to stay agile and be 
ready to adjust as information becomes available.
Policies with Immediate Impact
Ensuring a durable fall in inflation: With inflation 
still well above targets for most economies, the priority 
remains reducing inflation and ensuring that expecta-
tions stay anchored while containing financial market 
strains and minimizing the risk of further turbulence. 
Achieving this outcome in the midst of heightened 
market volatility and a sizable disconnect between 
markets’ anticipation of monetary policy paths and 
central bank communications requires the following:
•• Steady but ready monetary policy: Under the baseline 
forecast, real (inflation-adjusted) policy rates in 
major economies are expected to increase gradually, 
even as the pace of nominal rate rises slows on the 
back of declining inflation (Figure 1.22). Where 
core inflation pressures persist, raising real policy 
rates and holding them above their neutral levels 
would ward off the risk of de-anchoring infla-
tion expectations. Given the elevated volatility in 
financial markets, central banks should stand ready 
to address liquidity and financial sector risks if and 
when needed, as discussed later. Under the plausi-
ble alternative scenario, in which the tightening of 
financial conditions leads to a cooling in real activity 
and lower price pressures, central banks would need 
to carefully recalibrate monetary policy, including 
the timing and size of policy rate changes needed to 
align inflation rates with their targets. If the severe 
downside scenario materializes and financial stability 
is at stake, substantial readjustment of monetary 
policy paths might be needed in response to the 
disinflationary shock to minimize economic damage 
and contain financial sector contagion.
•• Clear communication: Given heightened uncertainty 
regarding the effects of monetary policy on both 
inflation and financial stability, and the reemerging 
disconnect between central banks, and markets’ 
expectations of monetary policy paths, clear com-
munication about central bank policy objectives and 
responses will be crucial. Estimates of the real interest 
Goods
Investment
Service
0
50
100
150
200
1. Geopolitical Risk Index
(Index, average 1990–2019 = 100)
Russian invasion
of Ukraine
Jan.
2009
Jan.
12
Jan.
15
Jan.
18
Jan.
21
Jan.
23
2. Harmful Trade Restrictions Imposed
(Number of measures)
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
2009 10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Figure 1.21.  Geopolitical and Trade Tensions Rising over Time
Sources: Caldara and Iacoviello (2022); and Global Trade Alert.
Note: In panel 2, data on harmful trade restrictions are as of February 1, 2023.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
18
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
rate consistent with stable inflation (commonly 
called the “natural rate of interest” and denoted r*) 
are uncertain (see Chapter 2). An unemployment 
rate above the level consistent with stable inflation 
(commonly called the “natural rate of unemploy-
ment” and denoted u*) would contribute to reduc-
ing inflation. But as with r*, estimates are highly 
uncertain. For example, recent estimates of u* for 
the United States range from 4 percent to 7 percent, 
which is above the current unemployment rate. This 
has contributed to projections of rising unemploy-
ment by 2024 (Figure 1.23). It will be essential that, 
faced with such uncertainty, monetary policymakers 
calibrate policy in a data-dependent manner. In 
addition, volatility has been unusually high: markets 
have reacted strongly to any news, leading to sudden 
repricing in the path of policy rates and amplifying 
the disconnect between market expectations and 
the rate path communicated by central banks. In 
that context, policymakers should reinforce their 
communication about the likely need for a restric-
tive monetary policy stance until there is tangible 
evidence that inflation is returning toward target. At 
the same time, policymakers should reassure market 
participants that they stand ready to change course 
and use the full set of available instruments should 
market turmoil deepen.
•• Applying the lessons from past premature easing: An 
easing of rates before price pressures have adequately 
receded could increase the costs of disinflation, as 
exemplified by the experience of the United States 
in the early 1980s. The Federal Reserve loosened 
policy after a first wave of tightening and an increase 
in unemployment, which contributed to expecta-
tions that high inflation would solidify (Goodfriend 
and King 2005). A second wave of sharp policy rate 
increases was required to bring inflation down and 
reestablish credibility, with more negative growth 
and employment implications (Figure 1.24).
Safeguarding financial stability: Minimizing financial 
stability risks will require careful monitoring of risks, 
managing market strains, and strengthening oversight.
•• Monitoring risks: In this period of high uncertainty 
and market volatility, monitoring the buildup of 
risks across industries and promptly addressing vul-
nerabilities that come to the fore will be crucial to 
restore confidence and safeguard financial stability 
(see Chapter 1 of the April 2023 Global Financial 
Stability Report). As central banks continue raising 
rates to fight inflation and gradually unwind their 
United States
Euro area
–12
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
2022:Q1
22:Q3
23:Q1
23:Q3
24:Q1
24:Q4
Figure 1.22.  Real Policy Rates in Selected Advanced 
Economies
(Percent, annualized)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The real policy rate is calculated as the nominal policy rate minus average 
expected headline inﬂation over the next year. Nominal policy rates are the federal 
funds target rate for the United States and the euro short-term rate for the euro 
area.
U*: IMF staff
U*: Congressional Budget Ofﬁce
U*: Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022)
U*: Crump and others (2022)
U*: Michaillat and Saez (2022)
Unemployment rate, February 2023
IMF unemployment forecast, 2024:Q4
Figure 1.23.  Is US Unemployment Unnaturally Low?
(Percent)
3
4
5
6
7
8
2017
18
19
20
21
22
23
Sources: April 2023 World Economic Outlook; Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022); 
Crump and others (2022); US Bureau of Labor Statistics; US Congressional Budget 
Ofﬁce; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: U* denotes estimates of the natural rate of unemployment in the United 
States (the level of the unemployment rate that is associated with stable inﬂation). 
The estimate from the Congressional Budget Ofﬁce is the noncyclical 
unemployment rate series. The estimate labeled Michaillat and Saez (2022) is 
calculated by IMF staff using their method. Estimate of Crump and others reﬂects 
both the secular trend of the unemployment rate as well as the behavior of wage 
and price inﬂation and inﬂation expectations as explained in the paper.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
19
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
balance sheets, more intensive and high-frequency 
monitoring of risks in the banking sector, nonbank 
financial institutions, and the housing sector will 
be essential.
•• Managing market strains: Where market strains 
emerge, deploying tools that provide liquidity 
support promptly and forcefully, while mitigating 
the risk of moral hazard, will be necessary to ease 
pressures and limit contagion. Liquidity support 
should be targeted as well as properly collateralized 
and preserve the transmission of monetary policy. 
Intervention and resolution procedures may need 
to be initiated promptly for weak and nonviable 
institutions.
•• Strengthening oversight: Financial sector regulations 
introduced after the global financial crisis contributed 
to the resilience of banks throughout the pandemic. 
More efforts are needed, however, to address 
shortcomings in the supervisory oversight of banks, 
including in the prudential framework for exposures 
to interest rate risk, and to ensure that stringent pru-
dential requirements align with the Basel framework 
on capital and liquidity regulations. In addition, 
the intensity of supervision must be commensurate 
with banks’ risks and systemic importance, and it is 
essential to address supervisory gaps in the nonbank 
financial sector (see also Chapter 1 of the April 2023 
Global Financial Stability Report).
•• Using the global financial safety net: With multiple 
shocks hitting the global economy, it is appropriate 
to make full use of the global financial safety net 
afforded by international financial institutions. This 
includes proactively employing the IMF’s precau-
tionary financial arrangements and focusing aid 
from the international community on low-income 
countries facing shocks, including through the 
rechanneling of special drawing rights and support 
from the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust and 
the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. The recent 
enhancement of dollar funding swap lines between 
the Federal Reserve and major advanced economy 
central banks should help limit financial strains. It is 
important to ensure that other central banks are also 
able to access liquidity to guard against potential 
external funding shocks.
Dealing with currency swings: The US dollar has 
depreciated in real terms since October 2022—by 
6 percent on a trade-weighted basis––but remains 
stronger than it has been since 2000, reflecting 
economic fundamentals such as the rapid tightening 
of US monetary policy and more favorable terms of 
trade for the United States (Figure 1.25). Emerging 
market economies should let their currencies adjust 
as much as possible in response to such fundamen-
tals (Gopinath and Gourinchas 2022). As guided 
by the IMF’s Integrated Policy Framework, foreign 
exchange interventions may be appropriate on a 
temporary basis if currency movements and capital 
flows substantially raise financial stability risks––as in 
the context of shallow foreign exchange markets or 
high foreign currency debt––or jeopardize the central 
bank’s ability to maintain price stability. Temporary 
capital flow management measures on outflows may 
also be useful in a crisis or when one is imminent 
but should not substitute for needed macroeconomic 
policy adjustment. In response to developments 
in 2022, some economies resorted to capital flow 
management measures (for example, China and 
Malawi, among others).
Normalizing fiscal policy: As deficits and debts 
remain above pre-pandemic levels, fiscal efforts will be 
warranted in 2023. Fiscal policymakers should support 
monetary policy in getting inflation back to target. 
Where inflation remains high, a steady tightening of 
Recession 
Effective federal funds rate
Core PCE inﬂation (right scale)
US unemployment rate
0
4
8
12
16
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
Sources: Federal Reserve Board; and US Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the evolution of the effective federal funds rate, along with 
core inﬂation and unemployment rate during the late 1970s and early 1980s. The 
PCE price index measures prices that US consumers face for goods and services. 
Core PCE inﬂation is the annual percent change in the PCE price index for goods 
and services, excluding food and energy. PCE = personal consumption 
expenditures.
Figure 1.24.  Sticky Inﬂation and Premature Easing: The US 
Experience in the 1980s
(Percent)
Jan.
1978
Jan.
80
Jan.
82
Jan.
84
Jan.
86
Jan.
88
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
20
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
the fiscal stance would moderate the need for mone-
tary tightening. In a severe downside scenario, auto-
matic stabilizers should be allowed to operate fully, and 
temporary support measures should be used as needed 
(including to buttress the financial system), with due 
consideration of available fiscal space (see Chapter 1 of 
the April 2023 Fiscal Monitor). Protecting the vulnera-
ble through targeted measures should remain a priority.
Supporting the vulnerable: The surge in global energy 
and food prices in 2022 triggered a cost-of-living crisis 
in many countries, especially low-income countries, 
many of which are still suffering from food insecu-
rity. Governments acted swiftly to extend support to 
households and firms, which helped cushion the effects 
on growth. However, the fiscal support extended to 
households and firms in many European economies 
was largely untargeted (Figure 1.26). Such broad-based 
measures are becoming increasingly costly and should 
be replaced by more targeted approaches (Ari and 
others 2022). Moreover, in the event of a renewed 
commodity price spike, measures taken should preserve 
the market signal from higher energy prices as much as 
possible, as high prices encourage a reduction in energy 
consumption, limiting the risks of shortages (see also 
the October 2022 Fiscal Monitor).
Improving food security everywhere: Trade restrictions 
on food and fertilizers run the risk of pushing a large 
share of the global population into food insecurity. 
For example, emerging market and developing econo-
mies’ net imports of wheat account for more than half 
of total wheat consumption, but domestic storage in 
these economies tends to be low, making them more 
vulnerable to trade shocks (Figure 1.27). Restrictions 
on exports of food and fertilizers—particularly those 
most recently imposed—should be lifted to safeguard 
food supplies and their distribution globally.
Policies with Payoffs in the Medium Term
Restoring debt sustainability: With lower growth and 
higher borrowing costs, public debt ratios are becom-
ing unsustainable in many countries. Actions must be 
taken to put them on a credible downward path. For 
economies at high risk of debt distress (Figure 1.20), 
fiscal consolidation and structural reforms to cre-
ate sound policy frameworks and revitalize growth 
remain the fundamental solution to sustainable debt 
80
100
120
140
160
1980
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
20 Feb.
23
Figure 1.25.  US Dollar Remains Strong Despite Some 
Moderation
(US REER index, 2010 = 100)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the evolution of the real effective exchange rate (REER)
index based on the consumer price index for the United States.
Mean 2011–21
Path 2022–23
Minimum–maximum, 2011–21
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1. Natural Gas Storage in Europe
(Percent of capacity by month)
2. Fiscal Support to European Households in 2022–23
(Percent of European GDP)
Apr.
23
Apr.
2022
Jul.
22
Jan.
23
Oct.
22
Targeted
Untargeted
Targeted
Untargeted
Price-based
Transfers
Sources: Ari and others (2022); Gas Infrastructure Europe, Aggregated Gas 
Storage Inventory; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows natural gas in storage as a percent of storage for European 
economies for which data are available. In panel 2, European GDP is the aggregate 
of 24 economies in an IMF survey of ﬁscal costs in 2023.
Figure 1.26.  Europe’s Energy Crisis: Status and Costs of 
Fiscal Support in 2022–23
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
21
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
(Box 3.1). In some cases, debt restructuring may be 
necessary to help reduce fiscal vulnerabilities. As shown 
in Chapter 3, waiting to restructure debt until after 
a default occurs is associated with larger declines in 
a country’s output, investment, private sector credit, 
and capital inflows than when debt restructuring is 
preemptive. The world is at a critical juncture, and 
international cooperation is needed to reduce the 
likelihood of a snowballing global debt crisis. Progress 
has been made in regard to countries that requested 
debt treatment under the G20 Common Framework 
(for example, Chad). Official and private creditors need 
to stand ready to respond swiftly to requests from a 
broad set of countries, including the poorest nations 
that were part of the Debt Service Suspension Initia-
tive, as well as middle-income economies under stress 
(for example, Sri Lanka). It is also necessary to agree 
on mechanisms to address debt-restructuring needs for 
a broader set of economies, including middle-income 
economies that are not eligible under the current 
Common Framework. Large creditors, including non–
Paris Club and private creditors, have a crucial role to 
play in ensuring effective, predictable, and timely debt 
resolution processes. The newly created Global Sover-
eign Debt Roundtable (GSDR) will help multilateral 
agencies and private and public creditors identify key 
impediments to restructurings and design standards 
and processes that can address them.
Reinforcing supply: Well-designed supply-side 
policies could help address structural factors impeding 
medium-term growth and recoup some of the output 
losses accumulated since the pandemic. Policy actions 
could include structural reforms to reduce harmful 
market power and rent-seeking behavior as well as 
overly rigid regulation and planning processes. They 
could also involve stimulating investment in infra-
structure improvements and productive digitalization 
initiatives and enhancing access to and quality of 
education. Policies intended to reduce labor market 
tightness—by encouraging participation and reducing 
job search and matching frictions—would also help 
smooth inflation’s path back to target. They could 
include adopting measures to bolster active labor 
market policies, such as short-term training programs 
for professions experiencing shortages, passing labor 
laws and regulations that increase work flexibility 
through telework and leave policies, and allowing for 
the resumption of regular immigration flows. Indus-
trial policy could be pursued if frictions (for instance, 
market failures) are well established and if other 
policies are not available. Industrial policy should not 
introduce distortions and should be consistent with 
international agreements and World Trade Organiza-
tion (WTO) rules. This will also help prevent unneces-
sary business uncertainty. Where industrial policies are 
rolled out, wasteful subsidy races or the imposition of 
domestic production requirements should be avoided. 
Such measures could lead to lower productivity and 
undermine trade relations and would be particu-
larly damaging to emerging market and develop-
ing economies.
Containing pandemic risks: Authorities should 
remain vigilant to the risks of a reemergence of the 
COVID-19 virus and new pandemics and their 
potential impacts on the global economy. This includes 
coordinated efforts to boost access to vaccines and 
medicines where immunity is low and greater pub-
lic support for vaccine development and systematic 
responses to future epidemics.
Policies for a Better Long Term
Strengthening multilateral cooperation: The host 
of complex challenges currently facing the world 
necessitates a coordinated and common response to 
Net imports
Domestic storage
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sources: United Nations; USDA Foreign Agricultural Service; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The share of wheat consumption that is imported is calculated as the ratio of 
an economy’s imports of wheat in 2022 to the annual consumption of the 
economy’s consumption of wheat in 2022. Storage levels are estimated as of the 
beginning of 2022. Ratios are averaged across economies within each income 
group. AEs = advanced economies; EMMIEs = emerging market and middle- 
income economies; LIDCs = low-income developing countries.
Figure 1.27.  Vulnerability to Food Insecurity: The Case of 
Wheat
(Percent of annual wheat consumption)
LIDCs
EMMIEs
AEs
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
22
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
bolster the global economy’s resilience and achieve the 
best outcomes. To this end, actions on fundamental 
areas of common interest are critical to improving trust 
and limiting the risks stemming from increasing geo-
political fragmentation. Strengthening the multilateral 
trading system would help reduce the risks to growth 
and resilience from such fragmentation by providing 
fair and predictable rules for exchange. To achieve such 
strengthening, WTO rules in critical areas such as 
agricultural and industrial subsidies must be upgraded, 
new WTO-based agreements implemented, and the 
WTO dispute settlement system fully restored.
Speeding up the green transition: Progress in emission 
reductions needed to contain global warming at 2°C 
or less remains inadequate. Implementing credible 
policies now will limit the overall costs of mitigation 
(see Chapter 3 of the October 2022 World Economic 
Outlook). International coordination on carbon pricing 
or equivalent policies would facilitate a faster decarbon-
ization in a cost-efficient way. With declining invest-
ment in fossil fuels, a concerted push on alternative 
clean energy investment could help ensure sufficient 
energy supplies and achieve the needed decarbonization. 
This could be achieved through investment incentives 
for green materials and electricity grid upgrades, easing 
of permitting processes for renewables, and support for 
research and development, among other efforts. The 
meetings at the 27th United Nations Climate Change 
Conference of the Parties resulted in encouraging signs 
of international cooperation on adaptation to climate 
change, but more needs to be done, including channel-
ing aid to vulnerable countries.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
23
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
As central banks raised borrowing costs to fight inflation 
in 2022, real house price growth turned negative in both 
advanced and emerging market economies. If mortgage 
rates continue to rise, demand for borrowing is likely to 
weaken, further depressing house prices. Economies with 
elevated house prices and high levels of household debt 
issued at floating rates are particularly vulnerable to any 
ensuing financial sector stress.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, real house prices 
rose to record levels in many countries—especially among 
advanced economies—reflecting a combination of ample 
policy support and limited numbers of available proper-
ties on the market. In the second quarter of 2022, how-
ever, quarterly real house prices fell, with about two-thirds 
of economies experiencing negative growth and the 
remainder positive but slower growth (Figure 1.1.1). 
Among advanced economies, the deterioration in the 
housing market was more pronounced in those that 
showed signs of overvaluation before and during the pan-
demic. With central banks hiking interest rates, mortgage 
rates climbed to an average of 6.8 percent in advanced 
economies in late 2022, up from 2.8 percent in January 
2022. If mortgage rates continue to rise, demand for 
borrowing and house prices are likely to weaken further.
Who Is at Risk?
Housing markets and prices are likely to cool more 
and be more sensitive to policy rate hikes in economies 
Prepared by Nina Biljanovska.
in which house prices rose more during the pandemic. 
Economies with high levels of household debt and a 
large share of debt issued at floating rates are more 
exposed to higher mortgage payments, with a greater 
risk of experiencing a wave of defaults (Figure 1.1.2). 
In economies in which house prices increased rapidly 
and affordability declined, but household debt levels 
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
2015:Q116:Q1 17:Q1 18:Q1 19:Q1 20:Q1 21:Q1 22:Q2
Sources: Bank for International Settlements; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Figure 1.1.1.  Global Average Real House Index
(Index, GDP-weighted; 2019:Q1 = 100)
CAN
AUS
LUX
NOR
SWE
NLD
USA
PRT
DNK
FIN
EST
GBR
CZE
LTU
AUT
ESP
IRL
FRA
BEL
POL
DEU
LVA
GRC
HUN
ITA
SVN
SVK
Lowest risk
Highest risk
Sources: Bank for International Settlements; European 
Central Bank; Hypostat, European Mortgage Federation; 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: C1 = households’ outstanding debt as a percentage of 
gross disposable income, 2022:Q2; C2 = share of debt 
outstanding at variable interest rate (ﬁxed rate up to one 
year), 2022:Q3; C3 = share of households owning home 
with a mortgage, 2020; C4 = cumulative real house price 
growth, 2020:Q1–22:Q1; C5 = cumulative policy rate 
changes, 2022:Q1–22:Q3. For each of the ﬁve criteria, 
countries obtain a score between 0 and 4 reﬂecting their 
position in the cross-country distribution. The total score is 
the sum of the individual criteria scores. Economy list uses 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
country codes.
Figure 1.1.2.  Indicators of Housing Market 
Risk 
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
Total
score
Box 1.1. House Prices: Coming off the Boil
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
24
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
remained moderate up to the recent onset of monetary 
tightening, a more gradual price decline is expected, 
which could improve affordability.
How Is This Housing Episode Different from the 
2007–08 Global Financial Crisis Episode?
In most cases, it is unlikely that an ongoing fall 
in house prices will lead to a financial crisis, but a 
sharp drop in house prices could adversely affect the 
economic outlook. The buildup of medium-term vul-
nerabilities warrants close monitoring and, potentially, 
policy intervention.1 Data from 2021 show that 
banks are better capitalized than before the global 
financial crisis, with the regulatory ratio of Tier 1 
capital to risk-weighted assets standing at 17.5 percent 
on average across countries (IMF 2021), compared 
with 13.4 percent in 2007. Moreover, banks’ under-
writing standards in many advanced economies are 
tighter today than before the global financial crisis. 
However, the average household debt-to-income ratio 
across countries in 2022 was on par with that in 
2007, driven mainly by households in economies that 
managed to escape the brunt of the global financial 
crisis and have since run up substantial borrowing 
(Figure 1.1.3).
At the same time, in China, the real estate sector 
has experienced a protracted contraction, with early 
signs of stabilization in 2023. Share prices of property 
developers rebounded partially following the wave of 
support measures announced in November 2022, but 
a correction in house prices could intensify financial 
stress for property developers. The Chinese economy 
is vulnerable to a correction in real estate prices, as 
the real estate and construction sectors account for 
about one-fifth of final demand absorption and a 
significant fraction of lending (IMF 2022b). Although 
the Chinese authorities have recently stepped up their 
support to the sector, the share of property developers 
in need of restructuring remains large (IMF 2023), 
and the loosening of lending standards could exacer-
bate financial stability risks.
1See the April 2023 Global Financial Stability Report for 
analysis of the risks to the global economic outlook from a sharp 
decline in house prices.
GBR
SWE
ESP
SVN
PRT
POL
NOR
NLD
IRL
HUN
DEU
FRA
FIN
CHL
CAN
BEL
AUT
AUS
USA
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
2007:Q1–Q2 average
0
50
100
150
200
250
Figure 1.1.3.  Household Indebtedness Rates in 
Selected Economies
(Percent)
2022:Q1–Q2 average
0
50
100
150
200
250
Box 1.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
25
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Understanding how long monetary policy takes to affect 
output and inflation is central to policy deliberations. 
The literature has not yet reached consensus, but several 
factors are known to shape the effects. Central bank 
credibility and mortgage rate flexibility increase trans-
mission speed. Other factors, such as financial devel-
opment and offsetting (uncoordinated) fiscal policies, 
reduce it. With the ongoing synchronous tightening, 
a faster and stronger response of economic output and 
prices could occur.
Transmission Speed
A review of studies1 on the United States and 
the euro area reveals that estimates of the timing of 
monetary policy transmission to output vary between 
near-immediate effects and a lag of about three 
quarters. Later, output usually reverts to its initial level 
within two to three years, although more persistent 
effects may occur. Estimates of the lag in transmis-
sion of monetary policy to prices vary as well. At the 
upper end, estimates indicate a delay of about 1.5 to 
2.5 years. This lag might be driven by firms’ staggered 
price adjustment, or it might be due to informational 
frictions that make it difficult to disentangle pure 
monetary policy shocks from outlook information that 
central banks convey during policy announcements. 
At the lower end of the range of estimates, studies 
accounting for the information component find that 
prices decline immediately following monetary shocks. 
The immediate response is driven by exchange rate 
appreciation and changes in inflation expectations. In 
addition, macroeconomic variables are found to react 
faster to forward guidance, since it may signal a more 
persistent change in financial market conditions.
Country Heterogeneity
A meta-analysis of 67 published studies covering 
30 different economies (Havranek and Rusnak 2013) 
finds that the effect of a tightening on prices takes 
an average of about three years to reach its trough, 
Prepared by Silvia Albrizio and Francesco Grigoli. Yang Liu 
provided research support.
1The review considers the following studies, among others: 
Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz (2005); Choi and others (2022); 
Christiano, Trabandt, and Walentin (2010); Gertler and Karadi 
(2015); Jarociński and Karadi (2020); Miranda-Agrippino and 
Ricco (2021); and Romer and Romer (2004). These estimates 
refer to the time it takes for macroeconomic variables to start 
responding to monetary policy shocks in a statistically sig-
nificant way.
with a wide range (Figure 1.2.1). Prices in advanced 
economies take about twice the time needed in 
emerging market and developing economies. Multiple 
country-specific factors may affect the transmission 
channels of monetary policy, consequently shaping the 
speed and strength of the transmission.
•• Financial development affects the credit channel. 
Developed financial systems provide more oppor-
tunities to hedge against monetary surprises in 
advanced economies, delaying the impact of a 
policy adjustment (Havranek and Rusnak 2013). At 
the same time, more competitive financial sectors 
exhibit faster and more complete interest rate 
pass-through (Georgiadis 2014).
•• Financial frictions affect the investment channel and 
capital reallocation. Firms’ investment sensitivity to 
monetary policy is higher for low-liquidity firms, 
since it increases their fixed-debt issuance costs 
(Jeenas 2019); for younger non-dividend-paying 
firms, since their external finances are more 
exposed to asset value fluctuations (Cloyne and 
others, forthcoming); for low-risk firms, since their 
marginal cost of investment finance is flatter than 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
All countries
AEs
EMDEs
Sources: Havranek and Rusnak (2013); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the average number of years to the 
maximum decrease in prices. The whisker indicates the 
interquartile range. AEs comprise Australia, Canada, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, euro area, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, New 
Zealand, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, United Kingdom, 
and United States. EMDEs comprise Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Hungary, Lithuania, Malaysia, Philippines, Poland, Romania, 
Thailand, and Türkiye. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 1.2.1. Years-to-Trough Responses of 
Prices to Monetary Tightening
(Number of years)
Box 1.2. Monetary Policy: Speed of Transmission, Heterogeneity, and Asymmetries
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
26
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
that of high-risk firms (Ottonello and Winberry 
2020); and for firms with a high marginal product 
of capital, since they are financially constrained 
(González and others 2022; Albrizio, González, and 
Khametshin 2023). Overall, following a monetary 
tightening, investment declines more in countries 
with higher levels of financial frictions, capital 
misallocation increases, and productivity declines.
•• Central bank credibility and effective communica-
tion strongly affect the expectation and exchange rate 
channels. When inflation expectations are well 
anchored and central bank independence is high, 
monetary policy is more effective at restoring price 
stability with a lower output cost (Chapter 3 of the 
October 2018 World Economic Outlook; Bems and 
others 2020). Conversely, if expectations are more 
backward looking, as in many emerging market and 
developing economies, a stronger monetary policy 
reaction to reanchor expectations is warranted 
(Chapter 2 of the October 2022 World Economic 
Outlook; Alvarez and Dizioli 2023), and the 
exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices will 
be stronger (Carrière-Swallow and others 2021).
•• The household wealth and income distribution shapes 
the consumption and saving channels. Households 
with a mortgage are the most responsive to mon-
etary policy tightening, as they reduce spending 
on durables (Cloyne, Ferreira, and Surico 2020). 
Moreover, households adjust their decisions 
depending on the liquidity of their asset hold-
ings: Households at the bottom of the liquid asset 
distribution decrease their consumption, households 
at the midpoint reduce saving or increase borrow-
ing, and households at the top increase consump-
tion substantially on account of a rise in interest 
income (Holm, Paul, and Tischbirek 2021). Finally, 
high-income consumers cut spending more than 
low-income consumers, possibly because of less 
binding borrowing constraints and stronger inter-
temporal substitution effects triggered by higher 
interest rates (Grigoli and Sandri 2022).
Nominal rigidities shape the output effect of mone-
tary policy in multiple ways. Greater wage rigidities 
amplify the output effect (Olivei and Tenreyro 2010). 
Conversely, mortgage rate rigidities dampen this effect, 
by decreasing the responsiveness of residential invest-
ment (Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca 2013) and the 
sensitivity of defaults, house prices, car purchases, and 
employment (Di Maggio and others 2017) to interest 
rate changes. Therefore, a large share of adjustable-rate 
mortgages, more common in emerging market and 
developing economies (Cerutti and others 2016), 
amplifies the contractionary output effect of mone-
tary tightening.
Asymmetric Effects
Monetary policy shocks may have asymmetric and 
cyclically dependent output and inflation effects. 
There is evidence that policy easing has large effects 
on prices but small effects on real activity, whereas 
policy tightening has large output effects, especially 
during booms, but small effects on prices (Barnichon 
and Matthes 2018; Angrist, Jordà, and Kuersteiner 
2018; Forni and others 2020; Tenreyro and Thwaites 
2016). These asymmetric effects might be driven by 
the presence of downward nominal rigidities (Forni 
and others 2020); by the interaction with fiscal policy, 
which dampens monetary policy in recessions but 
reinforces it in expansions (Tenreyro and Thwaites 
2016); or by changes in firms’ price-setting behavior 
when inflation increases (Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello 
2011; Nakamura and Steinsson 2008; Albagli, Grigoli, 
and Luttini 2023). Finally, cross-country synchronized 
tightening can counteract global shocks, such as global 
surges in commodity prices. Synchronization among 
energy importers effectively lowers energy world 
demand, hence reducing inflation faster (Auclert and 
others 2022).
Overall, with today’s exceptionally synchronous 
global monetary tightening, accompanied by wide-
spread withdrawal of fiscal support, sharply increas-
ing residential mortgage rates, and global financial 
conditions highly sensitive to policy news, a shorter 
transmission lag than in the past could occur in several 
countries. Clear and effective communication by major 
central banks regarding their resolve to keep inflation 
expectations anchored and reduce inflation is expected 
to further accelerate policy transmission.
Box 1.2 (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
27
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
This box uses the IMF’s Group of Twenty (G20) 
Model to derive confidence bands around the World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) growth and inflation forecasts 
and to quantify a severe downside scenario. As in the 
October 2022 WEO, the risk of global growth falling 
below 2 percent in 2023—a low-growth outcome that 
has happened only five other times (in 1973, 1981, 
1982, 2009, and 2020) since 1970—remains elevated 
at about 25 percent, with the balance of risks clearly 
tilted to the downside. This box introduces inflation 
confidence bands for the first time. The chance that core 
inflation will be higher in 2023 than in 2022 is close to 
30 percent. The downside scenario illustrates how shocks 
to credit supply, stemming from banking sector fragility 
in the face of tightening monetary policy and amplified 
through risk-off behavior and a decline in confidence, 
could reduce global growth to about 1 percent.
Confidence Bands
The methodology for producing confidence bands is 
based on Andrle and Hunt (2020). The G20 Model, 
presented in Andrle and others (2015), is used to 
interpret historical data on output growth, inflation, 
and international commodity prices and to recover 
the implied economic shocks to aggregate demand 
and supply. The recovered shocks are sampled through 
nonparametric methods and fed back into the model 
to generate predictive distributions around the WEO 
projections. The resulting confidence bands thus depend 
on the joint distribution of the estimated shocks, the 
structure of the model, and the initial conditions for 
the projections. Distributions for global variables are 
obtained by aggregating country-level estimates.
In the October 2022 WEO, two versions of the 
forecast distribution were presented: one that sampled 
all historical data uniformly, that is, without judgment, 
and one with judgment that sampled the year 1982 
more heavily, to stress the risk of a more pronounced 
slowdown from contractionary monetary policy. The 
distribution is shown for the latter case (with judg-
ment), as uncertainty about the impact of monetary 
policy tightening remains central to the assessment of 
risk. The judgment is applied to the first two years in 
the projection horizon (2023 and 2024).
Figure 1.3.1 shows the distributions for global growth 
and inflation projections. Each shade represents a 
5 percentage point interval, and the entire band covers 
Prepared by Michal Andrle, Jared Bebee, Allan Dizioli, Rafael 
Portillo, and Aneta Radzikowski.
  
WEO baseline projection
1. Real GDP Growth
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2022
23
24
25
2. Headline CPI Inﬂation
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2022
23
24
25
3. Core CPI Inﬂation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2022
23
24
25
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The chart shows the distribution of forecast uncertainty 
around the baseline projection as a fan. Each shade of blue 
represents a ﬁve percentage point probability interval. 
CPI = consumer price index; WEO = World Economic 
Outlook.
Figure 1.3.1. Distribution of Forecast 
Uncertainty around World Growth and 
Inﬂation Projections
(Percent)
Box 1.3. Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projections
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
28
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
90 percent of the distribution. Regarding global growth, 
the added judgment makes the distribution skewed to 
the downside, with lower growth outcomes more likely 
than higher growth outcomes. There is a 70 percent 
probability that 2023 global growth could be between 
1.0 percent and 3.8 percent. Similarly, there is a 70 per-
cent probability that growth will be between 1.4 percent 
and 4.3 percent in 2024.
Regarding global inflation, there is a 70 percent 
chance that 2023 headline inflation could be about 
1.2 percentage points higher or lower than cur-
rently projected. The distribution for core inflation 
is narrower: The range associated with a 70 percent 
probability is 0.7 percentage point higher or lower 
than the baseline. Both distributions are skewed to the 
upside in the near term, but the skew is more notable 
for core inflation, with about a 30 percent probability 
that 2023 core inflation will exceed the 2022 level. 
The upside skew for core in the near term reflects in 
part the inflation surge seen during the COVID-19 
period. Big positive shocks to inflation are now seen as 
more likely than before the pandemic.
Risk Scenarios
Recent events have revealed greater-than-expected 
fragility in parts of the global banking system, with 
potential losses from the speed and magnitude of the 
monetary policy tightening and the risk of deposit 
withdrawals weighing on valuations and access to 
funding. The IMF’s G20 Model is used to quantify a 
severe downside scenario in which the overall supply 
of credit is reduced and other channels add to the 
impact on global activity. Each channel is presented as 
a separate layer in the following discussion.
Layers
The first layer includes the impact from lower global 
credit supply. Due to the stress on some banks’ balance 
sheets, bank lending in the United States decreases by 
4 percent in 2023 relative to current baseline projec-
tions, equivalent to about one-fifth of the contraction 
in credit experienced during the global financial crisis 
(relative to the precrisis trend). Corporate spreads 
increase by 250 basis points in 2023. Other countries 
also experience a shock to the supply of credit. For 
euro area countries and Japan, the impact is similar 
in magnitude to that for the United States; for other 
countries, the size of the shock varies depending on 
how their financial conditions correlate with those 
in the United States. The assumed impact on China’s 
domestic financial conditions is small. The tightening 
in financial conditions is persistent and extends into 
2024 and (to a lesser extent) beyond.
The macroeconomic effects are amplified through 
three additional channels:
•• Equity prices: Global equity prices fall by 
10 percent on impact and by about 6 percent on 
average in 2023.
•• Flight to safety and dollar appreciation: In emerging 
markets excluding Asia, sovereign premiums increase 
considerably and the US dollar appreciates by close 
to 10 percent. The shock for emerging market econ-
omies in Asia is about half as large, and China is 
not directly affected. Sovereign spreads in some euro 
area countries increase by a modest amount.
•• Fall in confidence: It is assumed that greater precau-
tionary saving (about 75 percent of the estimated 
increase in precautionary saving during the global 
financial crisis) leads to a decrease in consumption, 
while a decline in business sentiment leads to a 
decrease in investment. For reference, in this layer, 
US consumption and investment decrease by 0.3 
and 1 percent, respectively, relative to the baseline.
The Policy Response
Monetary policy responds endogenously to the 
resulting decrease in activity and inflationary pressures. In 
terms of fiscal policy, it is assumed that automatic stabiliz-
ers operate in advanced economies but not in emerging 
markets. Balance sheet policies and other interventions 
by central banks and regulators, to preserve the stability 
of the financial system, are not explicitly modeled but 
should be thought of as helping avert a crisis, with larger 
effects on activity than what is shown here. The potential 
cost of these interventions and their impact on countries’ 
fiscal stance are not considered in this scenario. Should 
fiscal policy, especially in countries with limited fiscal 
space, tighten due to the strains on debt sustainability, the 
macroeconomic impact would be larger.
Impact on World Output and Inflation
Figure 1.3.2 shows the effects of the scenario on the 
level of GDP (in panel 1) and core inflation (panel 2) 
for 2023 and 2024. Results are presented as percent 
deviations from the baseline, for the case of GDP, and 
percentage point deviations from the baseline, for the 
case of core inflation. The contribution from each layer 
(credit conditions, equity prices, dollar appreciation 
and flight to safety, confidence) is shown in stacked 
form in the figures. Country results are grouped into 
Box 1.3 (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
29
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
four regions: the United States, advanced economies 
excluding the United States, emerging markets exclud-
ing China, and China.
Results can be summarized as follows:
•• The credit conditions layer subtracts 0.5 percent 
from global output in 2023. The impact of this 
layer is larger in the United States and in other 
advanced economies than in emerging markets. The 
impact on China is small.
•• The appreciation of the US dollar vis-à-vis emerg-
ing market economies’ currencies and tightening in 
emerging market (and some advanced) economies’ 
sovereign premiums subtract another 0.2 percent 
globally in 2022. The effect is larger in emerg-
ing market economies, at –0.4 percent in 2023. 
Advanced economies as a group are also affected 
by the currency depreciation in emerging market 
economies and lower global demand.
•• The decline in equity prices subtracts another 
0.5 percent from global output in 2023, with a 
somewhat larger impact in advanced economies 
than in emerging markets.
•• The confidence layer subtracts 0.5 percent from global 
activity in 2023, with advanced economies again 
seeing a larger hit to activity than emerging markets.
•• The combined effect from all layers implies a 
decrease in the level of global output of 1.8 per-
cent in 2023 and 1.4 percent in 2024, relative to 
the baseline. The overall effect on global output 
is about one-fourth the size of the impact of the 
global financial crisis during 2008–09. The United 
States and other advanced economies see a broadly 
similar hit to activity (1.8 percent in 2023). 
Emerging market economies excluding China see an 
even larger effect (–1.9 percent) due mainly to the 
dollar appreciation layer, while China experiences a 
smaller impact overall (–1.2 percent).
•• Oil prices fall by close to 15 percent in 2023 
relative to the baseline, due to the decrease in global 
demand, before gradually returning to the baseline 
over the projection horizon.
•• The disinflationary impulse, shown in panel 2, 
is pronounced. Global core inflation declines by 
0.9 percentage point in 2023 and by 1.1 percentage 
points in 2024, relative to the baseline. Disinflation 
is more pronounced in emerging markets excluding 
China, due to the assumption that Phillips curves 
are steeper, but the decline in inflation is also sizable 
in advanced economies.
•• Policy rates (not shown) are also considerably 
lower in this scenario. US policy rates decline by 
1.6 percentage points in 2023 and 1.8 percent-
age points in 2024, relative to the baseline; the 
global average of policy rates declines by 2.1 and 
2.3 percentage points over the same period.
Credit conditions
Dollar appreciation
Equity prices
Conﬁdence
1. Impact on GDP Level
(Percent deviation from baseline)
–2
–1
0
1
2023
2024
US
CHN WRL
US
CHN WRL
AEs ex.
US
EMs ex.
CHN
AEs ex.
US
EMs ex.
CHN
2. Impact on Core Inﬂation
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
2023
2024
–2
–1
0
1
US
CHN WRL
US
CHN WRL
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; CHN = China; AEs ex. 
US = advanced economies excluding United States; EMs ex. 
CHN = emerging markets excluding China; US = United 
States; WRL = World.
AEs ex.
US
EMs ex.
CHN
AEs ex.
US
EMs ex.
CHN
Figure 1.3.2.  Impact of Downside Scenario 
on GDP and Core Inﬂation
Box 1.3 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
30
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Primary commodity prices declined 28.2 percent between 
August 2022 and February 2023. The decrease was led 
by energy commodities, down 46.4 percent. European 
natural gas prices declined by 76.1 percent amid lower 
consumption and high storage levels. Base and pre-
cious metal prices rebounded by 19.7 and 3.3 percent, 
respectively, whereas food prices increased slightly, by 
1.9 percent. This Special Feature analyzes the impact of 
declines in the extraction of fossil fuel and other minerals 
on the macroeconomic activity of commodity exporters.
Commodity Market Developments
Energy prices waver. Crude oil prices retreated by 
15.7 percent between August 2022 and February 2023 
as the slowing global economy weakened demand 
(Figure 1.SF.1, panels 1 and 3). China experienced its 
first annual decline in oil consumption this century 
amid repeated shutdowns in response to COVID-19 
outbreaks and a faltering real estate market. Recession 
fears due to higher-than-expected inflation and tighter 
monetary policy in many major economies and bank-
ing woes sparked concerns about flagging demand.
On the supply side, uncertainty over the effects of 
Western sanctions on Russian crude oil exports whip-
sawed expectations about global market balances. As of 
March, Russian crude oil exports had held steady since 
implementation of the Group of Seven (G7) price cap 
and ban on crude oil imports on December 5. Russia 
rerouted its oil, reportedly sold at a major discount to 
Brent oil prices, to nonsanctioning countries, primar-
ily India and China. Downside supply risks did not 
materialize until Russia’s recent announcement of a 
modest production reduction. A sizable release of stra-
tegic petroleum reserves by Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development member countries also 
helped keep oil markets well supplied, in part offset-
ting underproduction and reduced targets by OPEC+ 
(Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
plus selected nonmember countries).
The contributors to this Special Feature are Mehdi Benatiya 
Andaloussi, Lukas Boehnert, Christian Bogmans, Rachel Brasier, 
Andrea Pescatori (team leader), Ervin Prifti, and Martin Stuermer, 
with research assistance from Wenchuan Dong and Tianchu Qi.
Futures markets suggest that crude oil prices will 
slide by 24.1 percent, to average $73.1 a barrel, in 
2023 (from $96.4 in 2022) and continue to fall in 
the coming years, to $65.4 in 2026 (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 2). Uncertainty around this price outlook is ele-
vated in part due to the uncertain rebound in China’s 
All commodities
Energy
Food
Base metals
Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval
October 2021 WEO
April 2022 WEO
October 2022 WEO
April 2023 WEO
0
60
120
180
240
2017
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
0
100
200
300
400
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Q1
24
Q4
Figure 1.SF.1.  Commodity Market Developments
  
40
80
120
160
2021
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
2. Brent Futures Curves2
(US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
3. Brent Price Medium-Term Prospects3
(US dollars a barrel)
1. Commodity Price Indices with Forecast1
(Index, 2016 = 100)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Kpler; 
Reﬁnitiv Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Adjusted for inﬂation using the US consumer price index (CPI). Last actual value is 
applied to the forecast period. Dashed lines are the forecasts from 2023:Q1 to 
2024:Q4.
2WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and derived from 
futures prices. Prices in the April 2023 WEO are based on the March 17, 2023 
closing.
3Derived from prices of futures options on March 17, 2023.
Special Feature Title: Special Feature Head
Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and the  
Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in Fossil Fuel Extraction
31
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and the  Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in Fossil Fuel Extraction
growth, as well as the energy transition (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 3). Upside price risks stem from potential supply 
disruptions, including those from Russian retaliation 
to a binding price cap, and insufficient investment in 
fossil fuel extraction. Following the financial market 
turmoil that emerged in mid-March, downside price 
risks of a widespread global economic relapse have 
increased significantly.
Natural gas prices at the European Title Transfer 
Facility trading hub receded 76.1 percent from record 
highs in August 2022 to $16.7 a million British ther-
mal units (MMBtus) in February 2023 as concerns 
about supply shortages faded. Prices reached nearly 
$100 a MMBtu in late August when EU countries 
raced to refill their gas storage facilities amid fears 
of supply shortages during the winter. This followed 
Russia’s progressive shutdown of roughly 80 percent 
of pipeline gas supplies to European countries. Prices 
in the global liquefied natural gas market followed 
in lockstep. For the winter of 2022–23, a crisis was 
averted, with ample storage at European facilities 
owing to higher liquefied natural gas imports and 
lower gas demand amid high prices as well as an 
atypically mild winter. Lower demand due to an eco-
nomic slowdown in China and substitution of other 
fuel sources, such as coal, also helped ease pressures 
on the global liquefied natural gas market. A price 
decline to historical averages is expected by 2028 
(Figure 1.SF.2). Risks of price spikes remain some-
what elevated, however, for next winter. Spillovers 
from gas markets caused a 50.9 percent slide in coal 
prices over the reference period.
Metal prices recover after steep drop. The base metal 
price index dropped below levels preceding Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. It surged after the invasion 
but experienced a broad-based retreat amid slow-
ing Chinese metal demand (accounting for roughly 
half of global consumption of major metals) and 
monetary policy tightening. With China’s reopening 
and increased infrastructure spending, as well as an 
expected slower pace of interest rate hikes from the 
Federal Reserve, base metal prices partially rebounded, 
increasing by 19.7 percent from August 2022 to 
February 2023. Recent banking distress presents 
significant downside risks to prices. The IMF’s energy 
transition metal index increased 14.3 percent. Gold 
prices rose by 5.1 percent, and central banks’ net 
purchases broke a 55-year record. The base metal price 
index is projected to increase 3.5 percent in 2023 and 
then decrease 2.6 percent in 2024. Traders seem to 
price in a potential rebound in demand from China.
Agricultural prices continue on a downward trend. 
Drawdowns of stocks of staple foods in major export-
ing countries, due to major shocks in the past two 
years from the pandemic and the war in Ukraine, have 
stopped as supply and demand have reacted to higher 
prices. Food and beverage prices peaked in May 2022 
and are up 1.3 percent from last August. They remain 
22.3 percent above the past-five-year average and 
39.1 percent above pre-pandemic levels. The sup-
ply outlook improved as Ukrainian wheat and other 
products entered the global market after the Black Sea 
corridor initiative was renewed last November. High 
prices also provided incentives to other regions, such 
as the European Union and India, to step up wheat 
production. However, some of the correction has likely 
come from demand destruction of price-elastic compo-
nents such as meat and biofuels. Risks remain balanced 
as spillovers from gas to fertilizer prices and a possible 
abrupt ending of the Black Sea corridor deal offset pos-
sibly reduced consumption and a potentially stronger 
supply reaction. Prices of raw agricultural materials 
declined by 9.1 percent from last August amid slowing 
global demand but, like base metal prices, have partly 
rebounded in recent months.
March 2023
March 2028
March 2024
Average price (2015–20)
March 2025
EU gas storage utilization (right scale)
March 2026
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80
100
Jan.
2022
Mar.
22
May
22
July
22
Sept.
22
Nov.
22
Jan.
23
Mar.
23
Figure 1.SF.2.  EU Gas Storage and Futures Contract Prices
(US dollars per million British thermal units; percent)
Sources: Argus Direct; Bloomberg L.P.; Gas Infrastructure Europe (GIE); and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: European Union country coverage by the GIE deﬁnition. Dates in legend are 
Dutch Title Transfer Facility (TTF) futures contracts expiration date.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
32
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
The Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in Fossil 
Fuel Extraction
Reaching net zero emissions by 2050 will require 
an 80 percent reduction in global fossil fuel extraction 
compared with 2021 levels, according to the Interna-
tional Energy Agency (2022) (Figure 1.SF.3). Though 
the situation is highly uncertain, it is worth asking 
what economic repercussions a contraction in fossil 
fuel extraction could have for fossil fuel exporters. A 
large amount of literature emphasizes the negative 
impact a sizable extraction industry has on a coun-
try’s economic growth (the resource curse) because 
it weighs on the performance of the manufacturing 
sector (Krugman 1987; Frankel 2012) and on the 
quality of institutions (Mauro 1995; Lane and Tornell 
1996).1 There is, however, a dearth of analysis on the 
macroeconomic effects of a reversal, to the extent that 
there is still debate over whether a decline in fossil fuel 
1“Dutch disease” is a version of the resource curse in which an 
increase in commodity prices leads to a real exchange rate appreci-
ation that crowds out a commodity exporter’s domestic manufac-
turing sector. Total output can still expand, and the country can 
become richer. See Brunnschweiler and Bulte (2008) and van der 
Ploeg and Venables (2012).
production is detrimental or beneficial to countries’ 
economic growth.2
This Special Feature contributes to filling this gap 
by estimating the macroeconomic impact of per-
sistent declines in extraction activity.3 It focuses on 
production declines, given that the effects of climate 
policies on fossil fuel prices are uncertain, depending 
on whether policies curbing demand for fossil fuels 
will prevail over those curbing their supply (see the 
April 2022 World Economic Outlook). Even though 
production declines will likely vary substantially and 
are hard to anticipate, these estimates can help inform 
fossil-fuel-exporting countries’ medium- to long-term 
planning and policies.
Countries depending on fossil fuel output: Between 
2010 and 2019, average oil and gas produc-
tion-to-GDP ratios were large in countries such as 
Angola, Azerbaijan, the Republic of Congo, Kuwait, 
and Saudi Arabia (Figure 1.SF.4 panel 1). Gas pro-
duction is particularly relevant in Qatar and Trinidad 
and Tobago. Coal production, on the other hand, is 
less relevant to GDP at the country level, except in 
the case of Mongolia. Most extracted fossil fuels are 
exported and so are a fundamental source of cash 
inflows in economies’ external balance. Indeed, ratios 
of net exports of oil and gas to GDP surpassed 25 
percent on average over 2010–2019 in more than 
ten countries (Figure 1.SF.4 panel 2). The oil and gas 
sector is also a substantial contributor to tax revenues 
and, to a lesser extent, to employment (see Online 
Annex Figures 1.SF.1 to 1.SF.4).4
A new data set on declines in extraction: The empir-
ical exercise conducted for this Special Feature relies 
on a new data set on the extraction of oil, coal, gas, 
and metals for countries worldwide from 1950 to 
2020. To deal with endogeneity, the analysis identifies 
35 episodes involving persistent declines in extractive 
activity out of a total of 154 observed episodes. It 
verifies that these episodes are driven by factors exog-
enous to economic conditions such as depletion or 
sector-specific policy changes. For example, included 
are episodes such as the sudden tax increase on bauxite 
mining in Suriname in 1974, which led to a ­persistent 
2A small body of literature examines the local effects of mining 
booms and busts. See Black, McKinnish, and Sanders (2005); Jacob-
sen and Parker (2016); Cavalcanti, Da Mata, and Toscani (2019); 
Watson, Lange, and Linn (2023); and Hanson (2023).
3This Special Feature is based on Bems and others (forthcoming).
4All online annexes are available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​WEO.
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Renewables and nuclear
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Renewables include solar, wind, hydro, bioenergy, and traditional use of 
biomass. Fossil fuel production includes fossil fuels for non-energy use (for 
example, petrochemicals) as well as carbon capture and storage abatement.
Figure 1.SF.3.  Global Fossil Fuel Production Declines 
60 Percent in a Net Zero Emissions Scenario
(Exajoule)
2000
10
20
30
40
50
33
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and the  Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in Fossil Fuel Extraction
contraction in bauxite output (other examples feature 
in Bems and others, forthcoming). Extraction declines 
driven by global recessions, policy decisions directly 
affecting other sectors of an economy, and structural 
transitions such as the breakup of the Soviet Union 
and civil wars are excluded. Across those identified, the 
typical episode is a 10 percent contraction in extraction 
activity in the episode’s first year that cumulates to a 
40 percent reduction over 10 years (Figure 1.SF.5).
Estimating the macroeconomic effects of declines in 
extractive activity: Following Jordà (2005), local projec-
tions are used to estimate the effects of episodes of per-
sistent exogenous extraction declines on real GDP and 
the external and domestic sectors using the following:
​y​ t+h,i​ − ​y​ t−1,i​  =  α + ​β​ h​ Δ ​q​ t,i​ + ​∑ j=1​ 
p  ​ ​Γ​ j​ h​ ​y​ t−j,i​ 
+ ​∑ j=1​ 
p  ​ ​Π​ j​ h​ Δ ​q​ t−j,i​ + ​ψ​ n​ + ​ϕ​ t​ + ​u​ t+h,i​ ​y​ t+h,i​ − ​y​ t−1,i​.
The equation’s left side represents the log deviation 
of the variable of interest from its initial value over 
the horizon h, up to 10 years. Results may thus be 
interpreted as cumulative percentage changes from the 
baseline to a shock in year t. The term Δqt,i captures 
the percentage change in extraction output for episode 
i at year t. The baseline includes country fixed effects 
ψn to account for structural differences across coun-
tries, time fixed effects ​ϕ​ t​ to control for global price 
movements and other common global factors, as well 
as three lags of the dependent variable, and a shock 
series to deal with autocorrelation, following Montiel 
Olea and Plagborg-Møller (2021).
Negative macroeconomic effects: A typical episode 
leads to a 1 percent initial decline from the baseline in 
real GDP, cumulating to 5 percent after five years. The 
decline is persistent, with no rebound until the end of 
the horizon (Figure 1.SF.6, panel 1).
The real exchange rate depreciates slowly by 20 per-
cent. This does not stimulate enough reallocation of 
production factors such as labor and capital toward 
tradables sectors, which could offset the decline in 
exports that depend on extractive industries. Instead, 
the trade balance worsens, driven by a decline in 
exports of about 6 percent (Figure 1.SF.6, panel 3). 
Imports and investment also decline, though the 
estimates for these effects are less precise. Aggregate 
consumption responds only with a lag of more than 
five years.
The role of manufacturing: Spillover effects on the 
manufacturing and services sectors are significant 
and negative. Their value added falls significantly by 
about 5 percent (Bems and others, forthcoming). 
Coal
Natural gas
Crude oil
1. Production-to-GDP Ratio
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
KWT
COG
TTO
GNQ
AZE
QAT
IRQ
SSD
SAU
BRN
VEN
LBY
OMN
AGO
GAB
DZA
KAZ
MNG
ARE
BHR
2. Net-Exports-to-GDP Ratio
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
BRN
KWT
QAT
AGO
COG
LBY
IRQ
OMN
AZE
SAU
DZA
ARE
VEN
KAZ
NOR
RUS
NGA
MNG
BOL
TTO
Sources: International Energy Agency; United Nations Comtrade database; World 
Bank; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Ratios are computed annually and averaged over 2010–2019. Prices are 
taken at the regional level in US dollars. Iran is excluded due to data limitation. 
Country list uses International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
Figure 1.SF.4.  Top Twenty Countries by Share of Fossil Fuel 
Production and Net Exports in GDP
(Percent)
Median
25th–75th percentile
Figure 1.SF.5.  Episodes of Extraction Declines
(Percent)
–120
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
Sources: Bems and others (forthcoming); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: X-axis unit is years before and after peak extraction year.
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
34
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
These ­sectors provide mining sector inputs and pro-
cess outputs. The negative impact more than offsets 
the potential benefits of the depreciation in the real 
exchange rate. The initial share of the manufacturing 
sector in value added matters. Economies with bigger 
initial manufacturing shares fare better, suggesting the 
presence of sunk costs in the tradables sector that favor 
existing exporting manufacturing firms over new ones. 
The negative impact on employment is, on the other 
hand, small, likely owing to the high capital intensity 
of the extraction sector.
The role of institutions: The estimated GDP impact is 
significantly larger for middle- and low-income coun-
tries than for those with high incomes. One plausible 
explanation for this is that high-income countries tend 
to have stronger institutions. Five years after the shock, 
the GDP difference between countries with high and 
low institutional quality is about 5 percentage points 
(Figure 1.SF.6, panel 2). This could indicate that 
strong institutions help buffer the negative economic 
effects of a persistent decline in extraction activity. 
While explaining what determines the quality of 
institutions is beyond the scope of this analysis, the 
economic literature on the resource curse emphasizes 
that resource booms can lead to a deterioration in the 
quality of institutions. What happens, however, in 
the reverse, a resource extraction bust? The exercise 
shows that a decline in extraction activity does not 
restore the quality of institutions, not even a decade 
after the shock. This suggests a hysteresis effect and an 
asymmetric response of institutions to shocks: once 
institutions are damaged, improving them is hard (see 
Figure 1.SF.7).
Anticipation: It could bias the results toward a smaller 
estimated impact if the regression does not capture 
earlier adjustment. To explore anticipation, projections 
of commodity production in IMF Article IV reports 
are reviewed and compared with actual production. 
Out of 26 decline episodes with Article IV coverage, 
Bad institutions
Good institutions
Imports
Exports
Private
Public
–16
–12
–8
–4
0
4
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
1. Real GDP
2. Role of Institutions
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
0
2
4
6
8
10
–16
–12
–8
–4
0
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
3. Trade
4. Exchange Rate
–16
–12
–8
–4
0
4
8
0
2
4
6
8
10
–12
–9
–6
–3
0
3
6
0
2
4
6
8
10
5. Consumption
6. Investment
Sources: Bems and others (forthcoming); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The unit of the x-axis is years after the shock. Shaded areas represent 
90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
Figure 1.SF.6.  Responses of Macroeconomic Variables to an 
Extraction Decline Shock
(Percent)
Small manufacturing sector
Large manufacturing sector
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Sources: Bems and others (forthcoming); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The unit of the x-axis is years after the shock. Shaded areas represent 
90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
Figure 1.SF.7.  Response of Institutional Quality Interacted 
with Manufacturing Sector Size to an Extraction Decline 
Shock
(Percent)
35
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and the  Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in Fossil Fuel Extraction
only 4 were anticipated. In the other 22, extraction was 
expected either to increase or to remain stable (or in a 
few cases, it was not mentioned). The lack of anticipa-
tion, in turn, suggests that uncertainty about the size 
and persistence of the ensuing contraction may have 
delayed the economic adjustment needed, surprising the 
country’s policymakers and private sector alike. In fact, 
both private and public consumption initially increase, 
declining only with a delay to a 4 percent lower level. 
This suggests that the shock was typically not fully 
anticipated, or income-side policies are implemented 
to buffer the initial impact, or both. Accordingly, the 
exchange rate moves in only a modest and statistically 
nonsignificant way.
A More Challenging Energy Transition: Countries 
at risk of declining fossil fuel output need to address 
the possibility of a challenging structural adjustment. 
To do so, they can improve public finances and the 
quality of their institutions (for example, by enhanc-
ing the management of public sector institutions 
and the regulatory business environment), diversify 
their economies (Cherif and others 2022), set up 
sovereign wealth funds, and facilitate the reallo-
cation of production factors. Possible policies for 
accomplishing these goals include ameliorating the 
business environment to attract investment in new, 
productive, higher-value-added sectors; modernizing 
infrastructure and attracting foreign direct investment 
in research and development; and improving the 
human capital stock of the labor force by investing 
in education.
The pace and direction of the clean energy transi-
tion as well as the price outlook depend on the policy 
mix. This creates great uncertainty in countries that 
produce fossil fuels. If fossil fuel prices decline because 
of a climate policy mix that works mostly through the 
demand side, high-cost producers will need to shut 
down production. If those prices instead rise based on 
a climate policy mix that relies on supply cuts, local 
production declines will depend on domestic policy 
decisions (see the Special Feature in the April 2022 
World Economic Outlook). Climate policy certainty, at 
the country and global levels, could make adjustments 
more predictable and less costly.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
36
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
2022
Projections
2022
Projections
Projections
Projections
2023
2024
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
Europe
2.7
0.8
1.7
15.4
10.5
6.5
1.7
1.3
1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Europe 
3.6
0.6
1.4
8.5
5.6
3.0
1.6
1.7
2.0
6.0
6.2
6.2
Euro Area4,5
3.5
0.8
1.4
8.4
5.3
2.9
–0.7
0.6
0.9
6.8
6.8
6.8
Germany
1.8
–0.1
1.1
8.7
6.2
3.1
4.2
4.7
5.1
3.1
3.3
3.3
France
2.6
0.7
1.3
5.9
5.0
2.5
–1.7
–1.2
–0.7
7.3
7.4
7.3
Italy
3.7
0.7
0.8
8.7
4.5
2.6
–0.7
0.7
1.0
8.1
8.3
8.4
Spain
5.5
1.5
2.0
8.3
4.3
3.2
1.1
0.9
0.8
12.9
12.6
12.4
The Netherlands
4.5
1.0
1.2
11.6
3.9
4.2
5.5
6.3
6.3
3.5
3.9
4.2
Belgium
3.1
0.7
1.1
10.3
4.7
2.1
–3.4
–2.7
–1.4
5.5
6.0
6.0
Ireland
12.0
5.6
4.0
8.1
5.0
3.2
8.8
8.2
7.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
Austria
5.0
0.4
1.1
8.6
8.2
3.0
0.3
1.2
0.6
4.8
5.3
5.6
Portugal 
6.7
1.0
1.7
8.1
5.7
3.1
–1.3
–0.8
–0.7
6.0
6.6
6.5
Greece
5.9
2.6
1.5
9.3
4.0
2.9
–9.7
–8.0
–6.0
12.2
11.2
10.4
Finland
2.1
0.0
1.3
7.2
5.3
2.5
–4.2
–3.4
–2.2
6.8
7.5
7.5
Slovak Republic
1.7
1.3
2.7
12.1
9.5
4.3
–4.3
–3.5
–2.6
6.1
6.0
5.9
Croatia
6.3
1.7
2.3
10.7
7.4
3.6
–1.2
–1.8
–1.8
6.8
6.4
6.0
Lithuania
1.9
–0.3
2.7
18.9
10.5
5.8
–4.5
–3.0
–2.0
5.9
7.0
6.5
Slovenia
5.4
1.6
2.1
8.8
6.4
4.5
–0.4
0.3
0.8
4.0
3.9
4.0
Luxembourg
1.5
1.1
1.7
8.1
2.6
3.1
4.0
4.3
4.3
4.8
5.1
5.4
Latvia
2.0
0.4
2.9
17.2
9.7
3.5
–6.3
–3.1
–2.2
6.9
7.0
6.8
Estonia
–1.3
–1.2
3.2
19.4
9.7
4.1
–2.2
–1.2
–0.9
5.6
6.1
5.7
Cyprus 
5.6
2.5
2.8
8.1
3.9
2.5
–8.8
–7.8
–7.2
6.7
6.5
6.2
Malta
6.9
3.5
3.5
6.1
5.8
3.4
0.7
1.8
1.7
2.9
3.1
3.2
United Kingdom
4.0
–0.3
1.0
9.1
6.8
3.0
–5.6
–5.2
–4.4
3.7
4.2
4.7
Switzerland
2.1
0.8
1.8
2.8
2.4
1.6
9.8
7.8
8.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
Sweden
2.6
–0.5
1.0
8.1
6.8
2.3
4.3
3.9
3.9
7.5
7.8
8.0
Czech Republic
2.4
–0.5
2.0
15.1
11.8
5.8
–2.2
0.3
2.4
2.3
3.5
2.5
Norway
3.3
2.1
2.5
5.8
4.9
2.8
30.4
25.4
23.2
3.3
3.5
3.7
Denmark
3.6
0.0
1.0
8.5
4.8
2.8
12.8
9.5
7.7
4.5
5.1
5.1
Iceland
6.4
2.3
2.1
8.3
8.1
4.2
–1.5
–1.7
–1.5
3.8
3.4
3.8
Andorra
8.7
1.3
1.5
6.2
5.6
2.9
17.1
17.6
18.1
2.0
2.1
1.7
San Marino
4.6
1.2
1.0
7.1
4.6
2.7
4.3
2.4
2.0
5.5
5.1
5.1
Emerging and Developing Europe6
0.8
1.2
2.5
27.9
19.7
13.2
2.4
–0.8
–0.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Russia
–2.1
0.7
1.3
13.8
7.0
4.6
10.3
3.6
3.2
3.9
3.6
4.3
Türkiye
5.6
2.7
3.6
72.3
50.6
35.2
–5.4
–4.0
–3.2
10.5
11.0
10.5
Poland
4.9
0.3
2.4
14.4
11.9
6.1
–3.2
–2.4
–2.1
2.9
3.2
3.5
Romania
4.8
2.4
3.7
13.8
10.5
5.8
–9.3
–7.9
–7.7
5.6
5.6
5.4
Ukraine7
–30.3
–3.0
. . .
20.2
21.1
. . .
5.7
–4.4
. . .
24.5
20.9
. . .
Hungary
4.9
0.5
3.2
14.5
17.7
5.4
–8.1
–4.6
–1.9
3.6
4.1
3.8
Belarus
–4.7
0.7
1.2
14.8
7.5
10.1
4.2
1.3
1.6
4.5
4.3
3.9
Bulgaria5
3.4
1.4
3.5
13.0
7.5
2.2
–0.7
–0.5
–1.0
4.3
4.6
4.4
Serbia
2.3
2.0
3.0
12.0
12.2
5.3
–6.9
–6.1
–5.7
9.4
9.2
9.1
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia. 
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.
7See the country-specific note for Ukraine in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
37
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
Asia
3.8
4.6
4.4
3.8
3.4
2.9
1.8
1.5
1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Asia
1.8
1.8
1.8
3.8
3.3
2.4
3.6
3.9
4.2
2.9
3.0
3.0
Japan
1.1
1.3
1.0
2.5
2.7
2.2
2.1
3.0
4.0
2.6
2.3
2.3
Korea 
2.6
1.5
2.4
5.1
3.5
2.3
1.8
2.2
2.8
2.9
3.7
3.7
Taiwan Province of China
2.5
2.1
2.6
2.9
1.9
1.7
13.4
11.9
11.3
3.7
3.7
3.7
Australia
3.7
1.6
1.7
6.6
5.3
3.2
1.2
1.4
0.2
3.7
4.0
4.1
Singapore
3.6
1.5
2.1
6.1
5.8
3.5
19.3
15.5
15.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
Hong Kong SAR
–3.5
3.5
3.1
1.9
2.3
2.4
10.7
8.0
6.5
4.2
3.4
3.3
New Zealand
2.4
1.1
0.8
7.2
5.5
2.6
–8.9
–8.6
–7.2
3.3
4.3
5.3
Macao SAR 
–26.8
58.9
20.6
1.0
2.5
2.3
–23.5
13.1
23.1
3.0
2.7
2.5
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.4
5.3
5.1
3.8
3.4
3.0
1.1
0.7
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
China
3.0
5.2
4.5
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.3
1.4
1.1
4.2
4.1
3.9
India4
6.8
5.9
6.3
6.7
4.9
4.4
–2.6
–2.2
–2.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Indonesia
5.3
5.0
5.1
4.2
4.4
3.0
1.0
–0.3
–0.7
5.9
5.3
5.2
Thailand
2.6
3.4
3.6
6.1
2.8
2.0
–3.3
1.2
3.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Vietnam
8.0
5.8
6.9
3.2
5.0
4.3
–0.9
0.2
0.6
2.3
2.4
2.4
Philippines
7.6
6.0
5.8
5.8
6.3
3.2
–4.4
–2.5
–2.4
5.4
5.3
5.1
Malaysia
8.7
4.5
4.5
3.4
2.9
3.1
2.6
2.6
2.7
3.8
3.6
3.5
Other Emerging and Developing Asia5
3.4
4.2
5.6
12.5
11.3
6.6
–3.3
–1.7
–3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
ASEAN-56
5.5
4.5
4.6
4.8
4.3
2.9
2.5
2.5
2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Asia7
4.4
5.3
5.0
3.4
3.1
2.9
1.3
0.7
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, 
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand.
7Emerging Asia comprises China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
38
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
North America
2.3
1.6
1.1
7.9
4.6
2.5
–3.3
–2.5
–2.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
United States 
2.1
1.6
1.1
8.0
4.5
2.3
–3.6
–2.7
–2.5
3.6
3.8
4.9
Mexico
3.1
1.8
1.6
7.9
6.3
3.9
–0.9
–1.0
–1.0
3.3
3.3
3.5
Canada
3.4
1.5
1.5
6.8
3.9
2.4
–0.4
–1.1
–1.1
5.3
5.8
6.2
Puerto Rico4
4.8
0.4
–1.6
4.3
3.3
2.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
6.0
7.9
8.8
South America5
3.9
1.0
1.9
17.4
17.2
11.8
–3.1
–2.1
–2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Brazil
2.9
0.9
1.5
9.3
5.0
4.8
–2.9
–2.7
–2.7
7.9
8.2
8.1
Argentina
5.2
0.2
2.0
72.4
98.6
60.1
–0.7
1.0
0.8
7.0
7.6
7.4
Colombia
7.5
1.0
1.9
10.2
10.9
5.4
–6.2
–5.1
–4.6
11.2
11.3
10.9
Chile
2.4
–1.0
1.9
11.6
7.9
4.0
–9.0
–4.2
–3.8
7.9
8.3
7.9
Peru
2.7
2.4
3.0
7.9
5.7
2.4
–4.5
–2.1
–2.3
7.8
7.6
7.4
Ecuador
3.0
2.9
2.8
3.5
2.5
1.5
2.2
2.0
2.0
3.8
3.6
3.6
Venezuela
8.0
5.0
4.5
200.9
400.0
200.0
3.5
5.0
5.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Bolivia
3.2
1.8
1.9
1.7
4.0
3.7
–1.5
–2.5
–2.6
4.7
4.9
5.0
Paraguay
0.2
4.5
3.5
9.8
5.2
4.1
–5.2
–2.5
–3.1
7.2
6.4
6.1
Uruguay
4.9
2.0
2.9
9.1
7.6
6.1
–2.5
–2.5
–2.2
7.9
8.3
8.0
Central America6
5.3
3.8
3.8
7.3
5.5
4.0
–3.5
–2.8
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Caribbean7
13.4
9.9
14.1
12.6
13.5
6.8
4.2
2.6
3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Latin America and the Caribbean8
4.0
1.6
2.2
14.0
13.3
9.0
–2.5
–1.8
–1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9
9.1
4.5
4.0
5.6
4.3
2.4
–14.2
–11.9
–10.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. Aggregates exclude 
Venezuela.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, 
Nicaragua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and 
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as Anguilla 
and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
39
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and 
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
Middle East and Central Asia
5.3
2.9
3.5
14.3
15.9
12.0
7.5
3.6
2.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
5.1
3.1
3.2
14.4
12.6
9.3
12.4
6.5
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
8.7
3.1
3.1
2.5
2.8
2.3
13.8
6.2
3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iran 
2.5
2.0
2.0
49.0
42.5
30.0
4.7
1.8
1.9
9.5
9.8
10.1
United Arab Emirates
7.4
3.5
3.9
4.8
3.4
2.0
11.7
7.1
7.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kazakhstan
3.2
4.3
4.9
15.0
14.8
8.5
2.8
–1.9
–2.0
4.9
4.8
4.8
Algeria
2.9
2.6
2.6
9.3
8.1
7.7
7.2
0.8
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iraq
8.1
3.7
3.1
5.0
6.6
1.6
11.6
4.4
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
4.2
2.4
1.8
5.0
3.0
2.7
26.0
19.2
14.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kuwait
8.2
0.9
2.7
3.9
3.3
2.6
28.5
19.7
16.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Azerbaijan
4.6
3.0
2.6
13.8
11.3
8.0
30.5
19.2
17.4
5.9
5.8
5.8
Oman
4.3
1.7
5.2
2.8
1.9
2.4
3.2
2.1
1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Turkmenistan
1.8
2.3
2.1
11.5
6.7
10.7
5.7
4.6
2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Importers5,6
5.5
2.7
4.0
14.1
20.5
15.8
–2.0
–2.4
–3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Egypt
6.6
3.7
5.0
8.5
21.6
18.0
–3.5
–2.8
–3.1
7.3
7.6
7.7
Pakistan
6.0
0.5
3.5
12.1
27.1
21.9
–4.6
–2.3
–2.4
6.2
7.0
6.8
Morocco
1.1
3.0
3.1
6.6
4.6
2.8
–4.3
–3.7
–3.5
12.9
11.0
10.5
Uzbekistan
5.7
5.3
5.5
11.4
11.8
9.9
1.4
–3.5
–3.7
8.9
8.4
7.9
Sudan
–2.5
1.2
2.7
138.8
71.6
51.9
–6.2
–7.2
–8.3
32.1
33.1
33.0
Tunisia
2.5
1.3
1.9
8.3
10.9
9.5
–8.5
–7.1
–5.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Jordan
2.7
2.7
2.7
4.2
3.8
2.9
–7.4
–6.0
–5.2
22.8
. . .
. . .
Georgia
10.1
4.0
5.0
11.9
5.9
3.2
–3.1
–4.1
–4.2
18.7
19.5
20.2
Armenia
12.6
5.5
5.0
8.7
7.1
5.0
0.1
–1.7
–3.3
12.5
12.5
13.0
Tajikistan
8.0
5.0
4.5
6.6
5.4
6.5
6.2
–1.9
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kyrgyz Republic
7.0
3.5
3.8
13.9
11.3
7.8
–26.8
–9.7
–9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
West Bank and Gaza
4.0
3.5
2.7
3.7
3.2
2.7
–12.4
–11.8
–11.5
24.4
24.2
24.0
Mauritania
5.0
4.4
5.1
9.6
9.5
7.0
–14.3
–7.2
–8.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Caucasus and Central Asia 
4.8
4.2
4.5
13.0
11.8
8.5
5.8
1.1
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan6
5.4
2.7
3.4
14.4
16.4
12.5
7.8
3.9
2.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East and North Africa
5.3
3.1
3.4
14.8
14.8
11.1
9.0
4.5
2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Israel7
6.4
2.9
3.1
4.4
4.3
3.1
3.7
3.5
3.3
3.8
3.8
3.7
Maghreb8
0.7
4.4
3.4
7.9
6.9
5.9
0.9
–0.5
–1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mashreq9
6.0
3.7
4.8
12.3
22.8
17.8
–5.0
–3.9
–4.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, and Yemen. 
5Includes Djibouti, Lebanon, and Somalia. See the country-specific note for Lebanon in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Excludes Afghanistan and Syria because of the uncertain political situation. See the country-specific notes in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is shown for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
8The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia. 
9The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and West Bank and Gaza. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
40
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3 
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
2022
2023
2024
Sub-Saharan Africa
3.9
3.6
4.2
14.5
14.0
10.5
–2.0
–2.6
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
3.1
3.2
3.0
18.1
17.6
14.1
2.0
0.7
0.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
3.3
3.2
3.0
18.8
20.1
15.8
–0.7
–0.6
–0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Angola
2.8
3.5
3.7
21.4
11.7
10.8
11.0
6.2
3.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Gabon
2.8
3.0
3.1
4.3
3.4
2.6
1.2
–0.1
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Chad
2.5
3.5
3.7
5.3
3.4
3.0
2.8
–1.4
–4.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Equatorial Guinea
1.6
–1.8
–8.2
5.0
5.7
5.2
0.0
–2.1
–5.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle-Income Countries5
3.6
2.7
3.7
9.3
9.4
6.2
–2.7
–3.3
–3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
2.0
0.1
1.8
6.9
5.8
4.8
–0.5
–2.3
–2.6
33.5
34.7
34.7
Kenya
5.4
5.3
5.4
7.6
7.8
5.6
–4.7
–5.3
–5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ghana
3.2
1.6
2.9
31.9
45.4
22.2
–2.3
–2.9
–2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Côte d’Ivoire 
6.7
6.2
6.6
5.2
3.7
1.8
–6.5
–5.7
–5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Cameroon
3.4
4.3
4.4
5.3
5.9
4.7
–1.6
–2.8
–3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Zambia
3.4
4.0
4.1
11.0
8.9
7.7
2.4
3.8
4.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Senegal
4.7
8.3
10.6
9.7
5.0
2.0
–16.0
–10.4
–4.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income Countries6
5.2
5.4
6.2
18.5
16.9
13.1
–6.2
–5.5
–5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ethiopia
6.4
6.1
6.4
33.9
31.4
23.5
–4.3
–3.4
–2.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tanzania
4.7
5.2
6.2
4.4
4.9
4.3
–4.6
–4.0
–3.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Democratic Republic of the Congo
6.6
6.3
6.5
9.0
10.8
7.2
–2.2
–3.9
–3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Uganda
4.9
5.7
5.7
6.8
7.6
6.4
–8.1
–10.9
–11.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Burkina Faso
2.5
4.9
5.9
14.1
1.5
2.3
–5.2
–3.6
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mali
3.7
5.0
5.1
10.1
5.0
2.8
–6.9
–6.2
–5.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP. 
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Republic of Congo and South Sudan.
5Includes Benin, Botswana, Cabo Verde, Comoros, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Seychelles.
6Includes Burundi, Central African Republic, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Togo, and 
Zimbabwe.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
41
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 
(Annual percent change; in constant 2017 international dollars at purchasing power parity)
Average
Projections 
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
World
2.3
2.1
1.9
2.4
2.4
1.6
–4.0
5.7
2.4
1.8
2.0
Advanced Economies
0.9
1.7
1.3
2.1
1.9
1.3
–4.7
5.3
2.3
0.9
1.0
United States
0.8
2.0
0.9
1.6
2.4
1.8
–3.6
5.6
1.7
1.0
0.4
Euro Area1
0.4
1.7
1.6
2.5
1.6
1.3
–6.5
5.5
3.2
0.6
1.2
Germany
1.4
0.6
1.4
2.3
0.7
0.8
–3.8
2.6
1.1
–0.2
1.1
France
0.4
0.6
0.7
2.2
1.5
1.5
–8.1
6.5
2.3
0.4
1.0
Italy
–0.9
0.9
1.5
1.8
1.1
0.7
–8.7
8.1
3.8
0.7
0.8
Spain
–0.4
3.9
2.9
2.8
1.9
1.2
–11.8
5.4
5.0
1.1
1.6
Japan
0.6
1.7
0.8
1.8
0.8
–0.2
–4.0
2.4
1.3
1.7
1.5
United Kingdom
0.5
1.6
1.3
1.8
1.1
1.1
–11.4
7.3
3.3
–0.7
0.5
Canada
0.9
–0.1
0.0
1.8
1.4
0.4
–6.2
4.4
1.7
–0.6
0.1
Other Advanced Economies2
2.3
1.5
1.8
2.5
2.0
1.3
–2.2
5.4
2.3
1.2
1.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
2.8
2.9
3.3
3.3
2.3
–3.1
6.1
2.8
2.8
3.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.1
5.8
5.8
5.7
5.6
4.4
–1.3
6.8
3.7
4.7
4.5
China
9.4
6.5
6.2
6.4
6.3
5.6
2.1
8.4
3.0
5.3
4.6
India3
6.2
6.7
7.0
5.6
5.3
2.8
–6.7
8.0
5.8
4.9
5.4
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.5
0.5
1.5
4.0
3.4
2.3
–1.5
7.4
2.4
1.9
2.2
Russia
3.4
–2.2
0.0
1.8
2.9
2.2
–2.3
6.1
–0.6
0.9
1.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.2
–0.8
–1.9
0.2
0.2
–1.1
–8.0
6.1
3.1
0.7
1.3
Brazil
2.5
–4.4
–4.1
0.5
1.0
0.4
–4.0
4.6
2.3
0.3
0.9
Mexico
0.7
2.1
1.5
1.0
1.1
–1.2
–8.9
3.8
2.2
1.0
0.7
Middle East and Central Asia
1.9
0.8
2.1
–0.4
0.5
–0.4
–4.7
6.2
3.3
1.1
1.7
Saudi Arabia
1.3
1.7
–0.5
–2.6
0.3
–1.5
–6.5
6.7
6.6
1.0
1.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.5
0.4
–1.3
0.1
0.5
0.5
–4.3
2.1
1.2
0.9
1.5
Nigeria
4.1
0.0
–4.2
–1.8
–0.7
–0.4
–4.3
1.1
0.7
0.7
0.5
South Africa
1.6
–0.2
–0.8
–0.3
0.0
–1.1
–7.7
4.0
1.3
–1.4
0.3
Memorandum
European Union
0.8
2.1
1.8
2.9
2.1
1.8
–5.8
5.7
3.5
0.6
1.5
ASEAN-54
3.7
3.3
3.6
4.1
3.9
3.2
–5.4
3.2
4.4
3.6
3.7
Middle East and North Africa
1.3
0.5
2.4
–1.1
0.1
–1.0
–5.0
2.8
3.3
1.3
1.6
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.6
3.0
3.2
3.5
3.6
2.5
–3.0
6.4
3.1
3.1
3.3
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.5
2.2
1.5
2.5
2.7
2.6
–1.2
2.6
2.7
2.5
3.2
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 
1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4ASEAN-5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
42
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
References
Aiyar, Shekhar, Jiaqian Chen, Christian Ebeke, Roberto 
Garcia-Saltos, Tryggvi Gudmundsson, Anna Ilyina, Alvar 
Kangur, and others. 2023. “Geoeconomic Fragmentation 
and the Future of Multilateralism.” Staff Discussion Note 
2023/001, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​Staff​-Discussion​-Notes/​
Issues/​2023/​01/​11/​Geo​-Economic​-Fragmentation​-and​-the​
-Future​-of​-Multilateralism​-527266.
Albagli, Elías, Francesco Grigoli, and Emiliano Luttini. 2023. 
“Sticky or Flexible Prices? Firms’ Price Setting during High 
Inflation Periods.” Unpublished, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Albrizio, Silvia, Beatriz González, and Dmitry Khametshin. 
2023. “A Tale of Two Margins: Monetary Policy and Capital 
Misallocation.” Documentos de Trabajo 2302, Banco de 
España, Madrid. https://​doi​.org/​10​.53479/​25027.
Alvarez, Fernando E., Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello. 2011. 
“Optimal Price Setting with Observation and Menu Costs.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4): 1909–60. https://​doi​
.org/​10​.1093/​qje/​qjr043.
Alvarez, Jorge, and Allan Dizioli. 2023. “How Costly Will Rein-
ing in Inflation Be? It Depends on How Rational We Are.” 
IMF Working Paper 23/21, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​
Issues/​2023/​02/​03/​How​-Costly​-Will​-Reining​-in​-Inflation​-Be​
-It​-Depends​-on​-How​-Rational​-We​-Are​-529103.
Andrle, Michal, Patrick Blagrave, Pedro Espaillat, Keiko Honjo, 
Benjamin Hunt, Mika Kortelainen, René Lalonde, and oth-
ers. 2015. “The Flexible System of Global Models—FSGM.” 
IMF Working Paper 15/64, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​
Issues/​2016/​12/​31/​The​-Flexible​-System​-of​-Global​-Models​
-FSGM​-42796.
Andrle, Michal, and Benjamin Hunt. 2020. “Model-Based 
Globally-Consistent Risk Assessment.” IMF Working Paper 
20/64, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2020/​05/​22/​
Model​-Based​-Globally​-Consistent​-Risk​-Assessment​-49253.
Angrist, Joshua D., Òscar Jordà, and Guido M. Kuersteiner. 
2018. “Semiparametric Estimates of Monetary Policy Effects: 
String Theory Revisited.” Journal of Business and Economic 
Statistics 36 (3): 371–87. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1080/​07350015​
.2016​.1204919.
Ari, Anil, Nicolas Arregui, Simon Black, Oya Celasun, Dora M. 
Iakova, Aiko Mineshima, Victor Mylonas, Ian W. H. Parry, 
Iulia Teodoru, and Karlygash Zhunussova. 2022. “Surging 
Energy Prices in Europe in the Aftermath of the War: How 
to Support the Vulnerable and Speed Up the Transition away 
from Fossil Fuels.” IMF Working Paper 2022/152, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​
.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2022/​07/​28/​Surging​-Energy​
-Prices​-in​-Europe​-in​-the​-Aftermath​-of​-the​-War​-How​-to​
-Support​-the​-Vulnerable​-521457.
Auclert, Adrien, Hugo Monnery, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig 
Straub. 2022. “Managing an Energy Shock: Fiscal and Mone-
tary Policy.” Unpublished, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 
https://​web​.stanford​.edu/​~aauclert/​ha​_energy​.pdf.
Ball, Laurence, Daniel Leigh, and Prachi Mishra. 2022. 
“Understanding U.S. Inflation during the COVID Era.” 
IMF Working Paper 2022/208, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2022/​10/​28/​Understanding​
-U​-S​-525200.
Barnichon, Regis, and Christian Matthes. 2018. “Functional 
Approximation of Impulse Responses.” Journal of Monetary 
Economics 99: 41–55. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jmoneco​
.2018​.04​.013.
Bems, Rudolfs, Lukas Boehnert, Andrea Pescatori, and Martin 
Stuermer. Forthcoming. “Economic Consequences of 
Large Extraction Declines: Lessons for the Green Transi-
tion.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Bems, Rudolfs, Francesca Caselli, Francesco Grigoli, and 
Bertrand Gruss. 2020. “Gains from Anchoring Inflation 
Expectations: Evidence from the Taper Tantrum Shock.” 
Economics Letters 188: 108820. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/ 
​j​.econlet​.2019​.108820.
Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz. 2005. “Mea-
suring the Effects of Monetary Policy: A Factor-Augmented 
Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach.” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 120 (1): 387–422. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1162/​
0033553053327452.
Black, Dan, Terra McKinnish, and Seth Sanders. 2005. “The 
Economic Impact of the Coal Boom and Bust.” Economic 
Journal 115 (503): 449–76. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1111/​j​.1468​
-0297​.2005​.00996​.x.
Brunnschweiler, Christa N., and Erwin H. Bulte. 2008. “The 
Resource Curse Revisited and Revised: A Tale of Paradoxes 
and Red Herrings.” Journal of Environmental Economics and 
Management 55 (3): 248–64. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jeem​
.2007​.08​.004.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2022. “Measuring 
Geopolitical Risk.” American Economic Review 112 (4): 
1194–225. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​aer​.20191823​.
Calza, Alessandro, Tommaso Monacelli, and Livio Stracca. 2013. 
“Housing Finance and Monetary Policy.” Journal of the Euro-
pean Economic Association 11 (S1): 101–22. https://​www​.jstor​
.org/​stable/​23355061.
Carrière-Swallow, Yan, Bertrand Gruss, Nicolas E. Magud, 
and Fabian Valencia. 2021. “Monetary Policy Credibility 
and Exchange Rate Pass-Through.” International Journal of 
Central Banking 17 (3): 61–94. https://​www​.ijcb​.org/​journal/​
ijcb21q3a2​.htm.
Cavalcanti, Tiago, Daniel Da Mata, and Frederik Toscani. 2019. 
“Winning the Oil Lottery: The Impact of Natural Resource 
Extraction on Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 24 (1): 
79–115. https://​www​.springer​.com/​journal/​10887.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
43
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Cerutti, Eugenio, Ricardo Correa, Elisabetta Fiorentino, 
and Esther Segalla. 2016. “Changes in Prudential Policy 
Instruments—A New Cross-Country Database.” IMF Work-
ing Paper 16/110, International Monetary Fund, Washington, 
DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2016/​
12/​31/​Changes​-in​-Prudential​-Policy​-Instruments​-A​-New​
-Cross​-Country​-Database​-43945.
Cherif, Reda, Fuad Hasanov, Nikola Spatafora, Rahul Giri, 
Dimitre Milkov, Saad Quayyum, Gonzalo Salinas, and 
Andrew M. Warner. 2022. “Industrial Policy for Growth and 
Diversification: A Conceptual Framework.” IMF Departmen-
tal Paper 2022/017, International Monetary Fund, Washing-
ton, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​Departmental​
-Papers​-Policy​-Papers/​Issues/​2022/​09/​28/​Industrial​
-Policy​-for​-Growth​-and​-Diversification​-A​-Conceptual​
-Framework​-51971.
Choi, Jason, Taeyoung Doh, Andrew Foerster, and Zinnia Mar-
tinez. 2022. “Monetary Policy Stance Is Tighter Than Federal 
Funds Rate.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2022–30, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. https://​
www​.frbsf​.org/​economic​-research/​publications/​economic​
-letter/​2022/​november/​monetary​-policy​-stance​-is​-tighter​-than​
-federal​-funds​-rate/​.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin. 
2010. “DSGE Models for Monetary Policy Analysis.” In 
Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3, edited by Benjamin 
M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, 285–367. Amsterdam: 
North-Holland. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​B978​-0​-444​
-53238​-1​.00007​-7.
Cloyne, James, Clodomiro Ferreira, Maren Froemel, and Paolo 
Surico. Forthcoming. “Monetary Policy, Corporate Finance 
and Investment.” Journal of the European Economic Association.
Cloyne, James, Clodomiro Ferreira, and Paolo Surico. 2020. 
“Monetary Policy When Households Have Debt: New 
Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism.” Review of 
Economic Studies 87 (1): 102–29. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​
restud/​rdy074.
Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, and 
Ayşegül Şahin. 2022. “The Unemployment-Inflation 
Trade-Off Revisited: The Phillips Curve in COVID Times.” 
NBER Working Paper 29785, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. https://​www​.nber​.org/​
papers/​w29785.
Di Maggio, Marco, Amir Kermani, Benjamin J. Keys, Tomasz 
Piskorski, Rodney Ramcharan, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao. 
2017. “Interest Rate Pass-Through: Mortgage Rates, House-
hold Consumption, and Voluntary Deleveraging.” American 
Economic Review 107 (11): 3550–88. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1257/​aer​.20141313.
Duval, Romain, Yi Ji, Longji Li, Myrto Oikonomou, Carlo 
Pizzinelli, Ippei Shibata, Alessandra Sozzi, and Marina M. 
Tavares. 2022. “Labor Market Tightness in Advanced Econ-
omies.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 2022/01, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​Staff​-Discussion​-Notes/​Issues/​2022/​03/​30/​Labor​
-Market​-Tightness​-in​-Advanced​-Economies​-515270.
Forni, Mario, Davide Debortoli, Luca Gambetti, and Luca 
Sala. 2020. “Asymmetric Effects of Monetary Policy Easing 
and Tightening.” CEPR Discussion Paper DP15005, Centre 
for Economic Policy Research, London. https://​cepr​.org/​
publications/​dp15005.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. 2012. “The Natural Resource Curse: A 
Survey of Diagnoses and Some Prescriptions.” In Com-
modity Price Volatility and Inclusive Growth in Low-Income 
Countries, edited by Rabah Arezki, Catherine A. Pattillo, 
Marc G. Quintyn, and Min Zhu, 7–34. Washington, DC: 
International Monetary Fund. https://​m​.elibrary​.imf​.org/​
downloadpdf/​book/​9781616353797/​ch002​.xml.
Georgiadis, Georgios. 2014. “Towards an Explanation of 
Cross-Country Asymmetries in Monetary Transmission.” 
Journal of Macroeconomics 39: 66–84. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1016/​j​.jmacro​.2013​.10​.003.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2015. “Monetary Policy 
Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity.” American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1): 44–76. https://​doi​
.org/​10​.1257/​mac​.20130329.
González, Beatriz, Galo Nuno, Dominik Thaler, and Silvia 
Albrizio. 2022. “Firm Heterogeneity, Capital Misallocation and 
Optimal Monetary Policy.” Banco de España Working Paper 
2145, Madrid, Spain. http://​dx​.doi​.org/​10​.2139/​ssrn​.4011955.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. 2005. “The Incredible 
Volcker Disinflation.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (5): 
981–1015. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jmoneco​.2005​.07​.001.
Gopinath, Gita, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2022. “How 
Countries Should Respond to the Strong Dollar.” IMF Blog, 
October 14. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Blogs/​Articles/​2022/​10/​
14/​how​-countries​-should​-respond​-to​-the​-strong​-dollar.
Grigoli, Francesco, and Damiano Sandri. 2022. “Monetary Pol-
icy and Credit Card Spending.” IMF Working Paper 22/255, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​
.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2022/​12/​16/​Monetary​
-Policy​-and​-Credit​-Card​-Spending​-527011.
Hanson, Gordon H. 2023. “Local Labor Market Impacts of the 
Energy Transition: Prospects and Policies.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 30871, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA. https://​www​.nber​.org/​papers/​w30871.
Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags 
of Monetary Policy: A Meta-analysis.” International Journal of 
Central Banking 9 (4): 39–76. https://​www​.ijcb​.org/​journal/​
ijcb13q4a2​.htm.
Holm, Martin Blomhoff, Pascal Paul, and Andreas Tischbirek. 
2021. “The Transmission of Monetary Policy under 
the Microscope.” Journal of Political Economy 129 (10): 
2861–904. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1086/​715416.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2022. World Energy 
Outlook 2022. Paris. https://​iea​.blob​.core​.windows​
.net/​assets/​830fe099​-5530​-48f2​-a7c1​-11f35d510983/​
WorldEnergyOutlook2022​.pdf.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
44
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018. “­Guidance Note on 
the Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability ­Framework for Low Income 
Countries.” https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/
Issues/2018/02/14/pp122617guidance-note-on-lic-dsf.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021. Financial Soundness 
Indicators. Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022a. “Macroeco-
nomic Developments and Prospects in Low-Income 
Countries—2022.” IMF Policy Paper 22/054, Washington, 
DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​Policy​-Papers/​
Issues/​. World Energy Outlook 2022/12/07/Macroeconomic- 
Developments-and-Prospects-in-Low-Income-Co
untries-2022-526738.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022b. “People’s Repub-
lic of China: 2021 Article IV Consultation.” IMF Country 
Report 22/21, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​CR/​Issues/​2022/​01/​26/​Peoples​-Republic​-of​
-China​-2021​-Article​-IV​-Consultation​-Press​-Release​-Staff​
-Report​-and​-512248.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023. “People’s Republic 
of China: 2022 Article IV Consultation.” IMF Country 
Report 23/67, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​CR/​Issues/​2023/​02/​02/​Peoples​-Republic​-of​
-China​-2022​-Article​-IV​-Consultation​-Press​-Release​-Staff​
-Report​-and​-529067.
Jacobsen, Grant D., and Dominic P. Parker. 2016. “The 
Economic Aftermath of Resource Booms: Evidence from 
Boomtowns in the American West.” Economic Journal 126 
(593): 1092–128. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1111/​ecoj​.12173.
Jarociński, Marek, and Peter Karadi. 2020. “Deconstruct-
ing Monetary Policy Surprises—The Role of Information 
Shocks.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (2): 
1–43. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​mac​.20180090.
Jeenas, Priit. 2019. “Firm Balance Sheet Liquidity, Monetary 
Policy Shocks, and Investment Dynamics.” Unpublished. 
https://​www​.semanticscholar​.org/​paper/​Firm​-Balance​
-Sheet​-Liquidity​%2C​-Monetary​-Policy​-and​-Jeenas/​
7df991d446490527be651740ca74a9e842541ec7.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse 
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review 
95 (1): 161–82. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​0002828053828518.
Kremer, Michael, Jack Willis, and Yang You. 2022. “Converging 
to Convergence.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 36, 
edited by Martin S. Eichenbaum and Erik Hurst, 337–412. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1257/​10​.1086/​718672.
Krugman, Paul. 1987. “The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch 
Disease, and the Competitive Consequences of Mrs. 
Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence of Dynamic Scale 
Economies.” Journal of Development Economics 27 (1–2): 
41–55. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​0304​-3878(87)90005​-8.
Lane, Philip R., and Aaron Tornell. 1996. “Power, Growth, 
and the Voracity Effect.” Journal of Economic Growth 1 (2): 
213–41. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1007/​BF00138863.
Mauro, Paolo. 1995. “Corruption and Growth.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 110 (3): 681–712. https://​www​.jstor​.org/​
stable/​2946696.
Michaillat, Pascal, and Emmanuel Saez. 2022. “u* = √uv.” 
NBER Working Paper 30211, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. https://​www​.nber​.org/​
papers/​w30211.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Giovanni Ricco. 2021. “The 
Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks.” American Economic 
Journal: Macroeconomics 13 (3): 74–107. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1257/​mac​.20180124.
Montiel Olea, José Luis, and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller. 2021. 
“Local Projection Inference Is Simpler and More Robust 
Than You Think.” Econometrica 89 (4): 1789–823. https://​
onlinelibrary​.wiley​.com/​doi/​abs/​10​.3982/​ECTA18756.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts about 
Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 123 (4): 1415–64. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1162/​
qjec​.2008​.123​.4​.1415.
Olivei, Giovanni, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2010. “Wage-Setting 
Patterns and Monetary Policy: International Evidence.” Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics 57 (7): 785–802. https://​doi​.org/​
10​.1016/​j​.jmoneco​.2010​.08​.003.
Ottonello, Pablo, and Thomas Winberry. 2020. “Financial 
Heterogeneity and the Investment Channel of Monetary 
Policy.” Econometrica 88 (6): 2473–502. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.3982/​ECTA15949.
Romer, Christina, D., and David H. Romer. 2004. “A New 
Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications.” 
American Economic Review 94 (4): 1055–84. https://​doi​.org/​
10​.1257/​0002828042002651.
Srinivasan, Krishna, Thomas Helbling, and Shanaka J. Peiris. 
2023. “Asia’s Easing Economic Headwinds Make Way for 
Stronger Recovery.” IMF Blog, February 20. https://​www​.imf​
.org/​en/​Blogs/​Articles/​2023/​02/​20/​asias​-easing​-economic​
-headwinds​-make​-way​-for​-stronger​-recovery.
Tenreyro, Silvana, and Gregory Thwaites. 2016. “Pushing on a 
String: US Monetary Policy Is Less Powerful in Recessions.” 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (4): 43–74. 
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​mac​.20150016.
van der Ploeg, Frederick, and Anthony J. Venables. 2012. “Natu-
ral Resource Wealth: The Challenge of Managing a Windfall.” 
Annual Review of Economics 4: 315–37. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1146/​annurev​-economics​-080511​-111003.
Watson, Brett, Ian Lange, and Joshua Linn. 2023. “Coal 
Demand, Market Forces, and US Coal Mine Closures.” 
Economic Inquiry 61 (1): 35–57. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1111/​ecin​.13108.
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
45
The natural rate of interest—the real interest rate 
that neither stimulates nor contracts the economy—is 
important for both monetary and fiscal policy; it is a 
reference level to gauge the stance of monetary policy 
and a key determinant of the sustainability of public 
debt. This chapter aims to study the evolution of the 
natural rate of interest across several large advanced and 
emerging market economies. To mitigate the uncertainty 
that typically surrounds estimates of the natural rate, the 
chapter relies on complementary approaches to analyze 
its drivers and project its future path. Common trends 
such as demographic changes and productivity slowdown 
have been key factors in the synchronized decline of the 
natural rate. And while international spillovers have been 
important determinants of the natural rate, offsetting 
forces have resulted in only a moderate impact on balance. 
Overall, the analysis suggests that once the current 
inflationary episode has passed, interest rates are likely to 
revert toward pre-pandemic levels in advanced economies. 
How close interest rates get to those levels will depend on 
whether alternative scenarios involving persistently higher 
government debt and deficit or financial fragmentation 
materialize. In major emerging market economies, natural 
interest rates are expected to gradually converge from 
above toward advanced economies’ levels. In some cases, 
this may ease the pressure on fiscal authorities over the 
long term, but fiscal adjustments will still be needed in 
many countries to stabilize or reduce debt-to-GDP ratios.
Introduction
In 1979, the Federal Reserve hiked interest rates 
from about 10 percent at the start of the year to 
almost 14 percent by the year’s end, which in real 
terms—after taking account of inflation—amounted to 
a rate of interest of about 5 percent.1 Even at the time 
The authors of this chapter are Philip Barrett (co-lead), Christoffer 
Koch, Jean-Marc Natal (co-lead), Diaa Noureldin, and Josef Platzer, 
with support from Yaniv Cohen and Cynthia Nyakeri. The authors 
thank John Williams for very helpful comments.
1When comparing interest rates, it is important to take account 
of inflation. Savings invested at 5 percent when inflation is 2 percent 
will buy the same thing as an investment at 3 percent when infla-
tion is zero.
this was viewed as likely insufficient to tame rapidly 
rising inflation.2 And so it proved to be. Inflation 
continued to rise, peaking at nearly 15 percent the 
following year, requiring even higher interest rates and 
a prolonged recession before the situation was brought 
under control.
Nearly three decades later as the world faced the 
global financial crisis of 2008, the Federal Reserve—
along with central banks worldwide—slashed interest 
rates to as close to zero as they thought possible in 
nominal and real terms. This time around, however, 
commentators and policymakers raised concerns that 
interest rates were not low enough to boost demand 
and inflation. Once again, these concerns proved 
well-founded, with inflation remaining stubbornly low 
for much of the next 10 years.
These two contrasting examples raise an obvious 
question. How can it be that in the same country a 
real interest rate of 5 percent is sometimes too low but 
at other times a real interest rate of zero is too high?
Most answers rely on the idea that a given real 
interest rate does not have the same macroeconomic 
effects at all times. Instead, the impact is relative to 
some reference level. When real interest rates are below 
that level, they are stimulatory, boosting demand and 
inflation. And when above it, they are contractionary, 
lowering output and inflation. If this reference level 
moves over time, then the same real interest rate can 
be too high or too low at different times.
Macroeconomists call this reference interest rate 
the “real natural rate of interest.”3 The “natural” part 
means that this is the real interest rate that is neither 
stimulatory nor contractionary and is consistent with 
output at potential and stable inflation. Lowering the 
real rate below the natural rate is akin to stepping on 
the macroeconomic accelerator; raising it above is like 
hitting the brake. The natural rate is usually thought of 
as independent of monetary policy and instead driven 
2See Goodfriend and King (2005).
3In many discussions, the “real” part is dropped; this approach is 
followed in the chapter. Some economists use the terms “neutral” 
and “natural” interchangeably, and some do not. For clarity, this 
chapter uses only “natural.”
THE NATURAL RATE OF INTEREST: DRIVERS AND 
IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY
2
CHAPTER
46
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
by real phenomena such as, for instance, technological 
progress, demographics, inequality, or preference shifts 
for safe and liquid assets.4
As the preceding discussion suggests, the natural 
rate is important for the conduct of monetary policy. 
Policymakers need to know the level of the natural 
rate in order to gauge the likely impact of their poli-
cies and so assess the stance of monetary policy. The 
natural rate also has a critical influence on fiscal pol-
icy. On average over the long term, monetary policy is 
typically neither inflationary nor contractionary. And 
so the natural rate is also an anchor for real rates over 
long periods of time. Because governments typically 
pay back debts over long time spans (both through 
long-maturity debt and by rolling over short-term 
debt), the natural rate is essential in determining the 
overall cost of borrowing and the sustainability of 
public debts.
Given the importance of the natural rate for both 
monetary and fiscal policy, it is not surprising that 
the recent surge in inflation and government debt 
worldwide has led to renewed interest in this topic. 
Real rates have increased a bit as monetary policy has 
become tighter in response to higher inflation. But 
the uptick remains modest compared with the late 
1970s. Whether central banks have raised rates enough 
to return inflation to target depends critically on the 
level of the natural rate. Similarly, the natural rate will 
determine how much of a burden the present-day high 
levels of debt will be for governments (see Chapter 3).
In light of these concerns, the chapter seeks to 
answer the following questions:
•• How has the natural rate evolved in the past across 
different economies?
•• What has driven this evolution?
•• What is the outlook for these drivers and natural 
rates in the near and medium term?
•• How will this outlook affect monetary and 
fiscal policies?
To shed light on these issues, the chapter first reviews 
the main stylized facts that characterize real interest 
rate trends at different maturities and across different 
countries. It then sets out to measure the natural rate. 
To mitigate the unavoidable uncertainty associated with 
estimations of the natural rate, the chapter will follow 
4In line with a long tradition in monetary economics, monetary 
policy is here assumed to be neutral, meaning that it does not affect real 
variables over the long term. Borio, Disyatat, and Rungcharoenkitkul 
(2019) present an alternative view and implications for the natural rate.
a two-pronged approach. Beginning with a simple 
model (Laubach and Williams 2003)—one that lets the 
data speak—it moves to a tighter theoretical structure 
that imposes more restrictions on the data but allows a 
deeper understanding of the underlying drivers of the 
natural rate (Platzer and Peruffo 2022). Comparing 
estimates from different models provides independent 
validation. In addition, alternative scenarios covering 
a range of plausible future developments for the main 
underlying drivers of the natural rate are considered 
for robustness. These projections provide a long-term 
anchor for monetary policy and a crucial input to 
analyze debt sustainability in the largest advanced and 
emerging market economies.
The main findings of the chapter are as follows:
•• Common trends have played an important role in 
driving real interest rates down. The natural rate 
has declined over the past four decades in most 
advanced economies and some emerging markets. 
While idiosyncratic factors can explain cross-country 
differences, common trends underlying demographic 
transitions and productivity slowdowns are key to 
understanding the synchronized decline.
•• Global drivers have also been important determinants 
but on balance have had a limited impact on net cap-
ital flows and corresponding natural rates in advanced 
and emerging market economies. As global capital 
markets opened and fast-growing emerging market 
economies entered the scene in the 1980s and 
1990s, foreign factors increasingly shaped long-term 
trends in interest rates. High growth in emerging 
markets has tended to drive up interest rates in 
advanced economies while producing a glut of 
savings in emerging markets. These excess savings—
in their quest for safe and liquid assets—have tended 
to flow back to advanced economies, pushing 
natural interest rates back down. On balance, these 
forces seem to have had broadly offsetting effects on 
capital flows and a moderate impact on natural rates 
over the past half-century.
•• Country-specific natural rates of interest are projected 
to converge in the next couple of decades. Based on 
conservative assumptions on demographic, fiscal, 
and productivity developments, it is anticipated that 
natural rates in large emerging market economies 
will decline, gradually converging toward the low 
and steady levels expected in advanced economies.
•• As inflation returns to target, the effective lower 
bound on interest rates may become binding again. 
Post-pandemic increases in interest rates could be 
47
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
protracted until inflation is brought back to target 
(Chapter 1). However, long-term forces driving 
the natural rate suggest that interest will eventually 
converge toward pre-pandemic levels in advanced 
economies. How close to those levels will depend on 
whether alternative scenarios involving persistently 
higher government debt and deficit or financial 
fragmentation materialize. Because nominal rates 
cannot fall far below zero (the effective lower bound 
constraint), this could limit central banks’ ability to 
respond to negative demand shocks. Thus, debates 
about the appropriate level of target inflation at 
the effective lower bound could reemerge. Even the 
central banks in some emerging market economies 
may eventually need to adopt unconventional policy 
tools similar to those used by advanced economies 
in recent years.
•• Despite increased fiscal space, many countries will 
have to consolidate. While low natural rates may 
ease pressure on fiscal policy, they do not negate 
the need for fiscal responsibility. Important gov-
ernment support during the pandemic has strained 
public accounts, requiring some budget consol-
idation to ensure long-term debt sustainability. 
Various paths to deficit reduction are open, but 
delaying action will only make the required steps 
more drastic: Larger public debt tends to crowd 
out private investment and erode the appeal of safe 
and liquid government debt.
Trends in Real Rates over the Long Term
This section lays out some basic facts about how real 
interest rates have evolved over the long term. Because 
the natural rate is an anchor for real interest rates, 
long-term trends in real interest rates are potentially 
informative signals about the natural rate itself.
Figure 2.1, panel 1, starts the inquiry by comparing 
five different measures of the ex ante real interest rate 
for the United States.5 Different maturities from 1 year 
up to 20 years are considered. Despite differences at 
high frequencies—the short-horizon measures are 
5Ex ante measures of the real interest rate use actual measures of 
inflation expectations, which are either extracted from financial mar-
kets or based on surveys, to deflate the nominal interest rate. Ex post 
real interest rates rely instead on realized inflation. Over long periods 
of time, ex ante and ex post real interest rates tend to coincide, but 
there can be large discrepancies when surprise inflation is expected to 
be temporary, as in the most recent episode. Unfortunately, inflation 
expectation measures are not always available for long time series, 
emerging markets, or both.
unsurprisingly much more volatile—all these measures 
share a common long-term trend. Looking through 
cyclical fluctuations and term premiums, real rates 
have fallen steadily, by about 5 percentage points over 
the last four decades across all maturities. Given that 
the natural rate of interest is a long-term attractor for 
real rates, this suggests that the natural rate of interest 
has also fallen, at least in the United States.
To get a sense of whether these developments have 
been mirrored elsewhere, Figure 2.1, panel 2, compares 
historical ex post real rates in five advanced economies 
over a similar period, in this case using three-month 
real rates. The broad pattern is the same, with real 
rates declining steadily from highs in the 1980s. 
Interestingly, the common international component 
seems at first glance to have become more important 
over time, with countries’ real rates seeming to con-
verge gradually.
1-year
2-year
5-year
10-year
20-year
United States
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
France
Figure 2.1.  Real Interest Rate Trends
(Percent)
1. (Ex Ante) Real Interest Rates at Different Maturities in
the United States
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
1982
90
2000
10
20
Feb.
23
2. (Ex Post) Real Short-Term Interest Rates in Selected
Advanced Economies
1982
90
2000
10
20 Nov.
22
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
Sources: Federal Reserve Economic Data; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the real interest rates are computed as the difference between 
the US Treasury rate at each horizon and the Cleveland Federal Reserve measure 
of inﬂation expectations over the same horizon. In panel 2, the real interest rates 
are the difference between the three-month interbank rates and the average of the 
realized inﬂation measured by the consumer price index in the next three months 
for each country. Japan’s three-month interbank rates are spliced with rates for 
certiﬁcates of deposit from 1979 to 2002. Online Annex 2.1 provides details on 
data sources and calculations for the ﬁgure.
48
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
Figure 2.2 contrasts developments in advanced and 
emerging market economies. A shared trend at the 
start of the 2000s decoupled later on as real rates con-
tinued to decline in advanced economies but stabilized 
at their 2005 level in emerging markets.
Overall, this first look at the data suggests that 
the natural rate has likely declined in the past four 
decades or so in advanced economies. This downward 
trend seems to be increasingly common across coun-
tries and points to some global drivers. The picture 
is different in emerging markets, where natural rates 
have remained broadly stable over the past 20 years 
on average. Because emerging market and advanced 
economies’ current accounts are broadly balanced, 
the divergence in long-term rates points to remaining 
frictions preventing a stronger convergence between 
advanced and emerging market economies (Obstfeld 
2021).6 Yet this analysis leaves many important issues 
unaddressed. The data, although suggesting that the 
natural rate has declined in many advanced economies, 
6Beyond market frictions, weak institutions and lack of investor 
protection in recipient countries may also explain the lack of 
convergence. An alternative explanation, which is likely to be 
particularly relevant for the United States, is that following the 
global financial crisis, emerging market debt was not considered 
safe, pushing down the real interest rate for the main provider of 
safe and liquid assets.
cannot explain why this decline occurred and fail to 
distinguish the impact of secular and cyclical factors. 
The following sections tackle these concerns.
Measuring the Natural Rate
This section relies on well-known macroeconomic 
empirical models to try to estimate the natural rate 
of interest. Because the natural rate is an unobserved, 
latent variable, any measurement requires some theory. 
The approach here is to use a minimal amount of 
theory, drawing on simple macroeconomic relation-
ships between aggregate supply and demand, interest 
rates, and inflation. Approaches based on aggregate 
relationships are a good starting point for developing 
a more informed measure of the natural rate because 
they are transparent and straightforward. Subsequent 
sections use a richer framework based on more exten-
sive microeconomic theory and so speak more to the 
underlying drivers of the natural rate.
Single-Country Estimates of the Natural Rate
The first approach is an application of the widely 
used Laubach-Williams model (Holston, Laubach, and 
Williams 2017; hereafter HLW). This model assumes 
a set of relationships between supply, demand, interest 
rates, and prices consistent with perhaps the most 
standard macroeconomic view of the world, the New 
Keynesian model.7 In this setting, the natural rate is 
driven by a variety of shocks, including trend output 
growth. Here, it is defined as the real interest rate that 
will return output to potential and inflation to target, 
once purely transitory shocks to aggregate supply or 
demand have dissipated. The intuition for this is that 
central banks tend to think about returning inflation 
to target in the medium term, because trying to offset 
every temporary shock would lead to undue volatility 
in interest rates and output.8
7See Online Annex 2.2 for a formal description of the model. All 
online annexes are available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WEO.
8In this framework, financial shocks affect the natural rate only if 
they affect potential output. A persistent increase in precautionary 
saving or preference for safe and liquid assets would qualify, whereas 
purely transitory variation in risk aversion, for example, would not 
(Barsky, Justiniano, and Melosi 2014; Gourinchas, Rey, and Sauzet 
2022). This definition of the natural rate is consistent with the one 
implicit in the theoretical framework of the next section, because it 
emphasizes low-frequency movements of the real interest rate in a 
world without nominal friction (where output is at potential).
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
Figure 2.2.  (Ex Post) Real Interest Rates in Advanced and 
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
(Percent)
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
2003
06
09
12
15
18
22
Divergence after 2011
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The sample comprises 34 advanced economies and 25 emerging market 
and developing economies, aggregated using market-exchange-rate-based GDP 
weights. Maturity of the bonds is greater than one year. Nominal interest rates are 
deﬂated using consumer price inﬂation.
49
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
The model is first estimated from data for one 
country at a time. As part of the estimation, the model 
attempts to figure out what were the most likely 
values for several key unobserved variables, including 
potential output and the natural rate of interest, given 
the (relatively standard) New Keynesian view of the 
macroeconomy. This framework also offers a basic 
decomposition of changes in the natural rate into two 
components: one due to changes in the long-term 
growth trend, and one due to other factors, which 
can in principle include domestic and foreign drivers. 
One drawback, however, is that the HLW model is 
designed to apply principally to advanced economies, 
for which data can be reasonably described by the 
New Keynesian model over a long enough time period. 
The richer structural model in the next section has 
more to say about emerging markets.
Figure 2.3 summarizes the results from estimating 
the HLW model on a sample of six advanced econo-
mies for which sufficient quarterly data exist. It shows 
estimates of the natural rate, as well as the part due to 
trend growth, for two five-year periods: one covering 
the end of the 1970s, the other for the late 2010s. 
These estimates broadly confirm the intuition pre-
sented so far in this chapter: that the natural rate of 
interest has declined across advanced economies in the 
past 40 years. Despite some variation in the level of the 
rate across countries, the magnitude of the decline has 
been broadly similar, at a little over 2 percentage points 
in most countries. This is much smaller than the over-
all decline in real interest rates over the same period (of 
about 5 percentage points), which likely also reflected 
the change in the monetary policy stance, particularly 
tight at the beginning of the 1980s as central banks 
fought historically high inflation.
However, the uncertainty over the estimates of the 
natural rate is very large, with the 90 percent confi-
dence interval for the United States ranging from zero 
to about 3 percent in the second half of the 2010s. 
Uncertainty is a common feature of all estimates of 
the natural rate9 and arises because the estimated 
­relationships between interest rates and the output gap, 
and the output gap and inflation, are both relatively 
weak. As a result, fluctuations in output and inflation 
provide little information about the overall level of the 
natural rate. Yet at least one part of the natural rate 
is well estimated: the trend growth component, for 
9See Arena and others (2020) for a related exercise applied to 
European countries.
which confidence intervals are much smaller. This is 
because data for output are directly informative about 
trend growth.
One interesting feature of these results is that the 
decline in the natural rate is so similar across advanced 
economies despite such differing trend growth compo-
nents. With the exception of Japan, the natural rate 
dropped more than implied by the change in growth 
rates over the same period. This suggests that some 
forces other than domestic growth may be inducing 
Natural rate
Growth component
1. Canada
2. France
1975–79
2015–19
1975–79
2015–19
3. Germany
4. Japan
1975–79
2015–19
1975–79
2015–19
5. United Kingdom
6. United States
1975–79
2015–19
1975–79
2015–19
Sources: Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ranges show 90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
Figure 2.3.  Kalman Filter Estimates of the Natural Rate of 
Interest for Selected Advanced Economies
(Percent)
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
50
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
common movements in the natural rate. That esti-
mated natural rates are more similar across countries 
now than 40 years ago is perhaps consistent with the 
idea that capital market integration has progressed, 
at least among advanced economies. This possibility 
motivates an extended version of this model, which 
allows for explicit international spillovers through 
either real or financial channels (and is explored in the 
section “Multicountry Estimates of the Natural Rate”).
The Natural Rate during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Despite its limitation, the closed economy model is 
a useful benchmark for addressing two questions that 
have gained attention during the post-pandemic infla-
tionary episode in many advanced economies. That 
is: How much did policymakers stimulate during the 
pandemic? And how fast did they tighten afterward?
One concern when answering these questions is 
that any conclusions may unduly rely on the ben-
efit of hindsight. What now might appear to be 
policy mistakes may have been perfectly reasonable 
decisions for policymakers without the benefit of 
perfect foresight.
To illustrate the challenges, Figure 2.4 shows 
different vintages of measures of the real and natural 
rates. The gap between the two is a summary measure 
of whether monetary policy is tight (when the realized 
real rate is higher than the natural rate; the gap is posi-
tive) or loose (when the gap is negative). The measures 
differ in the data they use. The full-sample estimate (in 
red) uses data up to the third quarter of 2022 and so 
approximates the current best guess of what the natural 
rate was at each point in time. This helps provide an 
assessment of the monetary policy stance with the 
benefit of hindsight. In contrast, contemporaneous 
estimates (in blue) are computed by repeatedly running 
the model, extending the data sample by one quarter 
each time. This aims to approximate how the real rate 
gap might have been assessed at the time.
Early in the pandemic, the two measures differed, 
often considerably and usually with the contempo-
raneous estimate presenting a much tighter view of 
monetary policy. This is consistent with the idea that 
the shocks seen when the pandemic hit were highly 
unusual, with both supply and demand moving far 
and fast. Faced with contemporaneous data, this model 
viewed supply shocks as having a large permanent 
component, generating an exceptionally low natu-
ral rate and thus a tight stance for monetary policy. 
Subsequent data helped correct this misperception, 
with the sharp change in the natural rate early in the 
pandemic progressively revised away. A reasonable 
interpretation is that policymakers looked through the 
immediate crisis, applied their judgment in a way that 
Contemporaneous estimate
Estimates based on data up to 2022:Q3
Realized real interest rate
Figure 2.4.  Real Rates and Natural Rates: Contemporaneous 
and Current Estimates for Selected Advanced Economies
(Percent)
1. Canada
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Oct.
21
2. France
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Oct.
21
3. Germany
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Oct.
21
4. Japan
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Oct.
21
5. United Kingdom
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Oct.
21
6. United States
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Oct.
21
Sources: Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ranges show 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. Parameters are estimated 
on pre-COVID data. The diamonds represent contemporaneous estimates at 
2021:Q4 and realized real interest rates at 2022:Q4 for each country.
51
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
a model cannot, and so delivered moderately stimula-
tory policy.10
Later in the pandemic, however, policy became 
looser. And although the natural rate did rise a little in 
most places, looser policy largely came about through 
inflation eroding real policy rates. In contrast to the 
early pandemic period, the red and blue dots are 
generally very close. This says that subsequent data do 
not tell us much that was not known at the time. And 
so, while policymakers may have had good reasons not 
considered here for conservatism in adjusting rates, 
the HLW model suggests that policy was loose for a 
long time in some countries (October 2022 Global 
Financial Stability Report).
Multicountry Estimates of the Natural Rate
One drawback of the HLW approach is that it 
involves a closed-economy model; it can only estimate 
the natural rate for one country at a time. This is not 
an issue when the goal is only to estimate the level of 
the natural rate in a particular country. However, the 
approach cannot be used for counterfactual analysis that 
would try to assess something like the impact of a decline 
in foreign potential growth on the domestic natural rate.
One way to address this is to use an explicitly inter-
national model. Wynne and Zhang (2018) proposed 
one such framework that allows for two-way interac-
tions between two independent regions using an empir-
ical approach very similar to HLW. The framework 
features an important general equilibrium aspect of the 
determination of the natural rate via international spill-
overs. This is in line with international macroeconomic 
theory that stipulates that when capital is internation-
ally mobile, the determination of natural rates entails 
a global dimension (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler 2002; 
Galí and Monacelli 2005; Metzler 1951; Obstfeld 
2020). This also implies that if there are spillovers from 
one country to another, then it stands to reason that 
those effects might spill back over to the originator.
Specifically, the natural rate is now allowed to be 
affected not just by domestic growth but also by 
foreign growth. The intuition is that if foreign growth 
increases, so do foreign rates of return, necessitating 
greater compensation for domestic investors and driv-
ing up the domestic natural rate. Of course, changes 
in the domestic natural rate affect domestic growth, 
10See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2020) for a discussion on 
how to adapt the HLW model to capture the pandemic.
which then spills back to the foreign natural rate 
through a similar channel.
Figure 2.5 presents the results from such a model, 
with the United States and the rest of the world as 
the two regions.11 As before, this setting suggests that 
the natural rate in the United States has declined 
by about 2 percentage points in the past 50 years or 
so. In contrast, the estimated natural rate in the rest 
of the world has been more stable, at least since the 
mid-1970s. Two factors are responsible. First, as might 
be expected, domestic growth rather than foreign 
growth is more important for each (relatively closed) 
region. Second, secular slowdown in many advanced 
11It is important to exercise caution when interpreting the quanti-
tative implications of this analysis. The estimation is not disciplined 
by current account data, and so the decomposition may lump var-
ious effects together. Moreover, large confidence bands suggest that 
inference is highly imprecise.
Natural rate
United States growth
Rest of the world growth
Other factors
Figure 2.5. Measuring the Natural Rate: The Role of 
International Spillovers
(Percent)
1. United States
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1970
80
90
2000
10
19
2. Rest of the World
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
1970
80
90
2000
10
19
Sources: Wynne and Zhang (2018); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Rest of the world” comprises Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
China, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, The 
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
and the United Kingdom.
52
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
economies is offset by the rise of high-growth emerg-
ing market and developing economies, such as China, 
propping up growth in the rest of the world. These 
elements working together have led to a higher and 
more stable natural rate outside the United States.
Nevertheless, international spillovers are significant 
and important for determining the level of the natural 
rate. The analysis suggests two offsetting channels. The 
first operates through overseas growth (in red), which 
has helped support the natural rate in the United 
States. The other channel is shown by the increasing 
and negative impact of “other factors” (in yellow). 
That this has had a long-lasting and negative effect 
on the natural rate in the United States is consistent 
with the idea that increased foreign demand for safe 
and liquid US assets has depressed returns (Bernanke 
2005; Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas 2008, 2016, 
2017b; Pescatori and Turunen 2015), especially since 
the global financial crisis. Note that the converse effect 
in the rest of the world is smaller, which reflects the 
relative sizes of the two regions.
Overall, this analysis suggests that foreign devel-
opments likely have had two offsetting effects on 
natural rates in the United States. Sustained growth in 
emerging markets has driven up the US interest rate 
while simultaneously producing a glut of savings that 
pulled it down again as foreign investors increasingly 
demanded safe and liquid US government debt.
While more general than a closed economy model, 
this framework still has an important drawback. It has 
little to say about the true drivers of the changes in 
the natural rate: What causes growth, either foreign 
or domestic? What is behind “other factors”? The next 
section tackles some of these questions.
Drivers of the Natural Rate
The aggregate macroeconomic models of the pre-
ceding sections can offer a very simple explanation for 
why the natural rate has declined: While other factors 
do play a role, growth—both foreign and domestic—
seems to be the most important factor. But this is 
not very satisfying. “Growth” is a result of different 
macroeconomic forces, not a primary force itself. For 
example, while both demographic forces and pro-
ductivity growth could be responsible for the secular 
decline in growth, each could have potentially very 
different implications for the natural rate. Moreover, 
these deeper forces may have offsetting effects not fully 
captured by this simple decomposition.
Some Theory
Many possible economic mechanisms have been pro-
posed to explain variations in the natural interest rate. 
Their importance can vary at different frequencies, with 
“macroeconomic” forces more likely to drive long-term 
trends and “financial” forces more likely to be import-
ant in the short to medium term, reflecting risk aver-
sion and leveraging cycles.12 Of course, this distinction 
is somewhat artificial because financial forces may drive 
secular shifts in behavior that determines saving rates.13
Macroeconomic Drivers
•• Productivity growth: The simplest macroeconomic 
theories dictate that the interest rate is pinned down 
by growth in aggregate productivity. The idea is that 
the rate of interest paid by a borrower must com-
pensate the lender for giving up on alternative use 
of those funds, known as their “opportunity cost.” 
Higher productivity growth increases the marginal 
product of capital and drives up savers’ opportunity 
cost, necessitating a higher interest rate to induce 
them to lend (Cesa-Bianchi, Harrison, and Sajedi 
2022; Mankiw 2022; Solow 1956).
•• Demographics: Changes in fertility and mortality 
rates have complex and time-varying effects on the 
natural rate. Demographic forces have implications 
for the economy’s growth rate, its dependency ratio, 
and aggregate desired saving for longer retirement 
(Auclert and others 2021; Carvalho, Ferrero, and 
Nechio 2016; Gagnon, Johannsen, and López-Salido 
2021; see Online Annex 2.3).
•• Fiscal policy: Increased government borrowing can 
lead to higher interest rates because more saving is 
required to meet the increased demand for funds. 
However, the extent to which this occurs also 
depends on how much private investment is displaced 
by the additional public debt (Eggertsson, Mehrotra, 
and Robbins 2019; Rachel and Summers 2019).
•• Market power and the labor share: The impact of 
increased market power on the natural rate is ambigu-
ous. Increased market power typically depresses future 
production and investment demand, weighing down 
on interest rates. But it also reroutes dividends from 
laborers to capital owners, with the impact on the 
12See also Rogoff, Rossi, and Schmelzing (2021) for an analysis of 
real rate dynamics over the past 700 years.
13See Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2019) and Mankiw 
(2022) for recent reviews and Online Annex 2.3 for detailed descrip-
tion of the theoretical channels.
53
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
natural rate depending on the distribution of these 
dividends across cohorts (Ball and Mankiw 2021; 
Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas 2017b; Eggertsson, 
Mehrotra, and Robbins 2019; Mankiw 2022; Natal 
and Stoffels 2019; Platzer and Peruffo 2022).
•• Other reasons: These include the effect of govern-
ment taxation on the profile of private consumption 
and saving (Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins 
2019; Platzer and Peruffo 2022), rising inequality 
increasing the overall supply of savings because rich 
people tend to save more than poor people (Mian, 
Straub, and Sufi 2021a, 2021b, 2021c), and poten-
tial interactions between different channels.
Financial Drivers
•• International capital flows and the scarcity of safe 
assets: International spillovers from the integration 
of global capital markets may have been powerful 
drivers of the natural rate. Two main mechanisms 
are at work. On one hand, high-growth emerging 
markets provide alternative investment oppor-
tunities, resulting in capital outflows and raising 
the natural rate in advanced economies (Clarida, 
Galí, and Gertler 2002; Galí and Monacelli 2005; 
Obstfeld and Rogoff 1997; Obstfeld 2021). On 
the other hand, the supply of safe and liquid assets, 
primarily US government bonds, has not kept pace 
with fast-rising demand, especially from emerging 
markets. Their ensuing scarcity may have driven 
up their price and lowered their return (Bárány, 
Coeurdacier, and Guibaud 2018; Bernanke 2005; 
Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas 2008, 2016, 
2017a, 2017b, 2021; Del Negro and others 2017; 
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2012).
•• Risk aversion and leverage cycles: The quality attributed 
to particularly safe and liquid assets (for example, 
government bonds in advanced economies) gives rise 
to a convenience yield, which is variable and likely 
to increase when global stress leads to deleveraging 
(Gourinchas, Rey, and Sauzet 2022). Given the safe 
haven property of the US dollar, this is especially the 
case for US Treasurys whose value increases in periods 
of stress, providing protection to risk-averse interna-
tional investors (Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot 2017).
A New Theoretical Framework
To compare the quantitative impact of these dif-
ferent forces, this chapter relies on a macroeconomic 
model (PP) based on Platzer and Peruffo (2022). 
This is an important novelty with respect to earlier 
literature because the PP model includes in one unified 
framework many of the mechanisms discussed in the 
previous section and so can explain how the contri-
butions from each of the corresponding economic 
forces change the natural rate. This approach avoids 
double-counting and having to infer the impor-
tance of each driver from different models calibrated 
separately.14
PP is a “real” macroeconomic model, in the sense 
that it abstracts from nominal and financial frictions 
that typically underlie cyclical fluctuations. Similarly, 
for tractability, uncertainty is assumed away. While 
these are reasonable assumptions for the study of 
medium- to long-term trends in the real interest rate, 
the model is ill-equipped to analyze the impact of the 
financial drivers discussed earlier.15 Nonetheless, PP 
still allows for foreign developments to affect domestic 
interest rates through their implication for net interna-
tional capital flows.
PP is calibrated to represent eight major global 
economies: the United States, Japan, Germany, the 
United Kingdom, France, China, India, and Brazil. 
These are the five largest advanced economies and the 
three largest emerging market and developing econ-
omies, which cover some 70 percent of global GDP. 
Demographic developments, the age-earning profile, 
the share of income going to the richest 10 percent, 
productivity trends, the retirement age, average pen-
sion replacement rates, labor share, government debt, 
and public expenditure inform the country-specific 
calibrations.
Before turning to detailed model simulations, 
Figure 2.6 compares the overall decline in the natural 
rate implied by the PP and HLW frameworks. The 
striking similarity between the results obtained with two 
very different approaches is reassuring. This mitigates 
the uncertainty surrounding HLW point estimates while 
bolstering confidence in the microeconomic structure of 
the PP framework.
The first exercise for this model is to understand 
why the natural rate has declined in the past several 
decades. Figure 2.7 presents the estimated change in 
the natural rate and its attribution to the different 
fundamental forces for each of the eight countries.
14Full details of the model are in Platzer and Peruffo (2022). 
A description of specific calibration and simulations is in 
Online Annex 2.3.
15See the section “Alternative Scenarios” for quantification of the 
impact of variations in the convenience yield.
54
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
While no factor clearly dominates over the past 
40 years, a set of common forces has driven the natural 
rate, explaining part of the international comovement. 
All eight countries in the sample experienced 
population aging contributing negatively to the change 
in the natural rate. This effect was particularly large 
in China, Japan, and Germany. Growth in total factor 
productivity (TFP) declined in all advanced economies, 
at times explaining far more than the final decline in 
the natural rate. Fiscal policy is an important offset in 
all economies, particularly Japan and Brazil. In Japan, 
public debt increased by more than 200 percent of 
GDP, lifting the natural rate by more than the negative 
contributions from TFP growth or demographics. 
In Brazil, it is mainly the large increase in public 
consumption, financed by taxation, that explains the 
positive contribution of the fiscal driver, even though 
the increase in public debt also plays a role. The 
contribution of net international capital flows, which 
summarizes the net impact of global forces through 
international spillovers (discussed in the context of 
Figure 2.5), is significant but smaller and goes in the 
expected direction.16 The largest net negative effect 
is found in the United States, potentially reflecting 
that stockpiling of safe assets by emerging markets 
more than offsets capital outflows drawn to attractive 
investment opportunities abroad. In contrast, in Japan, 
capital outflows seem to dominate, lifting the country’s 
natural rate as excess domestic savings are invested in 
faster-growing economies abroad. The picture is more 
mixed in the three large emerging markets displayed 
16Note that while gross capital flows have increased over time as 
capital accounts have liberalized, both in- and outflows have surged 
since the 1970s.
Natural rate Kalman ﬁlter
Natural rate structural model
Figure 2.6.  Natural Rate Estimates: Model Comparison
(Percent)
Sources: Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Platzer and Peruffo (2022); and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The Kalman ﬁlter estimates are based on Holston, Laubach, and Williams 
(2017). The estimates from the structural model are based on Platzer and Peruffo 
(2022). The values from the structural model for 2015–19 are calibrated to overlap 
with the Kalman ﬁlter estimates. The ranges show 90 percent conﬁdence 
intervals.
1. France
2. Germany
3. Japan
5. United States
4. United Kingdom
1975–79
2015–19
1975–79
2015–19
1975–79
2015–19
1975–79
2015–19
1975–79
2015–19
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Demographics
TFP growth
Fiscal
Capital ﬂows
Other
Total change
Figure 2.7.  Drivers of Natural Rate Changes from 1975–79 to
2015–19 for Selected Economies
(Percentage points)
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
Sources: Platzer and Peruffo (2022); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: TFP = total factor productivity.
France Germany
Japan
United
Kingdom
United
States
Brazil
China
India
55
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
here (Box 2.3 analyzes the importance of international 
spillovers for smaller emerging market and developing 
economies).17
The Outlook for the Natural Rate
So far, this chapter has focused on understanding 
what has happened to the natural rate and why. While 
interesting, this is perhaps less relevant for policy today 
than a slightly different issue: What will happen to real 
rates in the future?
The Baseline
The same framework used to understand the 
drivers of the natural rate can also be used to convert 
assumptions about those underlying drivers into pre-
dictions for the natural rate. The baseline projection 
presented in Figure 2.8, panel 1, relies on conserva-
tive assumptions for the main drivers: (1) predicted 
demographic trends follow United Nations population 
projections, (2) public debt follows World Economic 
Outlook (WEO) projections until 2028 (and remains 
constant thereafter), and (3) all other drivers are 
assumed fixed at their 2015–19 levels. In emerging 
markets, (4) TFP growth is assumed to converge to 
the advanced economies’ average over the long term, 
as would be expected as countries get closer to the 
technology frontier.
The simulation suggests that natural interest rates 
are likely to stay close to pre-pandemic levels in 
advanced economies. Because the demographic tran-
sition is already well underway, the residual negative 
impact of further aging is expected to be moderate. 
At the same time, higher public debt acts as a coun-
terweight, pushing up the natural rate. In emerging 
markets, in contrast, the prognosis is for a significant 
decline in natural rates. This is the consequence of 
slowing productivity growth and an aging population; 
in many emerging market economies, the demo-
graphic transition should accelerate in the decades 
ahead. In China, for example, a steady decline in the 
17There are also country-specific forces that drive idiosyncratic 
movements in the natural rate. For example, the rise in inequality 
during the past half-century has had a large negative impact on 
the natural rate in the United States, even more than demographic 
changes. Rising inequality is also relevant in India and Japan. The 
change in market power is significant for India, which has experi-
enced a large decline in the labor share over recent decades, implying 
a corresponding rise in market power in this chapter’s model. 
Online Annex 2.3 provides further explanation.
natural rate by about 1.5 percentage points within 
the next 30 years is projected, bringing it to about 
zero in 2050.
These projections assume that some degree of 
segmentation remains between the capital markets 
of advanced economies and emerging markets (see 
Figure 2.2 and the analysis in Obstfeld 2021) and that 
the balance of capital inflows and outflows stays as it 
was in 2019.
Departures from these assumptions are used to craft 
alternative scenarios.
Alternative Scenarios
The outlook for a given scenario is highly uncertain. 
Many shocks could cause the natural rate to depart 
from the baseline paths. And so these paths should 
be thought of as illustrative, with a distribution of 
future outcomes around them. Within this uncertain 
outlook, some specific alternative scenarios stand out 
Brazil
China
France
Germany
India
Japan
United Kingdom
United States
AE high debt
EM high debt
AE decline in convenience yield
AE higher labor share
Figure 2.8.  Simulated Path for Natural Rate of Interest: 
Baseline and Scenarios
1. Baseline
(Percent)
–1
0
1
2
3
4
2022
25
30
35
40
45
50
2. Alternative Scenarios
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
2022
25
30
35
40
45
50
Sources: Platzer and Peruffo (2022); and IMF staff estimates.
Note: AEs are France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, and United States. EMs 
are Brazil, China, and India. The lines in panel 2 represent the difference between 
the scenarios and the baseline. The decline in convenience yield is simulated in a 
version of the model with a positive convenience yield; see Online Annex 2.3. 
AE = advanced economy; EM = emerging market economy.
56
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
as particularly germane to the current post-pandemic 
conjuncture. (1) Government debt could drift higher, 
(2) enthusiasm for holding safe and liquid public 
debt could wane, (3) workers’ bargaining power could 
increase, (4) deglobalization forces could intensify, 
and (5) the energy transition could have important 
implications for global saving, investment, and the 
natural rate. These alternative scenarios are reported 
in Figure 2.8, panel 2, and in Boxes 2.1 and 2.2 and 
are described briefly here. All in all, deviations are 
expected to be relatively modest, spanning a range 
of about 120 basis points centered on the baseline 
scenario. Of course, more sizable effects could be envi-
sioned should combinations of these scenarios happen 
simultaneously.
•• Higher government debt: As households struggle 
to keep up with rising energy expenses and the 
ongoing impact of the pandemic, governments may 
opt to provide greater financial assistance. Allowing 
public debt to increase by 25 percent of GDP above 
the baseline by 2050 would increase demand for 
private savings and lift the natural rate; however, the 
impact should not exceed 5 to 10 basis points for 
most countries.18
•• Erosion of the convenience yield, leading to higher 
borrowing costs for government in advanced 
economies: If investors were to perceive advanced 
economies’ government debt as less safe and less 
liquid than in the past (for example, if the US 
Congress failed to raise the debt ceiling), then the 
premium they pay for holding this particular type 
of asset would erode as portfolios are rebalanced; 
in this scenario, it is assumed that the premium 
would return to pre-2000 average levels.19 This 
decline in the convenience yield over the next three 
decades would bring up natural rates in advanced 
18The only channel modeled here is the effect of higher 
demand for loanable funds from the public sector lifting the 
equilibrium interest rate. Higher public debt could in principle 
also erode the convenience yield, with a significant effect on 
sustainability. This is considered explicitly in the next section, 
“Policy Implications.”
19By considering yield spreads between safe and liquid govern-
ment bonds and the highest-quality corporate bonds, the chapter 
focuses here on the spread that most closely reflects the notion 
that the convenience yield measures the unique safety and liquidity 
characteristics of a government bond (Del Negro and others 
2017). Other possibilities include yield spreads with lower-quality 
corporate bonds or the equity risk premium (Caballero, Farhi, and 
Gourinchas 2017b).
economies (and lower corporate bond yields) by 
about 70 basis points.20
•• Higher labor shares in advanced economies: Markups 
have increased in the past several decades, raising 
the share of income going to capital owners at the 
expense of workers (Akcigit and others 2021). As 
workers’ bargaining power continues to improve 
following the post-pandemic transformation of the 
labor market, a return to labor shares prevailing in 
the mid-1970s in advanced economies would raise 
the natural rate by 6 to 19 basis points by 2050.
•• Energy transition: Transitioning to a cleaner and 
more sustainable global economy by 2050, as 
laid out in the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate 
change, would push global natural rates lower in 
the medium term because higher energy prices 
bring down the marginal productivity of capital 
and investment demand. For reasonable scenarios 
based on the October 2020 WEO, the effects are 
expected to be relatively modest: By 2050, natural 
rates are expected to decline by 50 basis points 
along a hump-shaped trajectory. If large investment 
in low-emission capital and technology is financed 
through budget deficits, natural rates could tempo-
rarily climb by 30 basis points (Box 2.1).
•• Deglobalization: With increasing geopolitical ten-
sions, the risk of some form of international trade 
fragmentation—higher trade barriers, sanctions, 
and the like—is elevated. Lower international 
trade would push down global output and desired 
investment. The effect on the natural rate would 
vary across regions, reflecting the shortening of 
global value chains. The risk of trade fragmentation 
is compounded by the risk of financial fragmenta-
tion (April 2023 Global Financial Stability Report), 
whose effect on real interest rates will depend on 
countries’ initial external position: Deficit coun-
tries will find it more difficult to finance their 
current accounts, while surplus countries will 
repatriate excess savings, bringing down the natural 
20The model does not capture the endogenous response of capital 
flows to a change in preferences for government bonds by foreign 
investors. However, this effect could be sizable for safe asset providers 
such as the United States. To get a sense of the possible magnitude 
of the effect, it is useful to look at gross foreign portfolio investments 
in the United States, which increased by about 79 percent of GDP 
(US Bureau of Economic Analysis) from their average level before 
2000. Were these flows to reverse, simulations show that this could 
result in an increase in the natural rate of roughly 100 basis points in 
the United States by 2050.
57
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
interest rate. Effects are between a 40 basis point 
decline and a 20 basis point increase, depending on 
the region. For trade fragmentation, the effects are 
expected to be smaller (Box 2.2).
Policy Implications
Overall, the simulations previously discussed indi-
cate that natural rates will likely remain at low levels 
in advanced economies, while in emerging market 
economies, they are expected to converge from above 
toward advanced economies’ levels. These patterns will 
have important implications for both monetary and 
fiscal policy.
Monetary Policy
Once inflation is brought back to target over the 
coming years, which may require a protracted period of 
high interest rates (Chapter 1), the implication for mon-
etary policy seems clear: Long-term forces suggest that 
natural rates will remain low (in advanced economies) or 
decline further (in emerging markets), which may limit 
the ability of central banks to ease policy by lowering 
nominal interest rates. As a result, monetary institutions 
may have to resort to the same strategies they employed 
in the decade before the pandemic, such as balance sheet 
policy and forward guidance. In addition, if deflation-
ary dynamics take hold, many economies may become 
trapped for an extended period in a suboptimal equi-
librium characterized by low growth and underemploy-
ment (Summers 2014). To address these challenges, a 
larger stabilization role may have to be assigned to fiscal 
policy, and coordination between fiscal and monetary 
policy might even be necessary. Reopening the debate 
about the appropriate level of inflation targets, weigh-
ing the cost of permanently higher inflation against the 
benefit of enhanced monetary policy space, may also 
be warranted (Blanchard 2023; Galí 2020; IMF 2010; 
Chapter 2 of the April 2020 WEO).
Fiscal Policy
Concerns about debt sustainability have recently 
resurfaced due to the sharp increase in government debt 
following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and 
the simultaneous rise in policy rates to combat high 
inflation. In this context, the key factor for debt sustain-
ability analysis is the difference between the real rate of 
interest (r) and the growth rate of the economy ( g). If 
growth is higher than the real interest rate, governments 
may be able to sustain higher primary budget deficits 
without necessarily compromising debt sustainability.
The PP model used earlier in the chapter con-
sidered the impact of the fiscal policy stance on the 
natural rate, given that public debt issuance increases 
demand for loanable funds. This section studies the 
implications of secular movements in the natural rate 
for debt sustainability. The analysis relies on a partial 
equilibrium framework based on recent work by Mian, 
Straub, and Sufi (2022).21 This framework takes the 
natural interest rate and growth projections from the 
PP model as given and assesses debt dynamics under 
different scenarios for the eight advanced and emerging 
market economies presented in the preceding section.
The framework assumes that savers prefer to hold 
government debt due to its liquidity and safety 
­features or due to regulatory requirements. This 
means ­government debt enjoys a premium in financial 
markets relative to comparable assets, known in the 
literature as the “convenience yield,” which effectively 
translates into a discount extended to the govern-
ment on its borrowing costs (Krishnamurthy and 
Vissing-Jorgensen 2012; Wiriadinata and Presbitero 
2020). However, as the public sector accumulates more 
debt, government securities become less attractive to 
savers, and the borrowing costs for the government 
increases: The convenience yield gets eroded. Because 
the interest rate increases with the debt level in this 
framework, there is a limit to the size of the primary 
deficit governments can sustainably run in the long 
term.22 The sensitivity of interest rates to debt is 
important in this context, and its implications are 
discussed at the end of this section.
21Online Annex 2.4 describes the framework in detail. Further 
references can be found in Chapter 2 of the April 2022 WEO and 
Caselli and others (2022). A framework in which both channels are 
mutually operable would be ideal, but it would add a significant 
layer of complexity to an already very detailed framework.
22Of course, stabilizing the debt ratio is only one criterion for 
debt sustainability. Furman and Summers (2020) and Blanchard 
(2023) discuss stabilizing the debt service ratio, or debt service 
costs as a percent of GDP, as an alternative. Chapter 2 of the 
October 2021 Fiscal Monitor discusses the merit and limitations 
of this approach. In a long-term steady state in which borrowing 
costs are pinned down by the natural rate of interest, stabilizing the 
debt-to-GDP ratio would also stabilize the debt service ratio. The 
two measures would, however, diverge over the business cycle, espe-
cially if interest rates and growth rates move in opposite directions, 
as is often the case in emerging markets.
58
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
The projections from the PP model and the 
elasticity of the convenience yield to the level of the 
debt-to-GDP ratio are used to identify the long-term 
debt-stabilizing primary balance for each level of debt. 
Given current primary balances, the amount of fiscal 
consolidation needed is computed under the baseline 
and two of the scenarios presented earlier (high debt 
and 1970s labor share). Table 2.1 shows the amount of 
fiscal consolidation needed for the United States and 
China, the single largest representative of each country 
group in our sample.23
For the United States, consolidation of about 
3.7 percentage points of GDP is needed under the 
baseline. In the higher-debt scenario, more consoli-
dation is required, at about 3.9 percentage points of 
GDP. Under the higher-labor-share scenario, the dif-
ference between the natural rate and long-term growth 
becomes less favorable, so that slightly greater consol-
idation is required relative to the baseline. For China, 
the needed consolidation is much greater. A deficit 
reduction of about 7.6 percent of GDP is required to 
stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio over the long term. 
The large consolidation reflects China’s sizable primary 
deficit of about 7.5 percent of GDP in 2022. In all 
scenarios, it is assumed that fiscal adjustment can be 
undertaken either in the near term or over the medium 
term; the smaller the primary deficit in 2022, the 
smaller the fiscal cost of waiting.24
Inference about the fiscal space available to govern-
ments is of course uncertain. One important dimen-
sion of uncertainty relates to the sensitivity of interest 
rates to debt. An increase in the sensitivity of interest 
rates to debt essentially lowers the debt threshold at 
which primary surpluses are required for sustainability 
and thus erodes the fiscal space available to govern-
ments. Online Annex 2.4 conducts robustness analysis 
around this parameter that highlights the importance 
of building safety margins to account for changing 
market conditions and investors’ risk perceptions 
(Caselli and others 2022).
23This exercise is repeated for the other six large advanced and 
emerging market economies in Online Annex 2.4.
24As noted earlier, this is a partial equilibrium exercise. Fiscal con-
solidation is bound to be more difficult if the effect of deficit reduc-
tion on real GDP is taken into account. Also, for China, the chapter 
uses the definition of public debt in the World Economic Outlook 
database, which uses a narrower perimeter of the general government 
than IMF staff estimates in China Article IV reports. See the 2022 
Article IV report on China for a reconciliation of the two estimates 
and a debt sustainability assessment based on the broader perimeter 
of the general government.
Conclusion
Following four decades of steady decline, real interest 
rates appear to have increased in many countries in the 
wake of the pandemic. While this uptick clearly reflects 
recent monetary policy tightening, this chapter’s analysis 
seeks to understand whether the long-term anchor—the 
natural rate—has also shifted. This is of key importance 
for the pricing of all assets (housing, bonds, equities) 
and for monetary and fiscal policy. All else equal, higher 
natural rates typically decrease fiscal space—that is, 
higher primary surpluses (smaller deficits) are required 
to stabilize debt ratios. But they also free up some mon-
etary policy space. Higher natural rates imply higher 
nominal rates over the long term, providing central 
banks with more space to react to negative demand 
shocks without hitting the effective lower bound.
The chapter suggests that recent increases in real 
interest rates are likely to be temporary. When inflation 
is brought back under control, advanced economies’ 
central banks are likely to ease monetary policy and 
bring real interest rates back toward pre-pandemic lev-
els. How close to those levels will depend on whether 
alternative scenarios involving persistently higher 
government debt and deficit or financial fragmentation 
materialize. In large emerging markets, conservative 
projections of future demographic and productivity 
trends suggest a gradual convergence toward advanced 
economies’ real interest rates.25
25Of course, structural policies that boost potential growth and 
diminish inequalities, for example, will tend to lean against these 
secular trends.
Table 2.1. Required Fiscal Adjustment under 
Different Scenarios
(Changes in primary deficit, percentage points of GDP)
Scenarios
Baseline
Higher Debt
1970s Labor Share
Near-Term Adjustment
United States
–3.71
–3.94
–3.75
China
–7.63
–7.69
–7.63
Additional Consolidation Needed for Medium-Term Adjustment (three years)
United States
–0.17
–0.18
–0.17
China
–0.47
–0.49
–0.47
Additional Consolidation Needed for Medium-Term Adjustment (five years)
United States
–0.29
–0.32
–0.29
China
–0.87
–0.93
–0.87
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The required fiscal adjustment is the difference from the long-term debt-stabilization 
level, calculated as the difference between the 2022 primary deficit from the World 
Economic Outlook database and the model-based estimate of the primary deficit that 
stabilizes debt to GDP at the long-term rates given projections for the natural rate of 
interest and growth.
59
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
This means that the issues associated with the 
“effective lower bound” constraint on interest rates 
and “low (interest rates) for long” are likely to 
resurface.26 Unconventional policies through active 
management of central bank balance sheets and 
forward guidance may become standard stabilization 
tools, even in emerging markets. Debates about the 
appropriate level of inflation target may also reemerge 
26As discussed at length in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and 
Adrian (2020).
as countries weigh the social cost of higher inflation 
against the constraint of ineffective stabilization due 
to the effective lower bound. In addition, perma-
nently lower real interest rates also increase fiscal 
space—all else equal—and allow fiscal authorities to 
take a more active role in stabilizing the economy, 
provided fiscal sustainability is ensured (Chapter 2 
of the April 2020 WEO). In this case, it is crucial 
to clarify the scope and responsibilities of fiscal and 
monetary authorities to avoid long-term damage to 
the credibility of central banks.
60
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
Policy responses to a transition to a carbon-neutral 
world will induce significant structural transformation 
that will affect the natural rate (r *) via a number of 
channels. This box highlights the crucial role of two 
channels: the design of climate policies and the level of 
international participation in their implementation.
A comprehensive and global policy package 
intended to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 serves 
as a benchmark, as simulated in Chapter 3 of the 
October 2020 World Economic Outlook.1 Carbon 
taxes—aimed at achieving net-zero emissions by 
2050—are imposed globally, starting at between $6 
and $20 a metric ton of CO2 (depending on the 
country) and reaching $40 a ton in 2030 and between 
$40 and $150 a ton in 2050. The package is fully 
financed by the carbon tax revenues—25 percent 
recycled toward social transfers, up to 70 percent for 
green public infrastructure investment, and the rest 
as subsidies to renewable energy sectors—making the 
policy budget-neutral.2 Maintaining budget neutrality 
helps isolate the impact of the green transition on r * 
absent debt-financed green investments. Although they 
are subject to uncertainty and intended to be largely 
illustrative, the results from simulating the policy 
package yield several insights into how climate policies 
can be expected to affect r *.
Different climate mitigation policies affect r* dif-
ferently. Acting alone, carbon taxes depress overall 
investment and hence r * (Figure 2.1.1, panel 1). This 
is because the carbon tax increases the overall cost 
of energy, a complement in production to physical 
capital. As a result of frictions, the associated decline 
in carbon-intensive activities exceeds the investment 
in renewable sources of energy and low-emission 
production methods—especially in countries where 
The authors of this box are Augustus Panton and 
Christoph Ungerer.
1Simulations are computed with the G-Cubed model, an 
open-economy, multicountry macroclimate model (see Liu and 
others 2020; McKibbin and Wilcoxen 1999).
2The scenario differs from the investigation in Chapter 3 of 
the October 2020 World Economic Outlook in two ways. First, it 
assumes a budget-neutral design rather than deficit financing. Sec-
ond, given the large uncertainty surrounding the impact of green 
public investment on output, the simulations take a conservative 
approach and do not assume any direct productivity gains from 
green public investment. Of course, any amount of progress in 
total factor productivity would tend to lift the natural rate.
Net
Avoided damage
Carbon tax
Green infrastructure
Green subsidies
Transfers
Deﬁcit-ﬁnanced package1
Budget-neutral package2
Advanced economies
Top ﬁve emitters
Global
Figure 2.1.1.  The Global Natural Rate of 
Interest and the Green Transition
(Global average, percentage point deviation from 
baseline)
Sources: G-Cubed model, version 164; and IMF staff 
calculations.
1The deﬁcit-ﬁnanced package is based on Chapter 3 of the 
October 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO) but is agnostic 
on total factor productivity effects: front-loaded and deﬁcit- 
ﬁnanced green public investment of 1 percent of GDP in the 
ﬁrst 10 years, 80 percent green subsidies to renewable 
sectors, carbon tax revenues recycled to households (1/4), 
and public debt reduction (3/4).
2Budget-neutral package uses carbon tax revenues to 
ﬁnance green public investment, green subsidies, and 
household transfers in the same proportion as in Chapter 3 
of the October 2020 WEO, but with a much smaller revenue 
envelope.
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
2023
28
33
38
43
48
55
1. Budget-Neutral Climate Policy Package
2. Impact of Deﬁcit-Financed versus
 Budget-Neutral Policies
3. Budget-Neutral Package with Partial
Participation
2023
28
33
38
43
48
55
2023
28
33
38
43
48
55
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
Box 2.1. The Natural Rate of Interest and the Green Transition
61
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
production is carbon intensive. In contrast, public 
investment in green infrastructure and subsidies 
to renewable energy positively affect investment, 
pushing up r *. It is also worth noting that climate 
mitigation helps avoid climate-change-related dam-
ages, boosting productivity growth with respect to a 
business-as-usual baseline and raising r *. 
The net impact on r* depends on the associated 
overall fiscal impulse. Panel 2 of Figure 2.1.1 shows an 
alternative policy package that includes a temporary 
deficit-financed and front-loaded green investment 
push. Unlike the budget-neutral policy package, which 
depresses r * along the entire transition path, this simu-
lation suggests that a deficit-financed fiscal stimulus—
because it increases demand for private savings—could 
have a positive impact on r *.
The macroeconomic impact of the green transition 
depends on the number of participating countries. In 
Figure 2.1.1, panel 3, the climate policy package 
is simulated under three different configurations, 
depending on whether all countries, only the five 
biggest emitters (China, European Union, India, 
Japan, United States), or only advanced economies 
participate. Not surprisingly, partial participation 
in the program leads to a significantly more muted 
impact on r *.
Overall, the short- to medium-term impact of the 
green transition on r * depends on the balance of sev-
eral effects. But over the long term, r * would converge 
to its pre-climate-policy steady state as economies 
become greener and climate policy applies to a shrink-
ing share of economic activity.
Box 2.1 (continued)
62
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
Geoeconomic fragmentation impacts regional 
economies through different channels, in particular, 
trade, technology diffusion, cost of external financing, 
international factor mobility, risk, and provision of 
global public goods (see Aiyar and others 2023). This 
box uses the IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and 
Fiscal (GIMF) Model1 to analyze two scenarios of 
trade and financial fragmentation between the “US 
bloc” (United States, European Union, other advanced 
economies) and the “China bloc” (China, emerging 
Southeast Asia, remaining countries group).2
To understand the impact of trade fragmentation 
on the natural rate, it is necessary to grasp its impact 
on saving and investment in the US and China 
blocs (both deflated by the consumption price index 
for comparison). The imposition of nontariff trade 
barriers—which are assumed to increase by 50 percent 
over 10 years—affects saving in two main ways. First, 
trade restrictions tend to increase import prices for all 
goods, whether intermediate, investment, or consump-
tion. Second, higher import prices for crucial production 
inputs act as a negative productivity shock and reduce 
output. Thus, by increasing the price of consumption 
(the price of imported consumption goods increases by 
about 5 percent to 25 percent depending on the region) 
and reducing output, trade barriers tend to reduce saving 
and push up the natural rate. Two opposite forces also 
determine how trade restrictions impact investment. 
First, higher input prices along the global value chain 
lower the profitability of production in all regions, 
including the “nonaligned bloc,” and depress the volume 
of investment demand (see Figure 2.2.1, panel 2). At the 
same time, trade restrictions directly increase the relative 
price of investment goods (from their higher import 
share compared with consumption goods), increasing the 
demand for loanable funds, all else equal.
Overall, higher trade barriers between the US and 
China blocs will reduce trade between the two regions. 
This reduction is partially offset by larger trade within 
blocs and with the nonaligned, but the net effect is a 
shortening of the global value chain and less global trade 
The authors of this box are Benjamin Carton and Dirk Muir.
1See Kumhof and others (2010) for a description of 
the GIMF Model.
2See Chapter 4 and Online Annex 4.4 for the modification 
to the GIMF Model to introduce explicit value chains and the 
calibration for eight regions grouped in three blocs: the US bloc, 
the China bloc, and the nonaligned bloc. The GIMF Model is 
also calibrated so that intermediate inputs (in value chains) and 
capital are complements in production.
(–19 percent) and output (–6 percent). Given the struc-
ture of trade, real investment in the China bloc declines 
the most due to reshoring (Figure 2.2.1, panel 1).
The impact on real interest rates is modest and var-
ies across regions (Figure 2.2.1, panel 2). Real interest 
rates are expected to fall by about 30 basis points in 
the China bloc as investment demand declines more 
than saving does. In the United States, the positive 
impact of lower saving on the natural rate and the 
negative impact as a result of the decline in investment 
broadly balance each other out. In the nonaligned 
bloc, trade diversion implies that investment demand 
declines by less than desired saving, which raises the 
real interest rate by about 10 basis points.
Investment goods
Intermediate goods
Consumption goods
Total
Figure 2.2.1.  Regional Impact of Trade 
Fragmentation Scenario
1. Real Interest Rate
(Percentage point deviation)
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
United States bloc
China bloc
Nonaligned
2. Real Investment
(Percent deviation)
–20
–16
–12
–8
–4
0
4
United States bloc
China bloc
Nonaligned
Sources: IMF, Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF) 
Model; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The fragmentation scenario is a gradual increase in 
nontariff barriers between the US bloc and the China bloc for 
all types of traded goods (intermediate, investment, and 
consumption) over 10 years. The real interest rate is the 
average over 10 years, whereas real investment is after 
10 years. See Online Annex 2.5 for the country composition 
of the blocs.
Box 2.2. Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Natural Interest Rate
63
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
Geoeconomic fragmentation also has implications for 
capital markets. In recent decades, and especially since 
the end of the 1990s, capital market integration has 
allowed advanced economies—and in particular the 
United States—to benefit from low borrowing costs. 
Savings from emerging markets have increasingly 
sought the safety and liquidity of US government 
bonds. This has helped bring down the natural rate of 
interest in the United States while lifting it in surplus 
countries in Asia and the Middle East (Bernanke 
2005; Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas 2008, 2016, 
2017a, 2017b, 2021). As this process reverses, the 
natural rate is likely to increase in the United States 
and other advanced economies while decreasing in 
emerging markets. In the extreme example of a full 
shutdown of capital markets, regional natural rates 
would converge to levels that reflect only domestic 
drivers such as demographics and productivity.
Figure 2.2.2 presents the macroeconomic impact of a 
financial fragmentation scenario assuming the China bloc 
reduces its exposure to the US bloc’s Treasury bonds; it 
is modeled by reducing the premium paid by foreigners 
on US Treasury bonds. The China bloc disposes of net 
foreign assets, which pushes down their domestic interest 
rate by 40 basis points. In the US bloc, the interest rate 
increases by 20 basis points and the net foreign asset 
position improves by 10 percent of GDP. The nonaligned 
countries experience slight net capital inflows from the 
China bloc, as investors look for returns, reducing their 
interest rates by about 10 basis points.
Real rate
Net foreign assets (right scale)
–0.6
–0.5
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Real interest rates (percentage points)
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
Net foreign assets (percent of GDP)
Sources: IMF, Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF) 
Model; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The fragmentation scenario is a permanent 100 basis 
point premium on one bloc’s assets held by the other bloc’s 
economic agents. The real interest rate and the net foreign 
asset position are reported after 10 years. See Online Annex 
2.5 for the country composition of the blocs.
United States
bloc
China
bloc
Nonaligned
Figure 2.2.2.  Regional Impact of Financial 
Fragmentation Scenario
(Deviation from baseline)
Box 2.2 (continued)
64
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
Do movements in the natural rate of interest in 
advanced economies impact real interest rates in 
emerging market and developing economies? And if 
so, at what horizon? How strong are such associations, 
and what determines their strength?
Many emerging market economies have adopted 
inflation targeting—orienting monetary policy 
toward domestic stabilization goals. Yet policymakers 
in those countries may be unable or unwilling to 
closely track global natural rates in the short term. 
Thus, for emerging market and developing econ-
omies, real rates’ short-term dynamics may appear 
disconnected from global forces (Figure 2.2 and 
Obstfeld 2021). Arslanalp, Lee, and Rawat (2018) 
examine real interest rates in the Asia and Pacific 
region and find that a country’s capital market open-
ness is a key factor for linking domestic and global 
long-term real rates.
This box’s analysis focuses instead on short-term 
real rates that pertain directly to the monetary 
policy stance and are less likely to be swayed 
by fluctuations in risk or term premiums.1 The 
importance of global natural rates to individual 
countries’ real interest rate dynamics is measured by 
the contribution of the US natural rate to emerging 
market economies’ individual forecast error variance 
decomposition.
The authors of this box are Christoffer Koch and 
Diaa Noureldin.
1This box uses quarterly short-term deposit rates adjusted for 
ex post realized inflation. The data are from the first quarter of 
2020 to the fourth quarter of 2022, although coverage is uneven, 
particularly toward the end of the sample. The primary data 
source is the IMF’s International Financial Statistics database. 
For countries with short-period gaps, the data are supplemented 
with data from Haver Analytics. The emerging market and 
developing economies sample consists of Algeria, Bangladesh, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jordan, 
Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, South Africa, Thailand, 
Türkiye, and Uganda. To avoid spurious regression, the deciding 
selection factor is whether each emerging market and developing 
economy rate series is cointegrated with the US rate series. The 
Phillips-Perron test is used for stationarity of the residual of the 
regression of emerging market and developing economy interest 
rates on the US natural rate, allowing for up to four lags. Fore-
cast error variance decomposition is computed based on bivariate 
vector autoregression models including the US natural rate and 
individual countries’ real interest rates.
Figure 2.3.1 shows that at business cycle horizons 
of less than five years, domestic real rates dominate. 
At horizons beyond a decade, spillover from the 
US natural rate matter just as much. This weighted 
aggregation masks substantial variation across coun-
tries at longer horizons. The contribution from the 
US natural rates tends to be larger for East Asian and 
Latin American countries. In large emerging market 
economies, such as China and India, about 30 per-
cent of real rate variation is explained by US natural 
rates after a decade. After two decades, spillovers are 
somewhat stronger in China than in India. Spill-
over effects to African countries, such as Cameroon, 
Côte d’Ivoire, and Uganda, are minor, with less 
than a 10 percent contribution from US natural rate 
spillovers.
What is the role of capital account openness in 
explaining this substantial variation across countries? 
To gauge its importance, de facto capital openness—
the sum of foreign assets and liabilities as a percent 
of GDP (IIPGDP)—is regressed on the cross-country 
variation in magnitude of US natural rate spillovers 
Contribution of EMDEs’ own real interest rate
Contribution of US natural rate
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
8
16
24
32
40
48
56
64
72
80
Forecast horizon (quarters)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Forecast error variance decomposition contributions 
for each horizon are weighted by GDP weights adjusted for 
purchasing power. EMDEs = emerging market and 
developing economies.
Figure 2.3.1.  Natural Rate Spillovers at 
Different Horizons
(Percent)
Box 2.3. Spillovers to Emerging Market and Developing Economies
65
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
to emerging market and developing economies at 
80 quarterly horizons. Figure 2.3.2 shows that the 
effect of capital account openness becomes significant 
only gradually after about a decade. Quantitatively, 
a 1 percentage point increase in the gross interna-
tional investment position as a share of a country’s 
GDP raises the importance of the US natural rate 
in explaining the share of movements in emerging 
market and developing economies’ real interest 
rates by half a percentage point after a decade and 
by 0.9 percentage point after two. So for a country 
like Brazil, with an IIPGDP of about 40 percent, 
20 percent of the forecast error variance decomposi-
tion of Brazilian real interest rates is attributable to 
US spillovers after a decade, and about 36 percent 
after two decades. This implies sizable spillovers but 
at fairly low frequency.
Estimated impact
90 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each point on the solid blue line is the estimate of the 
coefﬁcient from a cross-section regression of the forecast 
error variance decomposition share of the US real natural 
rate on the emerging market and developing economies’ 
capital openness at the displayed forecast horizon from 1 to 
80 quarters.
Figure 2.3.2.  Estimated Impact of Capital 
Openness on Strength of US Spillovers
(Percent)
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
8
16
24
32
40
48
Forecast horizon (quarters)
56
64
72
80
Box 2.3 (continued)
66
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
References
Adrian, Tobias. 2020. “Low for Long and Risk-Taking.” IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 2020/15, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Jiaqian Chen, Christian H. Ebeke, Roberto 
Garcia-Saltos, Tryggvi Gudmundsson, Anna Ilyina, Alvar 
Kangur, and others. 2023. “Geoeconomic Fragmentation and 
the Future of Multilateralism.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 
23/001, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Akcigit, Ufuk, Wenjie Chen, Federico J. Diez, Romain A. 
Duval, Philip Engler, Jiayue Fan, Chiara Maggi, and others. 
2021. “Rising Corporate Market Power: Emerging Policy 
Issues.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 21/01, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Arena, Marco, Gabriel di Bella, Alfredo Cuevas, Borja Gracia, 
Vina Nguyen, and Alex Pienkowski. 2020. “It Is Only 
Natural: Europe’s Low Interest Rates (Trajectory and 
Drivers).” IMF Working Paper 20/116, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC.
Arslanalp, Serkan, Jaewoo Lee, and Umang Rawat. 2018. 
“Demographics and Interest Rates in Asia.” IMF Work-
ing Paper 18/172, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Auclert, Adrien, Hannes Malmberg, Frédéric Martenet, and 
Matthew Rognlie. 2021. “Demographics, Wealth, and Global 
Imbalances in the Twenty-First Century.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 29161, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Ball, Laurence M., and N. Gregory Mankiw. 2021. “Market 
Power in Neoclassical Growth Models.” NBER Working 
Paper 28538, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Bárány, Zsófia, Nicolas Coeurdacier, and Stéphane Guibaud. 2018. 
“Capital Flows in an Aging World.” CEPR Discussion Paper 
DP13180, Centre for Economic and Policy Research, London.
Barsky, Robert, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi. 
2014. “The Natural Rate of Interest and Its Usefulness for 
Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review 104 (5): 37–43.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. “The Global Saving Glut and the US 
Current Account Deficit.” Remarks at the Homer Jones 
Lecture, St. Louis, MO, April 14.
Blanchard, Olivier. 2023. Fiscal Policy under Low Interest Rates. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Borio, Claudio, Piti Disyatat, and Phuricai Rungcharoenkitkul. 
2019. “What Anchors for the Natural Rate of Interest?” 
BIS Working Paper 777, Bank for International Settle-
ments, Basel.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier 
Gourinchas. 2008. “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Imbal-
ances’ and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 98 
(1): 358–93.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier 
Gourinchas. 2016. “Safe Asset Scarcity and Aggregate 
Demand.” American Economic Review 106 (5): 513–18.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier 
Gourinchas. 2017a. “Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Pre-
mia Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns 
on Capital, Earning Yields, and Factor Shares.” American 
Economic Review 107 (5): 614–20.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier 
Gourinchas. 2017b. “The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum.” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (3): 29–46.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier 
Gourinchas. 2021. “Global Imbalances and Policy Wars 
at the Zero Lower Bound.” Review of Economic Studies 88 
(6): 2570–621.
Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2016. 
“Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mech-
anism.” European Economic Review 88 (C): 208­–26.
Caselli, Francesca, Hamid R. Davoodi, Carlos Goncalves, Gee 
Hee Hong, Andresa Lagerborg, Paulo A. Medas, Anh D. M. 
Nguyen, and Jiae Yoo. 2022. “The Return to Fiscal Rules.” 
IMF Staff Discussion Note 22/002, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Cesa-Bianchi, Ambrogio, Richard Harrison, and Rana Sajedi. 
2022. “Decomposing the Drivers of Global R*.” Bank of 
England Staff Working Paper 990, Bank of England.
Clarida, Richard H., Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler. 2002. “A 
Simple Framework for International Monetary Policy Analy-
sis.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (5): 879–904.
Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc Giannoni, and 
Andrea Tambalotti. 2017. “Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural 
Rate of Interest.” Staff Report 812, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, New York.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. 
2019. “A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantita-
tive Evaluation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 
11 (1): 1–48.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero 
Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34 (1): 139­–235.
Furman, Jason, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2020. “A Recon-
sideration of Fiscal Policy in the Era of Low Interest 
Rates.” ­Kennedy School of Business, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David 
López-Salido. 2021. “Understanding the New Normal: The 
Role of Demographics.” IMF Economic Review 69 (2): 357–90.
Galí, Jordi. 2020. “The Effects of a Money-Financed Fiscal Stim-
ulus.” Journal of Monetary Economics 115 (C): 1–19.
Galí, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli. 2005. “Monetary Policy 
and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small Open Economy.” 
Review of Economic Studies 72 (3): 707–34.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. 2005. “The Incred-
ible Volcker Disinflation.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52 
(5): 981–1015.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. 
2017. “Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty.” Unpublished.
67
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
CHAPTER 2 
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Maxime Sauzet. 2022. 
“Global Real Rates: A Secular Approach.” CEPR Discussion 
Paper DP16941, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 
2017. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International 
Trends and Determinants.” Journal of International Economics 
108: S59–S75.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2020. 
“Adapting the Laubach and Williams and Holston, Laubach 
and Williams Model to the COVID-19 Pandemic.” Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Note, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, New York.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2010. “Rethinking Macro-
economic Policy.” IMF Staff Position Note 10/03, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. 
“The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt.” Journal of Politi-
cal Economy 120 (2): 233–67.
Kumhof, Michael, Dirk V. Muir, Susanna Mursula, and Douglas 
Laxton. 2010. “The Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal 
Model (GIMF)—Theoretical Structure.” IMF Working Paper 
2010/034, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2003. “Measuring the 
Natural Rate of Interest.” Review of Economics and Statistics 
85 (4): 1063–70.
Liu, Weifeng, Warwick J. McKibbin, Adele Morris, and Peter J. 
Wilcoxen. 2020. “Global Economic and Environmental Out-
comes of the Paris Agreement.” Energy Economics 90: 1–17.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 2022. “Government Debt and Capital 
Accumulation in an Era of Low Interest Rates.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 30024, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
McKibbin, Warwick J., and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 1999. “The 
Theoretical and Empirical Structure of the G-Cubed Model.” 
Economic Modelling 16 (1): 123–48.
Metzler, Lloyd A. 1951. “Wealth, Saving, and the Rate of Inter-
est.” Journal of Political Economy 59 (2): 93–116.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021a. “Indebted 
Demand.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 136 (4): 2243–307.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021b. “What 
Explains the Decline in r*? Rising Income Inequality versus 
Demographic Shifts.” BFI Working Paper, Becker Friedman 
Institute, University of Chicago.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021c. “The Saving 
Glut of the Rich.” Unpublished, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2022. “A Goldilocks 
Theory of Fiscal Deficits.” NBER Working Paper 29707, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Natal, Jean-Marc, and Nicolas Stoffels. 2019. “Globaliza-
tion, Market Power, and the Natural Interest Rate.” IMF 
Working Paper 19/095, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2020. “Global Dimensions of U.S. 
Monetary Policy.” International Journal of Central Banking 
16 (1): 73–132.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2021. “Two Challenges from Globalization.” 
Journal of International Money and Finance 110: 1–9.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1997. Foundations of 
International Macroeconomics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pescatori, Andrea, and Jarkko Turunen. 2015. “Lower for Lon-
ger: Neutral Rates in the United States.” IMF Working Paper 
15/135, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Platzer, Josef, and Marcel Peruffo. 2022. “Secular Drivers of the 
Natural Rate of Interest in the United States: A Quantitative 
Evaluation.” IMF Working Paper 2022/030, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Rachel, Łukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2019. “On Secular 
Stagnation in the Industrialized World.” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity (Spring): 1–54.
Rogoff, Kenneth S., Barbara Rossi, and Paul Schmelzing. 2021. 
“Long-Run Trends in Long-Maturity Real Rates 1311–2021.” 
NBER Working Paper 30475, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Solow, Robert M., 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory 
of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
70 (1): 65–94.
Summers, Lawrence H. 2014. “U.S. Economic Prospects: 
Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound.” 
Business Economics 49 (2): 65–73.
Wiriadinata, Ursula, and Andrea Presbitero. 2020. “The Risks of 
High Public Debt Despite a Low Interest Rate Environment.” 
VoxEU, August 5, 2020.
Wynne, Mark A., and Ren Zhang. 2018. “Estimating the 
Natural Rate of Interest in an Open Economy.” Empirical 
Economics 55: 1291–318.
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
69
Public debt as a ratio to GDP soared across the 
world during COVID-19 and is expected to remain 
elevated, posing a growing challenge for policymakers, 
particularly as real interest rates are rising across the 
world. This chapter examines the effectiveness of different 
approaches to reducing debt-to-GDP ratios. Based on 
econometric analyses and complemented with a review 
of historical experiences, the chapter reaches three main 
conclusions. First, adequately timed (for example, 
during economic expansions) and appropriately designed 
(for example, more expenditure- than revenue-based 
in advanced economies) fiscal consolidations have a 
high probability of durably reducing debt ratios. The 
debt-reducing effects of fiscal adjustments are reinforced 
when accompanied by growth-enhancing structural 
reforms and strong institutional frameworks. At the 
same time, because these conditions and accompanying 
policies may not always be present, and partly because 
fiscal consolidation tends to slow GDP growth, 
consolidations on average have negligible effects on 
debt ratios. Factors such as transfers to state-owned 
enterprises, contingent liabilities, or exchange rate 
fluctuations can also offset debt reduction efforts. Second, 
when a country is in debt distress, a comprehensive 
approach that combines significant debt restructuring—
renegotiation of terms of servicing of existing debt—
fiscal consolidation, and policies to support economic 
growth can have a significant and long-lasting impact 
on reducing debt ratios. Coordination among creditors 
is essential. Finally, economic growth and inflation 
have historically contributed to reducing debt ratios.
Introduction
Public debt as a ratio to GDP (“debt ratios” 
henceforth) has soared across the world during 
COVID-19. In 2020, the global average of this 
The authors of this chapter are Sakai Ando, Tamon Asonuma, 
Alexandre Balduino Sollaci, Giovanni Ganelli, Prachi Mishra 
(co-lead), Nikhil Patel, Adrian Peralta Alva (co-lead), and Andrea 
Presbitero, with support from Carlos Angulo, Zhuo Chen, Sergio 
Garcia, and Youyou Huang. The authors thank Olivier Blanchard, 
Filippo Ferroni, Ivan Petrella, Juan Rubio-Ramirez, Alan Taylor, 
Jeromin Zettelmeyer, and IMF colleagues for helpful discussions.
ratio approached 100 percent, and it is expected to 
remain above pre-pandemic levels for about half of 
the world (Figure 3.1). High public debt ratios are a 
significant concern for policymakers, particularly in 
light of tightening global financial conditions, weak 
economic growth prospects, and a stronger US dollar. 
The recent rise in sovereign debt holdings of domestic 
financial institutions, particularly in emerging markets, 
has further exacerbated the costs of high public debt, 
including by limiting the resources available for domes-
tic institutions to lend to the private sector and by 
aggravating the risk of adverse sovereign-bank feedback 
loops (Chapter 2 of the April 2022 Global Financial 
Stability Report).
This chapter examines policy options for reducing 
debt ratios, including the effects of fiscal consolidation 
(increases in primary balances), growth, and inflation. 
While fiscal consolidation can serve several objectives, 
the chapter focuses on its impact on debt ratios. The 
chapter also draws on historical events of debt restruc-
turing, which is typically a last-resort option, and ana-
lyzes the factors that made them effective in reducing 
debt. At the outset, it is important to keep in mind 
that debt restructuring is often not a policy choice by 
countries. It involves a complex process of negotiations 
between debtors and creditors, and it can entail sig-
nificant economic costs, coordination challenges, and 
reputational risks.
A vast literature studies the effects of fiscal consol-
idation on GDP, but far less work has been done on 
understanding the impact of fiscal policies on debt 
ratios, particularly in emerging market economies and 
low-income countries.1 Since fiscal consolidation can 
be expected to reduce both debt and GDP, the net 
effect of fiscal policies on debt ratios is far from obvi-
ous. The empirical literature on the effects of restruc-
turing on debt ratios is relatively limited, and the 
1See, for example, Chapter 3 of the October 2010 World Economic 
Outlook, Jordà and Taylor (2016), and Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi 
(2019) for selected studies that examine the effects of fiscal consolida-
tions on public debt in advanced economies. Balasundharam and others 
(2023) document that fiscal consolidation achieves its ex ante objectives 
(including improving primary balances in a durable manner and reduc-
ing debt) with a probability ranging between 21 and 65 percent.
COMING DOWN TO EARTH: HOW TO TACKLE SOARING PUBLIC DEBT
3
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
70
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
overall effects of debt restructuring and its interaction 
with fiscal policies have rarely been explored.2
Against this backdrop, the chapter attempts to 
answer the following questions:
•• How have countries reduced public debt ratios in 
the past? What was the contribution of different 
factors, including growth and inflation?
•• How effective are different policy approaches in 
durably reducing public debt ratios over a horizon 
of five years and beyond? What are the short- and 
medium-term (one to five years) effects of fiscal 
consolidation and debt restructuring on debt ratios, 
and how do fiscal consolidation and restructuring 
interact? Under which conditions are fiscal consoli-
dation and debt restructuring more likely to durably 
reduce debt ratios?
•• What does historical experience suggest for countries 
dealing with high debt today?
The chapter presents new evidence on these import-
ant issues using an up-to-date data set of fiscal aggre-
gates and a comprehensive set of restructuring events 
for advanced economies and emerging market econ-
omies over the past two decades. Where information 
2Asonuma and others (2021) estimate that GDP declines by 
1–5 percent relative to the precrisis trend following external private 
debt restructurings.
is available, low-income countries are also included 
in the analysis. The chapter also uses updated data 
on historical episodes of fiscal consolidation during 
1978–2019 that identify fiscal policy actions aimed at 
reducing deficits.3
The main findings of the chapter are as follows:
•• First, adequately timed and appropriately designed 
fiscal consolidations have a high probability of dura-
bly reducing debt ratios. The average size of primary 
balance consolidations that reduced debt ratios 
in the past is about 0.4 percentage point of GDP, 
lowering the average debt ratio by 0.7 percentage 
point in the first year and up to 2.1 percentage 
points after five years. About half of the observed 
decreases in debt ratios are driven by suitably tai-
lored consolidations.
•• The effectiveness of fiscal consolidation in reducing 
public debt ratios is influenced by various factors. 
The probability of success in reducing debt ratios 
improves from the baseline (average) of about 
50 percent to more than 75 percent when (1) there 
is a domestic or global expansion and global risk 
aversion and financial volatility are low, (2) the 
scope for “crowding out” effects is high (cases with 
initial high public debt and low private credit such 
that the benefits of reducing public debt can out-
weigh its costs), and (3) the consolidation is driven 
more by expenditure reductions than by revenue 
increases (in advanced economies).
•• At the same time, because such conditions may not 
always hold, and partly because fiscal consolidation 
tends to slow GDP growth, the average fiscal consol-
idation has a negligible effect on debt ratios. Unan-
ticipated transfers to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) 
and other contingent liabilities that get realized on 
government balance sheets, as well as unexpected 
exchange rate depreciations, which can increase the 
domestic value of foreign-exchange-denominated 
debt, can further offset debt reduction efforts.
•• Debt restructuring is typically used as a last resort 
when other efforts to reduce debt have failed and 
requires careful consideration of risks and poten-
tial consequences. However, in emerging market 
economies and low-income countries, where most 
restructurings occur, restructuring can significantly 
reduce debt ratios by an average of 3.4 percentage 
3See Carrière-Swallow, David, and Leigh (2021) and Guajardo, 
Leigh, and Pescatori (2014) for earlier versions of the data set on 
episodes of consolidation.
United States
China
LICs
AEs excl. United States
EMs excl. China
Global
Figure 3.1.  Public Debt Trends
(Percent of GDP)
Public debt remains elevated.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
2005
08
11
14
17
20
23
27
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure reports averages weighted by nominal GDP. Shaded area denotes 
forecast period. Sample comprises a balanced panel of 32 advanced economies, 
45 emerging market economies, and 12 low-income countries. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging market economies; LICs = low-income countries.
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
71
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
points in the first year and 8 percentage points 
after five years.
•• Restructurings have historically had larger effects on 
debt ratios, especially in the short term, when they 
were (1) executed through face value reduction and 
(2) part of coordinated and large-scale initiatives for 
debt reductions (for example, the Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries [HIPC] Initiative and Multilateral 
Debt Relief Initiative [MDRI]).4
•• Case studies highlight that, in practice, debt restruc-
turing is always a very complex process that involves 
burden sharing among residents, domestic creditors, 
and foreign creditors. Restructuring can also have 
reputational costs, affect interest rates and future 
market access, and have internal distributional 
consequences. Therefore, debt restructurings are 
typically used as part of a broader policy package—
often as a last resort after other efforts have failed 
and there is some urgency to reduce debt (or to 
provide clear signals that a reduction will come). It 
is by no means a free lunch for countries undergo-
ing this process.
•• Economic growth and inflation play an important 
role in reducing debt ratios. Growth reduces debt 
ratios not only through its effects on nominal GDP, 
but also because countries on average consolidate 
(run higher primary balances) during good times.
•• In terms of policy lessons, countries aiming for 
a moderate and gradual reduction in debt ratios 
should implement well-designed fiscal consolida-
tions, particularly when economies are growing 
faster and when external conditions are favor-
able. The debt reduction effects of fiscal adjust-
ments are often reinforced when accompanied by 
growth-enhancing structural reforms and strong 
institutional frameworks.
•• For countries aiming for more substantial or more 
rapid debt reduction, bold policy actions that do not 
preclude debt restructuring may be necessary. Fiscal 
consolidation may still be necessary to regain market 
confidence and recover macroeconomic stability. 
Regardless of the type of restructuring, lower debt 
4The HIPC and MDRI programs were initiated by official 
creditors to help reduce the debt of poor countries through a coor-
dinated set of negotiations involving public debt. To participate, 
countries must meet certain criteria, commit to poverty reduction 
through policy changes, and demonstrate a good track record 
over time. Chuku and others (2023) compare debt vulnerabilities 
in low-income countries today versus on the eve of the HIPC 
Initiative and examine challenges to a similarly designed debt 
relief framework.
ratios are achieved when restructuring is deep enough 
and is implemented together with comprehensive 
policy packages including IMF-supported programs.
•• To ensure success of restructuring in reducing debt 
ratios, mechanisms promoting coordination and 
confidence among creditors and debtors are neces-
sary. Improving the Group of Twenty (G20) Com-
mon Framework with greater predictability, earlier 
engagement, a payment standstill, and further clar-
ification on comparability of treatment can help.5 
Most importantly, prioritizing debt management 
and transparency in advance can reduce the need for 
restructuring and help manage debt distress, which 
would be in the interest both of debtor countries 
and of their creditors.
•• Although high inflation can reduce debt ratios, the 
chapter’s findings do not suggest that it is a desir-
able policy tool. High inflation can lead to losses 
on the balance sheets of sovereign debt holders such 
as banks and other financial institutions and, more 
crucially, damage the credibility of institutions such 
as central banks.
•• Ultimately, reducing debt ratios in a durable manner 
depends on strong institutional frameworks, which 
prevent “below the line” operations that undermine 
debt reduction efforts and ensure that countries 
indeed build buffers and reduce debt during good 
times.6 In the end, countries’ choices will depend 
on a complex set of factors, including domestic and 
external conditions, as well as on the fact that not 
all alternatives may always be available.
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. 
The first section documents stylized facts on debt 
reduction episodes and then evaluates the roles of 
fiscal consolidation, growth, and inflation. The second 
section looks into debt restructuring and analyzes its 
effectiveness in reducing debt ratios. The third section 
exploits the unique vantage point of the IMF and con-
siders case studies of countries that succeeded (or did 
not succeed) in reducing debt. The chapter concludes 
by drawing lessons for countries aiming to reduce debt 
ratios in the current environment.
5For details on the G20 Common Framework, see https://​
clubdeparis​.org/​sites/​default/​files/​annex​_common​_framework​_for​
_debt​_treatments​_beyond​_the​_dssi​.pdf.
6According to the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014, 
below-the-line operations are defined as transactions in finan-
cial assets and liabilities, also referred to as financing transac-
tions (IMF 2014).
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
72
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Macroeconomic Drivers of the 
Debt-to-GDP Ratio
This section uses a standard debt decomposition 
technique to quantify the contributions of real GDP 
growth, nominal interest expenses, the primary bal-
ance, and inflation to debt reduction episodes.
Primary Surplus, Growth, and Inflation Are Important 
Drivers of Debt Reductions
On average, a debt ratio reduction episode lasts five 
years.7 The magnitude of the decline in the debt ratio 
is, on average, 3, 5, and 10 percentage points a year in 
7The reduction episodes are identified in two steps. The first step 
involves identifying turning points in the time series for each coun-
try based on the business cycle dating methodology of Harding and 
Pagan (2002). A minimum of two years between successive peaks 
and troughs and a minimum length of four years for a complete 
cycle are imposed. This step decomposes the entire time series into 
nonoverlapping periods of surges and reductions. Second, stable 
periods with minimum length of three years are identified within 
these episodes if the cumulative change in the debt-to-GDP ratio is 
either less than 5 percentage points in levels or less than 10 percent-
age points of the country-specific standard deviation.
advanced economies, emerging market economies, and 
low-income countries, respectively (black squares in 
Figure 3.2).
The main insights from the decompositions are 
threefold (Figure 3.2). First, primary balance surpluses 
(red bars) followed by real GDP growth (dark blue 
bars) are the most important drivers of debt ratio 
reductions in advanced economies. Second, nominal 
interest expense (dark yellow bars) always contributes 
positively to the change in debt ratios. Third, real 
GDP growth and, notably, inflation (dark and light 
blue bars, respectively) play a relatively bigger role in 
reducing debt ratios in emerging market economies 
and low-income countries.8
In theory, high inflation can influence debt ratios 
through at least two channels: (1) higher nominal 
GDP and (2) higher nominal interest rates. The 
second mechanism, in turn, depends on whether 
inflation is anticipated or comes as a surprise. In 
principle, higher expected inflation (evaluated at the 
point when debt is issued) can translate into higher 
nominal interest expenses and can cancel out the 
favorable effect of inflation on the debt ratio. Unan-
ticipated inflation jumps, on the other hand, affect 
debt ratios only through the channel of higher nom-
inal GDP. The April 2023 Fiscal Monitor establishes 
that positive inflation surprises significantly reduce 
debt ratios.
The standard debt decomposition, however, cannot 
separate inflation into its expected and unexpected 
components, both of which are likely at play. A 
relevant question to ask is: Could expected inflation, 
in practice, also be associated with lower debt ratios, 
as suggested by the light blue bars in Figure 3.2? Two 
pieces of evidence may be consistent with such a 
mechanism. First, on average, nominal effective inter-
est rates (defined as nominal interest expense divided 
by the stock of the previous year’s debt) in emerging 
market economies and low-income countries remain 
low relative to inflation (Table 3.1). This may be 
attributed to the preponderance of concessional 
borrowing in low-income countries or to financial 
repression in emerging market economies. Moreover, 
8Canada, Iceland, New Zealand, and Norway are examples of 
countries with large primary surpluses. See Box 3.1 on the role 
of growth-friendly market reforms and Box 3.2 on the role of 
interest rates in the context of fiscal and monetary interactions. 
While Figure 3.2 focuses on debt reduction episodes, high inflation 
could also lead to higher debt, including through unexpected 
devaluations.
Change in debt to GDP
Primary balance
Real GDP growth
Inﬂation
Nominal interest expense
Residuals
Figure 3.2.  Contribution to Change in Debt to GDP during 
Reduction Episodes
(Percent)
Primary balance is more important in advanced economies, but growth and 
inﬂation play a bigger role in emerging market economies and low-income 
countries.
–12
–9
–6
–3
0
3
6
9
Advanced economies
Emerging market
economies
Low-income countries
Sources: IMF, Global Debt Database; Mauro and others (2013); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Contribution of real exchange rate to debt to GDP is reﬂected in the residual 
because the share of foreign-currency-denominated debt is not available for all 
countries. Sample covers 28 advanced economies from 1979 to 2021, 83 
emerging market economies from 1991 to 2021, and 55 low-income countries 
from 1985 to 2021.
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
73
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
inflation surprises, including some hyperinflation-
ary periods, may have occurred frequently in these 
samples. Second, the evidence presented in Box 3.2 
demonstrates that higher expected inflation and 
higher policy and market rates feed rather slowly into 
effective interest costs of debt, likely because of high 
average maturity of sovereign debt (seven years). A 
caveat to note is that the relationship between infla-
tion and debt could be more complex and is exten-
sively discussed in the April 2023 Fiscal Monitor. For 
example, high inflation could affect tax revenues and 
primary balances, lead to misallocation of resources 
and increased uncertainty, and in turn affect debt 
ratios through additional channels.
The subsections that follow will dig deeper into the 
effects of growth and fiscal consolidation shocks on 
debt ratios and also track the evolution of inflation and 
its implications for debt.
Role of Fiscal Consolidation, Growth, and Inflation
This subsection seeks to answer three questions. 
First, how important is growth in reducing debt ratios, 
and how does inflation behave during debt reductions? 
Second, what are the characteristics of fiscal consoli-
dations that durably reduce debt ratios? Third, under 
what conditions is it more likely that fiscal consolida-
tion translates into lower debt ratios? While the chap-
ter focuses on the ex post effects of fiscal consolidation 
on public debt ratios, fiscal adjustments may not be 
intended to reduce debt and could happen for different 
reasons, for example, in response to shocks such as 
tightening financing conditions, to offset spending in 
public sector entities, or to combat inflation.
The analysis uses annual data on fiscal and mac-
roeconomic aggregates for a sample of 33 emerging 
market economies starting in 1990 and 21 advanced 
economies starting in 1980. An updated version of 
the narrative fiscal consolidations data developed by 
Devries and others (2011) and Carrière-Swallow, 
David, and Leigh (2021) is also used in the analysis.
The Average Consolidation: Does It Reduce the 
Debt-to-GDP Ratio?
A stylized fact is that simultaneous consolidations 
and debt ratio reductions are infrequent: Only 52 per-
cent of increases in primary balance are accompanied 
by a decrease in debt ratios. This aligns with analysis 
by Balasundharam and others (2023) documenting 
that only about half of fiscal consolidations achieve 
their fiscal targets, including debt reduction.
A broad range of econometric methods, based on 
well-established methods in the empirical literature, con-
firm that fiscal consolidations do not reduce debt ratios, 
on average.9 These methods draw from a large literature 
to account for biases that arise when both consolida-
tions and debt are driven by other factors, including 
the macroeconomic environment. For example, the 
aforementioned “narrative shocks” are used to select 
cases in which governments implemented tax hikes or 
spending cuts with the explicit intention of reducing 
the public deficit and putting public finances on a more 
sustainable footing, irrespective of current and prospec-
tive macroeconomic conditions. Results suggest that, on 
average, consolidations do not lead to a statistically sig-
nificant effect on the debt ratio. An alternative approach 
employs an augmented inverse-probability-weighted 
(AIPW) estimator (Jordà and Taylor 2016) to account 
for the fact that consolidations do not happen randomly. 
This estimator first predicts the probability of experi-
encing a narrative shock, using indicators such as GDP 
growth and debt levels. It then estimates the impact of 
narrative shocks on the debt ratio using local-projection 
methods, while reweighting observations using the 
predicted probabilities. As shown in Figure 3.3, those 
adjustments do not change the finding that the average 
narrative fiscal consolidation does not have a statistically 
significant impact on the debt ratio.
What Conditions Improve the Chances of Consolidation 
Reducing the Debt-to-GDP Ratio?
Next, the analysis turns to the relevant question: 
Under which conditions are fiscal consolidations 
more likely to reduce debt ratios? A structural 
9For details, see Jordà and Taylor (2016) and Carrière-Swallow, 
David, and Leigh (2021).
Table 3.1. Average Nominal Effective Interest Rate 
and Inflation during Reduction Episodes
Nominal Effective 
Interest Rate
Inflation
Advanced Economies
5.6
3.0
Emerging Market Economies
5.2
9.0
Low-Income Countries
2.6
10.0
Sources: IMF, Global Debt Database; Mauro and others (2013); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Sample covers 28 advanced economies from 1979 to 2021, 
83 emerging market economies from 1991 to 2021, and 55 low-income 
countries from 1985 to 2021.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
74
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
vector autoregression (SVAR) model that consid-
ers jointly the well-known drivers of debt ratios, 
namely, real GDP growth, interest rates, inflation, 
government revenues, and primary balance, is 
applied to answer this question. The model uses a 
sign-restriction-based identification, following the 
method of Mountford and Uhlig (2009). Consis-
tent with the previous analysis, the SVAR approach 
also suggests that consolidations do not reduce 
debt ratios, on average (Online Annex 3.3).10 The 
result is robust to estimation through narrative sign 
restrictions based on the narrative data discussed 
earlier (as in Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez 
2018). The flexibility of the SVAR can be used to 
study the features of consolidations that reduce debt 
ratios. To do so, the primary balance shock (defined 
as a change in the primary-balance-to-GDP ratio 
outside of a business cycle) is split into two differ-
ent (orthogonal) components: a successful shock, 
after which the debt ratio declines, and one that 
is unsuccessful, after which the debt ratio rises in 
10All online annexes are available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​WEO.
response to a positive shock or an improvement in 
the primary-balance-to-GDP ratio (Table 3.2). Note 
that the method puts restrictions on the sign of the 
comovement between the variables and does not 
impose any other constraint, say, on the magnitude 
of the responses.
The historical decomposition from the SVAR 
is used to derive the contributions of growth and 
changes in the primary balance to changes in the 
debt ratio and highlights two important patterns 
(Table 3.3). First, higher GDP growth (as captured 
by positive demand and supply shocks together) is 
an important force driving debt ratios and explains 
about one-third of the observed reductions. This is 
because of the effect on nominal GDP, but impor-
tantly also because countries, on average, run primary 
deficits in bad times and primary surpluses during 
good times. Indeed, market reforms, complemented 
with improvements in fiscal frameworks, can increase 
growth and reduce debt ratios durably and signifi-
cantly (Box 3.1).11
Second, about 40 percent of the observed debt ratio 
reductions in both advanced and emerging market 
economies are explained by primary balance shocks, 
with a relatively even split between successful and 
unsuccessful primary balance shocks (Table 3.3). Note 
that unsuccessful primary balance shocks—identified 
by a positive comovement of primary balance and debt 
ratio on impact—can also lead to debt reductions. 
These shocks encompass improvements in the primary 
balance that result in increasing debt ratios, but they 
also include symmetric cases in which a worsening of 
11The contributions of each shock to the unexpected reductions in 
the debt-to-GDP ratio are based on a country-by-country historical 
decomposition from the SVAR. This is akin to a structural debt 
decomposition.
Advanced economies
Emerging market economies
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
On average, ﬁscal consolidations do not reduce debt-to-GDP ratios.
Sources: IMF, Global Debt Database; IMF, Historical Public Debt Database; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows the average treatment effect of ﬁscal consolidation on debt to 
GDP using augmented inverse probability weighted estimation. Vertical lines 
represent the 90 percent conﬁdence interval. X-axis denotes the number of years 
from ﬁscal consolidation. Sample consists of 17 advanced economies from 1978 
to 2020 and 14 emerging market economies from 1989 to 2020 with narrative 
consolidation shocks.
Figure 3.3.  Effect of Fiscal Consolidation on Debt to GDP
(Percentage points)
Table 3.2. Structural Vector Autoregression Sign Restrictions
GDP
Real 
Revenue
Primary 
Balance 
to GDP
Debt  
to GDP
Interest 
Rate
Inflation
Demand Shock
+
+
+
Supply Shock
+
+
–
Successful Primary 
Balance Shock
–
+
–
Unsuccessful Primary 
Balance Shock
–
+
+
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sign restrictions on debt to GDP and GDP growth for consolidation shocks are 
imposed one period ahead. All other sign restrictions are imposed on impact only.
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
75
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
the primary balance (for example, fiscal expansion) 
results in debt reductions, partly owing to positive 
GDP effects.
The question to be considered now is under which 
conditions primary balance consolidations turn into 
debt ratio reductions and what the characteristics of 
such consolidations are.
Characteristics of Consolidations That Drive the 
Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Two characteristics distinguish consolidations that 
lead to a reduction in debt ratios (successful) versus 
those that do not (unsuccessful) (Figure 3.4). First, 
the decline in growth is smaller (0.5 percent reduc-
tion on impact) in consolidations that reduce debt 
ratios compared with those that do not (1.3 percent 
reduction). As expected, successful consolidations 
reduce debt ratios because the negative effects on 
output are mitigated. At the same time, it is impor­
tant to note that movements in GDP alone are not 
the most important factor determining the difference 
between successful and unsuccessful consolidations. 
This point is evident in a comparison of the response 
of GDP and the debt-to-GDP ratio (Figure 3.4, 
panels 1 and 4). In successful cases (blue lines), 
GDP falls, and the debt-to-GDP ratio also falls; in 
unsuccessful cases (red lines), GDP falls, but the 
debt-to-GDP ratio increases twice as much as the fall 
in GDP. That is, the difference between successful 
and unsuccessful consolidations is driven primarily by 
movements in debt.
Second, the response of inflation to the consolida-
tion shock is positive (Figure 3.4, panel 6). Several 
factors could contribute to this positive impact on 
inflation. For instance, the typical consolidation entails 
a revenue (tax increase) component that could push 
prices up. Moreover, any exchange rate depreciation 
concomitant with the consolidation could also increase 
Table 3.3. Historical Decomposition of Debt Reduction
(Percent)
Median Contribution during Debt Reductions
AEs
EMs
Demand Shock
19
12
Supply Shock
21
13
Successful Primary Balance Shock
19
21
Unsuccessful Primary Balance Shock
16
22
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market economies.
Successful
Unsuccessful
Figure 3.4.  Impulse Responses to a 1 Percentage Point of 
GDP Primary Balance Shock, Advanced Economies
Successful consolidations entail lower GDP losses and higher inﬂation.
1. GDP Growth
(Percent)
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
2. Revenue Growth
(Percent)
–1.2
–0.6
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
3. Primary Balance to GDP
(Percentage points, ﬁrst
difference)
–0.4
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
1
2
3
4
5
4. Debt to GDP
(Percentage points, ﬁrst
difference)
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
5. Nominal Effective
Interest Rate
(Percent, ﬁrst difference)
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6. Inﬂation
(Percent, ﬁrst difference)
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
Sources: Canova and Ferroni (2022); IMF, Global Debt Database; IMF, Historical 
Public Debt Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Primary balance shock is scaled to 1 percentage point of GDP on impact on 
average. Displayed impulse responses are inverse variance weighted means 
across countries from a Bayesian vector autoregression estimated country by 
country with two lags at annual frequency. Shaded areas represent the 16th–84th 
percentile range of the posterior distribution. X-axis denotes horizon in years. 
Sample consists of 21 advanced economies from 1981 to 2019.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
76
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
import prices and contribute to inflation.12 The differ-
ential response of effective interest rates on impact 
in successful versus unsuccessful consolidations 
(Figure 3.4, panel 5) suggests that monetary policy 
remains more accommodative on impact and hence 
allows higher inflation in the case of successful consol-
idations. For successful consolidations, however, the 
impact on nominal effective interest rates is statistically 
indistinguishable from zero. Thus, the inflation hike 
contributes mainly to an increase in nominal GDP and 
results in a decline in the debt ratio. Debt decomposi-
tion identities (reported in Online Annex 3.2) suggest 
that inflation contributes significantly—about half a 
percentage point—to the reduction in the debt ratio 
for successful fiscal consolidations.
Furthermore, in advanced economies, successful 
consolidations tend to be balanced between spending 
cuts and tax or revenue increases, whereas those that 
are unsuccessful are biased toward revenue and involve 
fewer spending cuts (Online Annex 3.3). This pattern 
is not found in emerging market economies, consistent 
with studies that find tax increases hurt growth and debt 
ratios more than equivalent spending cuts in advanced 
economies but not necessarily in emerging market econ-
omies (see, for instance, Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori 
2014; Carrière-Swallow, David, and Leigh 2021; 
and Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi 2019). Indeed, for 
low-income countries, where the tax-revenue-to-GDP 
ratio is particularly low, revenue-mobilizing consolida-
tions may be more desirable (October 2022 Regional 
Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa).13
Successful consolidations, in fact, durably reduce 
debt ratios, even beyond a five-year horizon, as illus-
trated in Online Annex 3.3. The average consolidation 
shock in the data implies a sustained improvement 
12Consolidations may boost the economic outlook and inves-
tor sentiment, leading to an appreciation of exchange rates, but 
evidence for such effects is weak (Beetsma and others 2015). The 
exchange rate implications are vital for low-income countries where 
foreign-currency-denominated debt forms a significant share of pub-
lic debt. Exchange rate depreciation has been a major contributor to 
the increase in debt ratios in sub-Saharan Africa (April 2023 Regional 
Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa). In addition, Chapter 3 of 
the October 2010 World Economic Outlook finds that policy interest 
rate cuts can support output during fiscal consolidations, which 
would also be consistent with a positive inflation response, but the 
analysis in this chapter does not identify a substantial response of 
effective interest rates to fiscal consolidations.
13Peralta Alva and others (2018) study the welfare implications 
of fiscal consolidation in low-income countries and compare the 
trade-off between efficiency and distributional effects for different 
tax schemes.
in the primary balance, mostly on impact, of 
0.4 percentage point of GDP. It reduces debt ratios 
persistently, starting with 0.7 percentage point by 
the first year and stabilizing at a 2.1 percentage point 
reduction by year five and beyond.
Fiscal consolidation may also fail to reduce debt 
ratios if countries conduct below-the-line operations 
that can offset the impact of fiscal consolidation on 
debt. Examples include transfers to state-owned enter-
prises in Mexico (2016), clearance of arrears in Greece 
(2016), and contingent liabilities in Italy (2013).14
The historical decompositions from the SVAR are 
further used to isolate periods of successful consoli-
dations and identify the conditions that improve the 
probability that fiscal consolidation will translate into a 
lower debt ratio (Figure 3.5). Consolidations are more 
likely to reduce debt ratios during good times (for 
example, domestic and global booms, as well as peri-
ods of less financial tightening and less volatility and 
uncertainty captured by the Chicago Board Options 
Exchange Volatility Index [VIX]) and when the ini-
tial public-debt-to-GDP ratio is high and the initial 
private-credit-to-GDP ratio is low. Note that, in theory, 
the direction of the effect of initial debt levels on the 
likelihood of successful consolidations could go either 
way. When initial debt is high, the direct effect of fiscal 
consolidation (or the numerator) on the value of debt is 
small; at the same time, consolidations hurt output (or 
the denominator) less when initial debt is high, likely 
because of greater crowding out of investment (Ilzetzki, 
Mendoza, and Vegh 2013; Kirchner, Cimadomo, and 
Hauptmeier 2010). The results reported in Figure 3.5 
suggest that the latter effect dominates. (See Online 
Annex 3.3 for a mathematical illustration of these 
points.) The magnitudes of the estimates suggest that 
consolidations undertaken during domestic and global 
booms and when financial volatility is low can increase 
the probability of durably reducing debt ratios from the 
baseline of close to 50 percent to about 75 percent and 
even more if, in addition, crowding-out effects are high.15
14See IMF (2016), IMF (2017) and IMF (2013), respectively. The 
phenomenon is not limited to advanced and emerging market econ-
omies. The contribution of such below-the-line operations to rising 
debt ratios has been persistently high in recent times in sub-Saharan 
Africa (April 2023 Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa).
15The numbers are computed by adding the coefficients from a 
multivariate standardized logit regression plotted in Figure 3.5. For 
instance, when global and domestic output gaps are one standard 
deviation above mean and the VIX is one standard deviation 
below, the probability increases from a baseline of 51 to 75 percent 
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
77
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Debt Restructuring and Its Effects
While fiscal consolidation, growth, and inflation can 
help reduce debt ratios, they may not be sufficient for 
countries facing disruptive levels of debt. In such cases, 
debt restructuring may be necessary. Debt restructuring 
is often not a policy choice and is used as a last resort 
after other efforts have failed and there is an urgent need 
to reduce debt or provide clear signals of a reduction. 
It is a complex process involving negotiations between 
debtors and creditors and can come with large costs, 
reputational risks, and negative impacts on the economy 
overall.16 In addition, it can adversely affect creditors, 
reduce their ability to provide concessional financing, 
and lead to spillovers in global markets. This section first 
defines key concepts related to debt restructuring and 
documents stylized facts. Next it addresses the question: 
How effective have past restructuring events been in 
reducing debt and under what conditions?
Definition and Characteristics of Restructuring
Public debt restructuring is broadly defined as a 
“debt distress” event in which the terms of contractual 
payments of some outstanding government instru-
ments are renegotiated, typically with a net present 
value loss for the creditor.17
Restructurings can differ along at least three dimen-
sions. First, the types of creditors can be official or 
private. Official creditors include Paris Club countries, 
non–Paris Club G20 creditors (for example, China, 
India, and South Africa), and other official creditors.18 
Private creditors can be external or domestic residents. 
Second, the timing of restructuring can be preemptive 
(that is, before any payments are missed) or after default. 
(~=51+6.1+9.1+9.9), based on the numbers above and below the 
blue bars in Figure 3.5.
16Preemptive restructurings can be associated with smaller costs 
and relatively muted impact on the overall economy compared with 
postdefault restructurings (Asonuma and Trebesch 2016; Asonuma 
and others 2021), though historically preemptive restructurings have 
also been less deep.
17An external debt restructuring refers to a formal renegotia-
tion process of outstanding debt instruments issued under foreign 
jurisdiction and held by external creditors, which may involve a 
net present value loss for creditors (Asonuma and Papaioannou, 
forthcoming; Das, Papaioannou, and Trebesch 2012). A domestic 
sovereign debt restructuring has a similar definition, but the debt 
instruments are issued under domestic jurisdiction and held mainly 
by domestic creditors. There are also legal considerations unique to 
domestic debt restructuring (IMF 2021).
18Note that information on debt restructurings by non–Paris Club 
creditors is available only for China.
Third, the implementation of debt restructuring can take 
different forms. For example, restructuring can take place 
through a reduction in the face value of debt (which 
reduces the debt stock immediately) or through cash 
flow relief with no face value reduction (for example, an 
extension of maturity or a reduction in coupon pay-
ments). Cash flow relief with no face value reduction 
reduces the present value of debt through changes in the 
schedule of payments.
Following the introduction of key concepts, the next 
subsection presents a summary of essential stylized 
facts pertaining to debt restructuring.
Drawing from a compilation of databases, 709 restruc-
turing events were reported from 1950 to 2021, across 
115 countries. Almost all events were in emerging market 
economies and low-income countries. Debt restructurings 
often involve cash flow relief with no face value reduction, 
tend to happen preemptively (rather than postdefault), 
Figure 3.5.  Factors Affecting the Probability of Consolidations 
Reducing Debt Ratios
(Percent change)
39
43
47
51
55
59
63
Domestic
output gap
World
output gap
VIX
Debt to GDP
Private credit
to GDP
–8.9
6.3
–9.9
9.1
6.1
Sources: Canova and Ferroni (2022); IMF, Global Debt Database; IMF, Historical 
Public Debt Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows estimates of a multivariate standardized logit regression with 
the dependent variable being a dummy equal to 1 for a successful consolidation 
(in which debt to GDP declines and the successful shock from the vector 
autoregression contributes at least 10 percent to the decline) and equal to 0 for an 
unsuccessful consolidation (for example, if debt to GDP increases and the 
unsuccessful consolidation shock from the vector autoregression contributes at 
least 10 percent to the increase). The baseline of 51 percent on the y-axis 
represents the unconditional success probability using this deﬁnition. All 
coefﬁcients are signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level based on bootstrap standard 
errors. World output gap variable is orthogonalized with respect to domestic output 
gap to recover the exogenous component. Sample consists of 21 advanced 
economies from 1981 to 2019 and 37 emerging market economies from 1994 to 
2019. VIX = Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index.
Economic expansions, favorable ﬁnancial conditions, and high crowding-out 
effects boost the probability of consolidations reducing debt ratios.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
78
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
and most frequently involve official creditors, especially 
in low-income countries (Table 3.4). Restructurings with 
domestic creditors are rare and may reflect intentions 
to avoid risks in the domestic financial sector; these 
are also less likely to involve face value reduction, and 
even when they do, the reduction tends to be shallower 
compared with restructurings with external creditors (see, 
for example, the cases of Cyprus and Jamaica in “Going 
Granular: Case Studies of Debt Restructuring”).19
Fiscal consolidations, measured by an increase 
in the primary-balance-to-GDP ratio, are com-
monly implemented prior to debt restructuring. 
Figure 3.6 shows that, in the sample with available 
data on primary balances, 60 percent of debt restruc-
turing events are preceded by an increase in the 
primary-balance-to-GDP ratio, indicating that coun-
tries often undertake fiscal measures before resorting 
to debt restructuring.
Debt-to-GDP Ratio Reduction Is Large during 
Restructuring
To give a sense of the magnitude of the role restruc-
turing plays in the reduction of debt ratios, Figure 3.7 
distinguishes between reduction episodes that involve 
19In each country, a year is counted as a restructuring event if restruc-
turing starts in that year. Restructurings could involve multiple creditors, 
in which case the count of events is still 1 if they happen in the same 
year. A restructuring event can last multiple years. Details on the sources 
on the episodes of restructurings are in Online Annex 3.6. See IMF 
(2021) for further discussion on restructuring of domestic debt.
restructuring and those that do not. Not surprisingly, 
the decline in debt ratios during restructuring events 
is larger, 13 percentage points in emerging market 
economies and 18 percentage points in low-income 
countries, as shown by the black squares in Figure 3.7. 
Without restructuring, the average reduction is about 
4 percentage points and 8 percentage points, respec-
tively. Inflation plays an even larger role in debt 
reduction episodes with restructurings. This may reflect 
that restructuring often coincides with economic crises 
and is accompanied by capital outflows, exchange rate 
depreciations, and higher inflation.
High Chances of Restructuring
An important question to ask in the current envi-
ronment is: How likely will debt restructuring be in the 
future? One way to gauge chances of future restructur-
ing is to look at the past and note that restructurings 
have followed surges in debt ratios. In fact, waves of 
restructurings followed debt ratio surges in both the 
1980s and early 2000s (Figure 3.8). The share of coun-
tries with surging debt ratios has also been on the rise 
since the global financial crisis. This may suggest that, 
if history repeats itself, there could be a good chance of 
more restructurings in the near future. So far—possibly 
because of low interest rates and ease of financing 
conditions—a wave of restructurings has not occurred. 
Table 3.4. Summary Statistics of Restructuring
(Percent)
Emerging 
Market 
Economies
Low-Income 
Countries
Treatment
Cash flow relief without 
face value reduction
85.8
73.5
Face value reduction
14.2
26.5
Timing
Preemptive
58.4
54.3
Postdefault
21.6
31.1
Both + unidentified
20.0
14.6
Creditor Type
Paris Club
48.1
73.5
China
8.4
5.6
Private external
24.8
10.1
Private domestic
6.8
4.5
Joint
11.9
6.3
Sources: Asonuma, Niepelt, and Ranciere (2023); Asonuma and Trebesch 
(2016); Asonuma and Wright (2022); Cheng, Díaz-Cassou, and Erce 
(2018); Cruces and Trebesch (2013); Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2022); 
IMF (2021); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data are based on the number of restructuring events, which can last 
for several years. The sample includes 310 restructuring events in emerging 
market economies and 396 in low-income countries from 1950 to 2021.
Figure 3.6.  Share of Observations with Positive Change in 
Primary Balance to GDP
(Percent)
Consolidation tends to precede a resort to restructuring.
40
45
50
55
60
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
Years before (after) ﬁscal consolidation
Sources: Asonuma and Trebesch (2016); Asonuma and Wright (2022); Horn, 
Reinhart, and Trebesch (2022); IMF (2021); and IMF staff calculations.
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
79
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
An exception is those in 2020 and 2021 under the G20 
Debt Service Suspension Initiative, designed to mitigate 
the economic costs of the pandemic in developing econ-
omies. However, the changing global environment (for 
example, low growth, tightening financing conditions, 
strong dollar) could raise these risks. That said, the pro-
cess could differ significantly from that in the past, given 
the changing composition of creditors, the enhanced use 
of collective action clauses in sovereign bonds, and the 
G20 Common Framework initiative.
Estimated Effects of Debt Restructuring
To estimate the impact of debt restructuring, this 
section employs the AIPW estimator, which takes into 
account the nonrandom nature of restructuring events. 
As discussed earlier, the procedure first estimates the 
probability that a country will begin debt restructur-
ing negotiations based on macroeconomic factors and 
uses this information to reweight observations in an 
outcome model, as detailed in Online Annex 3.5.
The findings suggest that the debt restructuring process 
in emerging market economies and low-income coun-
tries can have a significant and long-lasting impact on 
debt ratios (Figure 3.9, panel 1). On average, debt ratios 
decrease by 3.4 percentage points in the first year and 
8 percentage points within five years of restructuring, and 
this effect is heightened when accompanied by fiscal con-
solidation. This is in line with the fact that two-thirds of 
restructuring events in the sample were accompanied by 
fiscal consolidation. In addition, the joint effect of restruc-
turing and fiscal consolidation grows over time, indicating 
that the two policies are complementary.
The identity and composition of creditors, the nature 
of negotiations, and the context in which restructur-
ing takes place can greatly affect its outcome as well. 
Figure 3.9 (panel 2) shows that restructuring under the 
HIPC or MDRI programs more successfully reduced 
debt ratios than the typical restructuring, both on impact 
and over longer horizons.20 The results are as expected, 
20Treatment in this case is identified as a restructuring event 
that (1) involved an official creditor (Paris Club or multilateral 
institution) and (2) happened in a country that benefited from either 
the HIPC Initiative or MDRI. A similar analysis was conducted to 
uncover differences between domestic and external restructurings. As 
noted also in Table 3.4, there are very few cases of restructuring that 
involved domestic creditors only—fewer than 40 across the whole 
sample. With this caveat, the results suggest that external restructur-
ing has a larger (negative) effect on the debt ratio.
Change in debt to GDP
Primary balance
Real GDP growth
Nominal interest expense
Debt restructuring
Inﬂation
Residuals
Figure 3.7.  Contribution to Change in Debt-to-GDP Ratio 
during Reduction Episodes with and without Restructuring
(Percent)
Debt reduction is larger during restructuring events.
–21
–14
–7
0
7
14
With
restructuring
Without
restructuring
With
restructuring
Without
restructuring
Emerging market economies
Low-income countries
Sources: Asonuma, Niepelt, and Ranciere (2023); Asonuma and Trebesch (2016); 
Asonuma and Wright (2022); Cheng, Díaz-Cassou, and Erce (2018); Cruces and 
Trebesch (2013); Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2022); IMF (2021); IMF, Global 
Debt Database; Mauro and others (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The unbalanced panel data cover 84 emerging market economies and 
54 low-income countries. Debt restructuring in the ﬁgure corresponds only to 
contributions of face value reduction. Contribution of cash ﬂow relief (for example, 
maturity extension and coupon rate reduction) would be included in contributions 
of primary balance and interest expense. The sample of face value reductions 
consists of restructurings by private external creditors, domestic private creditors 
(1999–2020), and ofﬁcial Paris Club creditors.
Share of countries with debt surges (percent, right scale)
Restructuring with private creditors
Restructuring with Paris Club
Restructuring under DSSI
Restructuring with China
Figure 3.8. Risk of Restructuring
(Number of restructuring episodes, unless noted otherwise)
Restructuring has followed debt surges.
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1970
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
21
Sources: Asonuma and Trebesch (2016); Asonuma and Wright (2022); Horn,
Reinhart, and Trebesch (2022); IMF (2021); IMF, Global Debt Database; Mauro
and others (2013); World Bank, International Debt Statistics; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Unbalanced sample of 123 economies over 1970–2021. DSSI = Debt 
Service Suspension Initiative.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
80
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
as the HIPC and MDRI programs were (1) characterized 
by coordination among creditors, (2) involved deep face 
value reductions, and (3) included IMF-supported pro-
grams. Figure 3.9 (panel 3) illustrates that restructuring 
events with face value reductions have a greater impact 
on the debt-to-GDP ratio, with much of the effect visi-
ble in the first year.
Three caveats need to be considered when interpret-
ing the results. First, the HIPC Initiative and MDRI 
were one-off initiatives. Second, face value reductions 
happen more frequently when the initial debt ratio is 
high.21 Third, about half of restructuring events with 
face value reduction happened under the HIPC Ini-
tiative (Table 3.5), although the stronger effect of face 
value reductions on debt ratios is robust to excluding 
HIPC events from the sample.22
To summarize, debt restructuring in emerging 
market economies and low-income countries can have 
a large, negative, and long-lasting effect on debt ratios 
(see Online Annex 3.5 for similar effects of restructur-
ing beyond five years). This effect is heightened when 
21The average debt ratios one year preceding the event with and 
without face value reductions are 90 and 75 percent, respectively.
22The results are qualitatively similar to those reported in 
Figure 3.9, panel 3, if the treatment includes (1) all non-HIPC 
events (24 events); (2) events that did not include entry into the 
HIPC program within three years of the start of restructuring, 
excluding borderline cases (16 events); or (3) the latter, including 
private external creditors (33 + 16 = 49 events). Notably, an alterna-
tive definition of HIPC treatment based on eligibility at the time of 
the HIPC decision points rather than completion of restructuring 
(20 non-HIPC events instead of 24, or 7 non-HIPC if based on 
an “ever-eligible” HIPC decision point criteria) gives a qualitatively 
similar finding of bigger effects of restructuring events with face 
value reductions on debt ratios. Note that information on face value 
reductions in MDRI programs is not available; hence, the analysis 
includes only non-HIPC treatment.
All restructuring episodes
Joint with consolidation
All restructuring episodes
HIPC and MDRI
All restructuring episodes
Face value reduction
Figure 3.9.  Impact of Restructuring on Debt to GDP
(Percentage point change)
1. Restructuring Joint with Consolidation
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years
2. Restructuring in HIPC Initiative and MDRI
–18
–15
–12
–9
–6
–3
0
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years
3. Restructuring by Face Value Reduction
–18
–15
–12
–9
–6
–3
0
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years
Sources: Asonuma, Niepelt, and Ranciere (2023); Asonuma and Trebesch (2016); 
Asonuma and Wright (2022); Cheng, Díaz-Cassou, and Erce (2018); Cruces and 
Trebesch (2013); Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2022); IMF (2021); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Figure shows the average treatment effect of restructuring on debt to GDP 
using augmented inverse probability weighted estimation. Vertical lines indicate 
the 90 percent conﬁdence interval. X-axis shows the number of years since the 
restructuring event starts. Sample consists of 111 emerging market and 
developing economies from 1987 to 2021. See Online Annex 3.5 for details on the 
estimation of the average treatment effect of restructuring with face value 
reduction. HIPC = Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative; MDRI = Multilateral 
Debt Relief Initiative.
Debt restructuring has a large and long-lasting impact on the debt ratio and is 
more effective when combined with ﬁscal consolidation.
Table 3.5. Restructurings with Face Value Reduction
Observations with Positive Face Value Reduction and Nonmissing Debt to GDP
Restructuring event with FVR
116
  By official Paris Club creditors
83
    HIPC events
59
    Non-HIPC events
24
      Of which, did not enter HIPC within three years
16
        Ultimately became eligible for HIPC
9
        Never became eligible for HIPC
7
  By private external creditors
33
Sources: Asonuma, Niepelt, and Ranciere (2023); Asonuma and Trebesch (2016); 
Asonuma and Wright (2022); Cheng, Díaz-Cassou, and Erce (2018); Cruces and 
Trebesch (2013); Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2022); IMF (2021); and IMF staff 
compilation.
Note: Information on Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative is not included. Because of 
lack of data, none of the episodes in this chapter's sample have face value reductions 
from non–Paris Club official bilateral creditors (China). FVR = face value reduction; 
HIPC = Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
81
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
the restructuring is combined with fiscal consolidation, 
and is implemented through large-scale initiatives with 
coordination mechanisms across creditors.
Comparing Magnitudes
How does the impact of fiscal consolidation on the 
debt ratio compare with that of debt restructuring? 
The previous section and Table 3.6 (last two columns: 
“ATE”) suggest that average restructuring can have a 
much larger effect than fiscal consolidation. But the 
two may not be exactly comparable because their “size” 
is also very different. The average face value reduction 
in the debt ratio is about 4.2 percent of GDP per year 
that the restructuring event lasts, while the average 
successful fiscal consolidation reduces the primary 
balance by only 0.4 percent of GDP (Table 3.6). A 
back-of-the-envelope calculation performed by dividing 
the estimated average treatment effect by the treat-
ment size reveals that, after one year, the impact of a 
successful fiscal consolidation is comparable to that of 
debt restructuring with face value reduction, per “unit” 
of treatment.23 After five years, fiscal consolidations are 
on average more effective according to this metric.
An important caveat from this comparison exercise is 
that fiscal consolidations and restructurings can happen 
under very different circumstances. Even different types 
of restructuring can reflect disparate contexts depending 
on the macroeconomic conditions, type of debt to be 
restructured, creditor preferences, creditor structure, 
and other factors. Ultimate policy choices by countries 
could manifest complex combinations of these factors 
and importantly also reflect the fact that alternatives 
may not be available in practice. However, these issues 
are difficult to capture through econometric analysis 
because of the presence of unobserved variables that 
can affect both policy choices and outcomes. Moreover, 
the results of econometric analysis are based on typical 
historical events and may not capture the subtleties of 
specific cases, which could provide valuable insights for 
the future. For example, debt restructurings conducted 
preemptively (before a default) in the past have typically 
been based on cash flow (but not face value) reductions 
and have rarely been deep (Asonuma, Chamon, and 
23A 1 percentage point face value reduction can decrease the debt 
ratio by, on average, 1.9 percentage points, exceeding the “mechani-
cal” impact on the debt ratio. This is possible when the restructuring 
event has a limited (negative) or positive impact on GDP growth 
and when it is supported by macro policies. In many cases, higher 
inflation and depreciation in exchange rates also contribute.
He 2023). This makes it hard to quantify the impact 
of “deep enough” preemptive restructuring, as events of 
that type have been rare in the past. Therefore, the next 
section complements the analysis by reviewing historical 
experiences of successful and unsuccessful debt reduc-
tions to draw lessons for the future.
Going Granular: Case Studies of Debt 
Restructuring
This section draws on historical policy documents, 
including IMF staff reports, to derive granular policy 
lessons from the experience of countries that experi-
enced a debt restructuring. It considers five specific 
cases: (1) Cyprus, 2014–19; (2) Jamaica, 2010–18; 
(3) Seychelles, 2009–15; (4) Belize, 2012–19; and 
(5) Mozambique, 2016–19. The case studies are 
divided into those in which the debt restructuring 
managed to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio and those 
in which it did not (Table 3.7).24 A key insight from 
the episodes is that public debt restructuring is a 
complex process that involves burden sharing among 
domestic residents, domestic creditors, and foreign 
creditors. In external debt restructurings, the burden 
is primarily shared between residents and foreign 
creditors (for example, Seychelles), while in domes-
tic debt restructurings, it is mostly shared between 
residents and domestic creditors (mainly banks; for 
24The selection of cases was based on inputs from the Debt 
Division of the IMF’s Strategy, Policy, and Review Department. 
These are recent experiences of countries that could offer interesting, 
but also relatively general, insights. Discussions with the correspond-
ing teams assigned to work on each of the countries also provided 
additional insights.
Table 3.6. Impact of Restructuring and Consolidation
(Percentage points)
Size
(FVR/Consolidation)
ATE
1st Year
5th Year
Restructuring (with FVR)
4.2
−7.9
−11.4
Successful Consolidations
0.4
−0.8
−2.5
Sources: Asonuma, Niepelt, and Ranciere (2023); Asonuma and Trebesch 
(2016); Asonuma and Wright (2022); Cheng, Díaz-Cassou, and Erce (2018); 
Cruces and Trebesch (2013); Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2022); IMF 
(2021); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: For better comparison across estimates, size is calculated as the total 
face value reduction in debt divided by the duration of the restructuring event 
in years, then normalized by GDP in the year restructuring negotiations start. 
This value is then averaged across all restructuring events. In successful 
consolidations, size refers to the average reduction in primary balance over 
GDP after a fiscal consolidation. ATE = average treatment effect; FVR = face 
value reduction.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
82
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
example, Cyprus and Jamaica). Restructurings with 
external creditors often occur postdefault and may 
involve face value reductions (possibly for both offi-
cial and private creditors as, for example, in the case 
of Seychelles), which immediately lower debt ratios. 
In restructurings with domestic creditors, financial 
stability concerns play a role, and they are typically 
implemented through cash flow relief with no face 
value reduction. Therefore, reductions in debt ratios 
tend to be gradual. Regardless of the type, one key 
lesson for the future is that restructuring needs to be 
deep to improve its chances of success.
Success in Reducing Public-Debt-to-GDP Ratios
Debt ratios declined substantially in Jamaica and 
Seychelles and modestly in Cyprus, as shown by the 
black squares in Figure 3.10. In Seychelles, the debt 
ratio had reached 180 percent in 2008, concomi-
tant with twin balance of payments and debt crises, 
and a sharp exchange rate depreciation. Debt ratios 
in Jamaica and Cyprus also reached above 140 and 
100 percent, respectively. A sharp exchange rate depre-
ciation combined with low growth during the global 
financial crisis played an important role in the increase 
in the debt ratio in Jamaica. In turn, a deterioration in 
the fiscal stance and financial assistance to the banking 
sector were key factors affecting increases in the debt 
ratio in Cyprus.25
In Seychelles, the ratio declined rapidly and sharply 
to 84 percent in 2010. This happened immediately 
after debt restructurings with both official Paris Club 
and private external creditors that involved a large 
reduction in face value of debt.26 Prudent fiscal policy 
combined with high inflation helped in sustaining 
the reduction in debt ratios (Figure 3.10). In Cyprus 
and Jamaica, debt ratios did not fall immediately after 
domestic debt restructurings (2013 for Cyprus and 
2010 and 2013 for Jamaica), which did not involve 
face value reductions. Yet in the case of Jamaica, the 
cash flow relief from restructuring was deep and was 
saved, with the debt-to-GDP ratio declining signifi-
cantly to 100 percent by 2018. In contrast, the cash 
flow relief from restructuring was only modest in 
Cyprus, and the debt-to-GDP ratio declined by less, 
to about 90 percent by 2019. Fiscal consolidation (red 
bars in Figure 3.10) contributed in both cases, as the 
debt service relief was partly saved. A recovery in GDP 
25The evolution of debt and its correlates over time for each of the 
case studies are reported in Online Annex 3.7.
26Interestingly, Seychelles achieved sizable face value reductions 
when foreign creditors were experiencing unfavorable business and 
financial cycles. See Asonuma and Joo (2020) for the role of foreign 
creditors in sovereign debt restructurings.
Table 3.7. Case Study Summary
Success in Reducing Public Debt to GDP
Debt Remained Elevated or Increased
Seychelles, 2009–15
Jamaica, 2010–18
Cyprus, 2014–19
Belize, 2012–19
Mozambique, 2016–19
Types of Creditors
External private/official Domestic
Domestic
External private
External private
Types of Restructuring Postdefault
Preemptive
Preemptive
(1) Preemptive
(2) Preemptive
(1) Preemptive
(2) Postdefault
Debt Treatment
Face value reduction
(1) Cash flow relief 
with no face value 
reduction1
(2) Cash flow relief 
with no face value 
reduction1
Cash flow relief 
with no face value 
reduction1
(1) Small face value 
reduction
(2) Cash flow relief 
with no face value 
reduction1
(1) Cash flow relief 
with no face value 
reduction1
(2) Cash flow relief 
with no face value 
reduction1
Main Drivers of Debt 
Reduction
(1) Fiscal consolidation
(2) GDP growth
(3) Debt restructuring 
(face value 
reduction)
(4) Inflation
(5) Exchange rate 
depreciation
(1) Fiscal consolidation
(2) Inflation2
(1) Fiscal consolidation 
(2) GDP growth 
GDP growth
(1) GDP growth
(2) Inflation2
IMF-Supported 
Program
Yes 
Yes
Yes
No
No (offtrack immediately)
Source: IMF staff compilation.
1Cash flow relief with no face value reduction corresponds to maturity extension, reduction in coupon payments, or both. 
2Inflation contributed to reduce public debt to GDP by 40 percentage points and 30 percentage points in Jamaica and Mozambique, respectively, though the 
positive contribution of nominal interest expenses by 40 percentage points and 30 percentage points completely offset the impacts. 
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
83
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
growth in Cyprus (dark blue bars) and high inflation 
in Jamaica (light blue bars) played important roles in 
debt reduction, though the positive contribution of 
nominal interest expenses almost offset the impact of 
inflation in Jamaica.
To summarize, in successful cases, debt restruc-
turings contributed significantly to reducing pub-
lic debt ratios, either directly (through face value 
reduction, for example, by 25 percentage points in 
Seychelles) or indirectly (through debt service relief 
and fiscal consolidation in Cyprus and Jamaica). The 
possibility of success of (deep enough) preemptive 
restructuring executed through cash flow relief, rather 
than face value reductions, is illustrated by the case 
of Jamaica.27
Economic growth also contributed to reducing debt 
ratios in all these experiences—by more than 20 per-
centage points in both Cyprus and Seychelles and by 
7 percentage points in Jamaica (Figure 3.10). Finally, 
inflation also played an important role, contributing 
to the reduction by 50 percentage points in Seychelles 
and by 70 percentage points in Jamaica, though the 
positive contribution of nominal interest expenses 
offset the impact on debt—partly in Seychelles and 
completely in Jamaica (Figure 3.10).
Debt Remaining Elevated or Increased
It is also instructive to review experiences of coun-
tries that did not succeed in reducing debt, as these 
may offer a cautionary tale for countries currently 
struggling with high public debt. Public debt in Belize 
and Mozambique remained elevated despite two 
sequential debt restructurings in both (2012–13 and 
2016–17 in Belize, 2015–16 and 2016–19 in Mozam-
bique). Debt ratios remained at above 90 percent in 
both countries as of 2019.28
27This is typically not the case based on historical events, 
econometric analysis of which finds that restructurings executed 
postdefault and with face value reductions to be more effective in 
reducing debt ratios.
28Prior to this, Belize had another debt restructuring in 2006–07 
that reduced public debt more durably, with public debt in 2011 
being 5 percentage points of GDP lower than in 2006. While 
the episode is not considered as a case study here, Belize has been 
successful at reducing public debt more recently following a surge 
from the COVID-19 crisis. Public debt declined to 64 percent of 
GDP in 2022 as a result of sizable fiscal consolidation, a debt swap 
with The Nature Conservancy for marine protection, a discount on 
debt owed to Venezuela under Petrocaribe, and a strong rebound in 
economic activity.
While restructuring was executed through cash flow 
relief with no face value reduction in both countries, 
the resulting debt service relief was, in fact, used to 
support expansionary public expenditure. Whereas 
Belize did not request an IMF-supported program, the 
request from Mozambique was approved in December 
2015, but the program was interrupted soon thereaf-
ter. Transfers to state-owned enterprises resulted in a 
substantial increase in the debt ratio in Mozambique, 
by 13.8 percentage points (Figure 3.10).
Overall, the main lesson that emerges from the 
review of historical experiences of debt restructur-
ings is that, for a sizable and durable reduction in 
debt ratios, restructurings need to be deep enough, 
no matter how they are executed, and need to be 
combined with a comprehensive set of fiscal and 
growth-enhancing reforms.
Conclusions and Policy Implications
This section summarizes the main findings of the 
chapter and outlines key lessons for countries currently 
facing the challenge of high public debt burdens.
First, adequately timed (for example, during 
economic expansions) and appropriately designed 
Change in debt to GDP
Primary balance
Real GDP growth
Nominal interest expense
Debt restructuring
Inﬂation
Exchange rate depreciation
Residuals
–250
–200
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
Seychelles
2009–15
Jamaica
2010–18
Cyprus
2014–19
Belize
2012–19
Mozambique
2016–19
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure reports a decomposition of cumulative change in debt to GDP by 
conventional debt drivers for each episode. See Online Annex 3.7 for further 
details.
Primary balance and inﬂation rate are main drivers of public debt reduction in 
Seychelles and Jamaica.
Figure 3.10.  Decomposition of Cumulative Change in Debt to 
GDP
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
84
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
(for example, growth friendly—which in advanced 
economies includes involving more expenditure- than 
revenue-based measures) fiscal consolidations have 
a high probability of durably reducing debt ratios. 
The average successful fiscal consolidation in the data 
(equal to 0.4 percentage point of GDP) reduces debt 
ratios by 0.7 percentage point during its first year 
and, cumulatively, by up to 2.1 percentage points 
after five years. The debt-reducing effects of fiscal 
adjustments are reinforced when accompanied by 
growth-enhancing structural reforms and strong insti-
tutional frameworks. At the same time, because these 
conditions and accompanying policies are not always 
present, and because fiscal consolidation tends to slow 
GDP growth, on average, fiscal consolidations have a 
negligible effect on debt ratios.
Second, the impact of restructuring (which 
occurs mostly in emerging market economies and 
low-income countries) on debt ratios can be sizable 
and long-lasting. The average observed restructuring 
reduces debt ratios by 3.4 percentage points in the first 
year and, cumulatively, 8.0 percentage points after five 
years. The impact is more immediate when the restruc-
turing is implemented through a face value reduction 
and stronger when combined with fiscal consolidation.
Third, selected case studies of countries that experi-
enced debt restructuring offer both instructive lessons 
and cautionary guidance. All cases studied emphasized 
the importance of medium-term fiscal consolidation. 
Fiscal consolidation played an important role even in 
cases that involved significant face value reductions. 
It can also help to persuade external creditors to agree 
to a reduction in the nominal value of debt. For debt 
restructurings that were carried out preemptively with 
domestic creditors and involved debt service relief, 
fiscal consolidation was vital in gradually reducing 
debt ratios.
Finally, both economic growth and inflation play 
an important role in reducing debt ratios. The results 
from this chapter complement the messages from 
related work (April 2023 Fiscal Monitor), including 
the importance of inflation and the scope of structural 
reforms to promote growth, which ultimately reduces 
debt ratios.
Turning to the policy implications, when a mod-
erate and gradual reduction in debt ratios is viable, 
well-designed fiscal consolidation, beyond automatic 
stabilizers or what would be implemented during 
economic cycles, along with growth-friendly structural 
reforms, is appropriate. Such fiscal consolidation 
should ideally coincide with domestic recovery, favor-
able external conditions, or both.
Some countries facing high risks of debt distress or 
increased rollover risks may have no viable alterna-
tive other than a substantial or rapid debt reduction. 
These countries will require sustained and comple-
mentary policy actions. Fiscal consolidation will likely 
be needed to regain market confidence and recover 
macroeconomic stability. In addition, debt restruc-
turing should also be considered in a timely way, and 
if pursued, will need to be deep to be successful in 
reducing debt ratios. Countries typically do not weigh 
fiscal, structural, and debt restructuring equally in 
their decisions. Instead, they design a macroeconomic 
program (fiscal and growth-enhancing structural 
reforms), and if this does not work convincingly, then 
restructuring may be considered as a last-resort option. 
This chapter suggests that all policies that help reduce 
debt may have to be considered from the outset. 
Although historical events have not typically included 
deep-enough restructurings carried out preemptively, 
Jamaica provides an example in which debt ratios were 
reduced significantly with early and deep restructur-
ings that were executed through cash flow relief. In 
contrast, the case of Belize suggests that even when 
treatment is undertaken early, if it is not deep enough, 
debt could remain elevated.
Debt restructuring is an altogether different process 
from other policies to reduce debt. Restructuring is 
always complex, takes time, requires mutual agreement 
between creditors and debtors, and involves burden 
sharing among various parties. Mechanisms that 
promote coordination and confidence among credi-
tors and debtors are required for debt restructurings 
to reduce debt ratios. Improving the G20 Common 
Framework, with greater predictability on steps in the 
process, earlier engagement with official and private 
creditors, a debt service payment standstill during 
negotiations, and further clarification on comparabil-
ity of treatment, could help. Nevertheless, countries 
must still put a priority on debt management and 
transparency to manage risks and reduce the need for 
restructuring, which is in the interest of both debtors 
and creditors.
Although the chapter documents the significance of 
inflation in reducing debt ratios, this does not suggest 
that high inflation is a desirable tool. High inflation, 
even if it is unanticipated, can become entrenched in 
higher expectations of price increases and exchange rate 
depreciations, raise the burden of future debt issuance, 
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
85
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
generate monetary instability, lead to loss of reputa-
tion, and in the end affect the credibility of institu-
tions, including central banks.
Ultimately, strong institutions are crucial to 
durable debt reduction. Robust fiscal and monetary 
frameworks can prevent operations that undermine 
debt reduction efforts and help countries benefit 
from global forces pushing down the natural interest 
rate (Box 3.2). Developing a credible medium-term 
fiscal framework can help countries manage high 
debt as they undertake fiscal adjustments to rebuild 
buffers (Gaspar, Obstfeld, and Sahay 2016; Caselli 
and others 2022). Finally, a medium-term debt 
management strategy can provide a structured 
approach for governments to evaluate costs and risks 
associated with financing options.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
86
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Market reforms in emerging market and developing 
economies may offer a valuable policy tool for promot-
ing growth and debt sustainability. By improving the 
functioning of product, labor, and financial markets, 
such reforms have the potential to stimulate growth 
and reduce debt ratios.1
Beyond the reduction in debt ratios arising from 
an increase in GDP, the impact of market reforms on 
public debt dynamics is not obvious. By improving 
the business environment, reforms can increase the 
tax base and generate additional resources. But they 
can also lead to a loss of revenue through measures 
such as trade tariff reductions. Similarly, borrowing 
costs could decline if reforms ease access to interna-
tional markets and boost external confidence. But 
costs could also increase if reforms tackle domes-
tic financial repression or require compensatory 
spending, for example, to alleviate adverse distribu-
tional effects.
An analysis of 62 emerging market and develop-
ing economies during 1970–2014 shows that market 
reforms have been associated with both increased GDP 
and reduced debt (Figure 3.1.1). A one-standard-­
deviation increase in an indicator of reforms is estimated 
to lead to a 0.6 percent increase in real GDP over five 
years and a medium-term reduction in the ratio of pub-
lic debt to GDP of 1.5 percentage points. Importantly, 
this means the effect of structural reforms on the debt 
ratio is much more than simply a denominator effect.
The findings also suggest that reforms lead to 
increased revenues and lower sovereign spreads, but 
The authors of this box are Gabriela Cugat, Futoshi Narita, 
and Carlo Pizzinelli. The box draws from a forthcoming IMF 
Staff Discussion Note (Aligishiev and others, forthcoming) 
as part of a project on macroeconomic policy in low-income 
countries with the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Develop-
ment Office (FCDO). The views expressed herein should not be 
attributed to the FCDO.
1There are other equally important reform areas that are not 
considered (such as education, health, infrastructure frame-
works), as well as fiscal reforms (for example, tax systems, public 
financial management, pension systems).
also higher public consumption, with only a small and 
temporary improvement in the overall fiscal balance. 
Countries with a more efficient value-added tax tend 
to experience greater fiscal gains from reforms.
To protect the fiscal gains from these reforms, 
it’s crucial to direct the additional revenue toward 
growth-friendly public investments and enhance the 
tax base through tax collection efficiency.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years
Median
10th–90th percentile range
1. Real GDP
(Percent)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
2. Public Debt to GDP
(Percentage points)
–3.0
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years
Source: Aligishiev and others (forthcoming).
Note: Cumulative effect after a one-standard-deviation shock.
Figure 3.1.1.  Empirical Impulse Response 
upon Structural Reforms
Box 3.1. Market Reforms to Promote Growth and Debt Sustainability
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
87
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
At the current juncture of high inflation and tighter 
(relative to pre-pandemic) worldwide financial condi-
tions, an increasing number of economies with high 
debts are facing difficult trade-offs among inflation, 
debt servicing costs, and monetary and fiscal tight-
ening. This box studies monetary and fiscal interac-
tions and finds that the effects of recent increases in 
inflation and nominal interest rates on debt service 
burdens may be somewhat limited for most advanced 
economies and for emerging market and developing 
economies with strong institutions. The response 
of the effective rate (defined as the interest expense 
divided by the previous period’s debt stock)—the rate 
that is relevant for servicing debt burdens—to changes 
in the inflation rate is considered first. Estimates 
show that an increase in consumer price inflation of 
1 percentage point lowers the effective real rate by 
about 0.5 percentage point on impact and does not 
lead to a higher effective real rate across the horizon 
(Figure 3.2.1). This is in line with the findings in the 
April 2023 Fiscal Monitor, which goes into greater 
detail and notes that inflation spikes may durably 
reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio, but rises in expected 
inflation do not.
Central banks around the world have lifted policy 
rates considerably since 2021 and put an end to the 
era of ultralow nominal rates. What are the implica-
tions of the current environment for governments’ 
debt servicing? An increase in the real spot market rate 
for a 10-year government bond of 100 basis points 
(bps) is, in fact, associated with an increase in the 
effective real rate of only about 20 bps, on average, on 
impact (Figure 3.2.1). Among emerging market and 
developing economies with weaker institutional frame-
works and those without an inflation-targeting central 
bank, however, the point estimate increases to about 
60 bps. Overall, a rise in spot rates therefore feeds into 
effective rates far less than one to one.
One reason behind these findings could be the 
increase in average maturity of outstanding debt in 
recent years. In addition, central bank credibility may 
The authors of this box are Josef Platzer and Francisco Roch.
help keep inflation expectations anchored. Hence, 
inflation and higher interest rates permeate debt 
service costs only slowly. The share of central govern-
ment debt maturing in 12 months or less, though, has 
increased over the past five years in both advanced and 
emerging market and developing economies, which 
could leave countries more vulnerable to rollover risks.
Persistent inflationary pressures pose the risk of a 
“high for long” interest rate environment. However, 
over a longer time frame, and once inflation pres-
sures have subsided, equilibrium real interest rates are 
expected to remain low on account of structural forces 
(see Chapter 2), which should also help keep real debt 
servicing costs in check.
Response to higher inﬂation
Response to higher long-term real rate
Figure 3.2.1.  Estimated Response of Effective 
Real Interest Rate
(Percentage points)
–0.75
–0.50
–0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Response of effective real rate in percentage points at 
different horizons to 1 percentage point change in long-term 
real rate and inﬂation rate, respectively. Shaded area shows 
95 percent conﬁdence interval. X-axis represents number of 
years after the interest rate change. The sample comprises 
both advanced economies and emerging market and 
developing economies and covers annual data from 1970 to 
2021. See Online Annex 3.8 for deﬁnitions and details on 
local projections estimated.
Box 3.2. Monetary and Fiscal Interactions
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
88
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
References
Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. 
2019. “Effects of Austerity: Expenditure and 
Tax-Based Approaches.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 33 (2): 141–62.
Aligishiev, Zamid, Gabriela Cugat, Romain Duval, Davide 
Furceri, João Tovar Jalles, Florence Jaumotte, Margaux 
MacDonald, and others. Forthcoming. “Market Reforms and 
Public Debt Sustainability in Emerging Market and Devel-
oping Economies.” IMF Staff Discussion Note, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Antolín-Díaz, Juan, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez. 2018. 
“Narrative Sign Restrictions for SVARs.” American Economic 
Review 108 (10): 2802–29.
Asonuma, Tamon, Marcos Chamon, Aitor Erce, and Akira 
Sasahara. 2021. “Costs of Sovereign Defaults: Restructuring 
Strategies and Financial Intermediation.” Luiss School of 
European Political Economy Working Paper 10/2021, Luiss 
School of European Political Economy, Rome.
Asonuma, Tamon, Marcos Chamon, and Chang He. 2023. 
“‘Too Little’ Sovereign Debt Restructurings.” Unpublished, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Asonuma, Tamon, and Hyungseok Joo. 2020. “Sovereign Debt 
Restructurings: Delays in Renegotiations and Risk Averse 
Creditors.” Journal of the European Economic Association 
18 (5): 2394–440.
Asonuma, Tamon, Dirk Niepelt, and Romain Ranciere. 2023. 
“Sovereign Bond Prices, Haircuts and Maturity.” Journal of 
International Economics 140: 103689.
Asonuma, Tamon, and Michael Papaioannou. Forthcoming. 
“External Sovereign Debt Restructurings and Economic 
Consequences: What Do We Know?” In Private Debt, edited 
by Moritz Schlarick.
Asonuma, Tamon, and Christoph Trebesch. 2016. “Sover-
eign Debt Restructurings: Preemptive or Post-default.” 
Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (1): 
175–214.
Asonuma, Tamon, and Mark L. J. Wright. 2022. “Sovereign 
Borrowing and Debt Restructurings: Multilateral, Bilateral 
and Private External Debt.” Unpublished, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN, and International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Balasundharam, Vybhavi, Olivier Basdevant, Dalmacio 
Benicio, Andrew Ceber, Yujin Kim, Luca Mazzone, Hoda 
Selim, and Yongzheng Zhang. 2023. “Fiscal Consolidation: 
Taking Stock of Success Factors, Impact, and Design.” 
IMF Working Paper 23/63, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Beetsma, Roel, Jacopo Cimadomo, Oana Furtuna, and Massimo 
Giuliodori. 2015. “The Confidence Effects of Fiscal Consoli-
dations.” Economic Policy 30 (83): 439–89.
Canova, Fabio, and Filippo Ferroni. 2022. “A Hitchhiker’s 
Guide to Empirical Macro Models.”
Carrière-Swallow, Yan, Antonio C. David, and Daniel Leigh. 
2021. “Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation in 
Emerging Economies: New Narrative Evidence from Latin 
America and the Caribbean.” Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking 53 (6): 1313–35.
Caselli, Francesca, Hamid Davoodi, Carlos Goncalves, Gee Hee 
Hong, Andresa Lagerborg, Paulo Medas, Anh Dinh Minh 
Nguyen, and Jiae Yoo. 2022. “The Return to Fiscal Rules.” 
IMF Staff Discussion Notes 22/02, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Cheng, Gong, Javier Díaz-Cassou, and Aitor Erce. 2018. “Official 
Debt Restructurings and Development.” World Development 
111: 181–95.
Chuku, Chuku, Joyce Saito, Prateek Samal, Dalia Hakura, 
Marcos Chamon, Martin Cerisola, Guillaume Chabert, 
and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2023. “Debt Vulnerabilities in 
Low-Income Countries: How Do They Compare with the 
Pre-HIPC Era?” Unpublished, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Cruces, Juan, and Christoph Trebesch. 2013. “Sovereign 
Defaults: The Price of Haircuts.” American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics 5 (3): 85–117.
Das, Udaibir S., Michael G. Papaioannou, and Christoph Trebesch. 
2012. “Sovereign Debt Restructurings 1950–2010: Literature 
Survey, Data and Stylized Facts.” IMF Working Paper 12/203, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Devries, Pete, Jaime Guajardo, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pesca-
tori. 2011. “A New Action-Based Dataset of Fiscal Consoli-
dation.” IMF Working Paper 11/128, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Gaspar, Vitor, Maurice Obstfeld, and Ratna Sahay. 2016. 
“Macroeconomic Management When Policy Space Is Con-
strained: A Comprehensive, Consistent, and Coordinated 
Approach to Economic Policy.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 
16/09, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2014. 
“Expansionary Austerity? International Evidence.” Journal of 
the European Economic Association 12 (4): 949–68.
Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan. 2002. “Dissecting the Cycle: 
A Methodological Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Econom-
ics 49 (2): 365–81.
Horn, Sebastian, Carmen Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch. 
2022. “Hidden Defaults.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 
112: 531–35.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique Mendoza, and Carlos Vegh. 2013. 
“How Big (Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?” Journal of 
Monetary Economics 60 (2): 239–54.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2013. “Italy 2013 
Article IV Staff Report.” International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2014. Government Finance 
Statistics Manual 2014. Washington, DC: International 
Monetary Fund.
CHAPTER 3 
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
89
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. “Mexico 2016 
Article IV Staff Report.” International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2017. “Greece 2016 
Article IV Staff Report.” International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021. “Issues in Restructur-
ing of Sovereign Domestic Debt.” Policy Paper, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Jordà, Òscar, and Alan M. Taylor. 2016. “The Time for 
Austerity: Estimating the Average Treatment Effect of Fiscal 
Policy.” Economic Journal 126: 219–55.
Kirchner, Markus, Jacopo Cimadomo, and Sebastian Hauptmeier. 
2010. “Transmission of Government Spending Shocks in the 
Euro Area: Time Variation and Driving Forces.” ECB Working 
Paper Series 1219, European Central Bank, Frankfurt.
Mauro, Paolo, Rafael Romeu, Ariel Binder, and Asad Zaman. 
2013, “A Modern History of Fiscal Prudence and Profligacy.” 
IMF Working Paper 13/5, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Mountford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig. 2009. “What Are 
the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?” Journal of Applied 
Econometrics 24 (6): 960–92.
Peralta Alva, Adrian, Xuan Song Tam, Xin Tang, and Marina 
Mendes Tavares. 2018. “The Welfare Implications of 
Fiscal Consolidations in Low-Income Countries.” IMF 
Working Paper 18/146, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
91
Supply-chain disruptions and rising geopolitical tensions 
have brought the risks and potential benefits and costs 
of geoeconomic fragmentation to the center of the policy 
debate. This chapter studies how such fragmentation can 
reshape the geography of foreign direct investment (FDI) 
and, in turn, how FDI fragmentation can affect the 
global economy. The recent slowdown in FDI has been 
characterized by divergent patterns across host countries, 
with flows increasingly concentrated among geopolitically 
aligned countries, particularly in strategic sectors. Several 
emerging market and developing economies are highly 
vulnerable to FDI relocation, given their reliance on FDI 
from geopolitically distant countries. In the long term, 
FDI fragmentation arising from the emergence of geopolit-
ical blocs can generate large output losses. These losses may 
be especially severe for emerging market and developing 
economies facing heightened restrictions from advanced 
economies, which are their major sources of FDI. Mul-
tilateral efforts to preserve global integration are the best 
way to reduce the large and widespread economic costs of 
FDI fragmentation. When multilateral agreements are not 
feasible, multilateral consultations and processes to miti-
gate the spillover effects of unilateral policies are required. 
In a more fragmented world, some countries could reduce 
their vulnerability by promoting private sector develop-
ment, while others could take advantage of the diversion 
of investment flows to attract new FDI by undertak-
ing structural reforms and improving infrastructure.
Introduction
Rising geopolitical tensions and the uneven distri-
bution of the gains from globalization have contrib-
uted to increasing skepticism toward multilateralism 
and to the growing appeal of inward-looking policies 
(Colantone and Stanig 2018; Rodrik 2018; Autor 
The authors of this chapter are JaeBin Ahn, Benjamin Carton, 
Ashique Habib, Davide Malacrino, Dirk Muir, and Andrea 
Presbitero, under the guidance of Shekhar Aiyar, and with support 
from Shan Chen, Youyou Huang, Carlos Morales, Chao Wang, and 
Ilse Peirtsegaele. The chapter benefited from comments by Richard 
Baldwin and seminar participants and reviewers. Eswar Prasad was a 
consultant for the project.
and others 2020; Pastor and Veronesi 2021). Brexit, 
trade tensions between the US and China, and Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine pose a challenge to international 
relations and could lead to policy-driven reversal of 
global economic integration, a process referred to as 
geoeconomic fragmentation. This process encom-
passes different channels, including trade, capital, 
and migration flows.1 This chapter focuses on one 
specific channel—the fragmentation of foreign direct 
investment (FDI), which is cross-border investment 
through which foreign investors establish a stable and 
long-lasting influence over domestic enterprises.
A slowdown in globalization—often referred to as 
“slowbalization”—is not new. For most countries it 
dates to the aftermath of the global financial crisis 
(Antràs 2021; Baldwin 2022). A decrease in FDI has 
been particularly visible, with global FDI declining 
from 3.3 percent of GDP in the 2000s to 1.3 percent 
between 2018 and 2022 (Figure 4.1; see also 
UNCTAD 2022 for an overview of recent trends in 
FDI). While a range of factors have contributed to this 
protracted phase of slowbalization, the fragmentation 
of capital flows along geopolitical fault lines and the 
potential emergence of regional geopolitical blocs are 
novel elements that could have large negative spillovers 
to the global economy.
Firms and policymakers are increasingly looking at 
strategies for moving production processes to trusted 
countries with aligned political preferences to make 
supply chains less vulnerable to geopolitical tensions.2 
1Aiyar and others (2023) present signs of geoeconomic fragmen-
tation along different dimensions (for example, trade, capital flows, 
and reassessments of geopolitical risk), analyze several channels 
through which such fragmentation could propagate through the 
global economy, and discuss how the rules-based multilateral system 
must adapt to the changing world. See the April 2023 Global 
Financial Stability Report for an analysis of the effects of geoeco-
nomic fragmentation on non-FDI flows, with implications for 
financial stability and macro volatility.
2The term “reshoring” refers to a country’s transfer of (part of the) 
global supply chain back home (or geographically closer to home in 
the case of “nearshoring”). “Friend-shoring” limits supply-chain net-
works and the sourcing of inputs to countries allied with the home 
country and trusted partners that share similar values. The chapter 
uses these terms in relation to the decision to relocate FDI (rather 
than to the more general decision of where to source inputs).
CHAPTER
4
GEOECONOMIC FRAGMENTATION AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
92
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
A text-mining analysis of earnings call reports from 
a large sample of multinational corporations shows 
a sharp spike in firms’ interest in reshoring and 
friend-shoring (Figure 4.2), occurring at the same time 
that the average geopolitical distance across country 
pairs started increasing. Recently, US Treasury Sec-
retary Janet Yellen (2022) argued that rather than 
relying heavily on countries with which the US has 
geopolitical tensions, US firms should move toward 
friend-shoring of supply chains to a large number of 
trusted countries. In Europe, the French government 
has been urging the EU to accelerate production 
targets, weaken state aid rules, and develop a “Made 
in Europe” strategy to counter domestic production 
subsidies provided by the US Inflation Reduction Act 
(Tamma and Stolton 2023). In China, too, govern-
ment directives aim to replace imported technology 
with local alternatives to reduce dependence on geo-
political rivals (Bloomberg News 2022). Rising interest 
in reshoring is a significant reversal of the division 
of production pursued through offshoring, driven 
predominantly by differences in labor and input costs 
(Feenstra 1998; Antràs and Yeaple 2014).
The importance of friend-shoring goes 
beyond just announcements and translates into 
investment-screening measures motivated by national 
security purposes (UNCTAD 2023). Recent large-scale 
policies implemented by major countries to strengthen 
domestic strategic manufacturing sectors suggest 
that a shift in cross-border capital flows is about to 
take place. Most notable is a series of recent bills 
adopted against the backdrop of rising US-China trade 
tensions—such as the Creating Helpful Incentives to 
Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) and Science Act 
and the Inflation Reduction Act in the US and the 
European Chips Act—that could affect multinational 
corporations’ production and sourcing strategies, 
prompting efforts to reconfigure their supply-chain 
networks (Box 4.1).
This reconfiguration of supply chains could poten-
tially strengthen domestic security and help maintain a 
technological advantage. It may also increase diver-
sification, provided the existing supply of inputs is 
concentrated in a single or a small number of foreign 
suppliers, such that domestic and close-country sourc-
ing would increase the number of available options. 
However, as most countries exhibit a marked degree 
of home bias in sourcing of inputs (see Chapter 4 of 
the April 2022 World Economic Outlook), in most cases 
reshoring or friend-shoring to existing partners will 
likely reduce diversification and make countries more 
vulnerable to macroeconomic shocks.
This chapter studies how geoeconomic fragmenta-
tion could affect the global economy through a shift 
in the geographic footprint of FDI. While a grow-
ing literature investigates the costs of geoeconomic 
Trade in goods and services
Gross foreign direct
investment (right scale)
Figure 4.1.  “Slowbalization”
(Percent of GDP)
Foreign direct investment sharply declined after the global ﬁnancial crisis.
Global
ﬁnancial
crisis
1980
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
22
25
35
45
55
65
0
1
3
2
4
5
6
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Geopolitical risk (annual average, 1985–2019 = 100)
Interest in reshoring (right scale)
US-China
trade war
COVID-19
Ukraine
war
Figure 4.2.  Rising Geopolitical Tensions and Foreign Direct 
Investment Fragmentation
(Index; frequency of mentions of reshoring on right scale)
Recent years have seen increasing geopolitical risk and companies’ interest in 
reshoring and friend-shoring.
2005
08
11
14
17
20
22
60
100
140
180
0
3
6
9
Sources: Bailey, Strezhnev, and Voeten (2017); Hassan and others (2019); NL 
Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The interest in reshoring measures the frequency of mentions of reshoring, 
friend-shoring, or near-shoring in ﬁrms’ earnings calls.
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
93
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
fragmentation through trade and technological 
decoupling,3 existing work has not yet looked directly 
at FDI fragmentation. But this is likely to be a relevant 
channel through which the emergence of geopolit-
ical blocs could have global spillovers. In fact, FDI 
accounts for a substantial share of domestic capital 
stock globally—about 12 percent, on average—and is 
generally associated with knowledge transfer to domes-
tic firms and economic growth, especially in emerging 
market and developing economies (Alfaro and others 
2004; Javorcik 2004; Kose and others 2009). A reloca-
tion of FDI closer to source countries could have direct 
negative effects on current host economies through 
lower capital and technological deepening, as firms 
expressing interest in reshoring and friend-shoring 
tend to be on average larger, more profitable, and more 
knowledge-intensive (Figure 4.3).
Against this backdrop, this chapter starts by looking 
for early signs of FDI fragmentation, using detailed 
bilateral investment-level data on FDI from 2003 
to the end of 2022. It investigates two questions: 
(1) Is there any evidence of reallocation of FDI across 
countries, indicating that flows are becoming more 
fragmented? and (2) Do geopolitical factors contribute 
to explaining bilateral FDI flows, so that countries 
deepen their integration with friends and reduce 
their reliance on foes? The chapter develops a multi-
dimensional index of countries’ vulnerability to FDI 
relocation combining information on the geopolitical 
distance between source and host countries, share of 
strategic sector investment in total FDI inflows, and 
degree of market power enjoyed by the host country.
Next, the chapter turns to quantifying the potential 
costs of FDI fragmentation and their distribution across 
countries. To understand the channels through which a 
potential unwinding of FDI could affect host coun-
tries, the chapter empirically examines FDI spillovers, 
taking both macro- and micro-level approaches. An 
extensive literature on the economic effects of FDI on 
host countries does not deliver consistent results when 
simply looking at aggregate flows (Bénétrix, Pallan, and 
Panizza 2022). The chapter extends this literature by 
conducting a country-level analysis of the relationship 
between GDP growth and FDI separately for horizontal 
3See, among others, Cerdeiro and others (2021); Eppinger and 
others (2021); Felbermayr, Mahlkow, and Sandkamp (2022); 
Giammetti and others (2022); Góes and Bekkers (2022); and Javorcik 
and others (2022). A related literature looks at the effects of Brexit and 
the 2018–19 US-China trade war; see Caliendo and Parro (2021) and 
Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2022) for an extensive review.
and vertical investment, as the latter is more likely to be 
affected by geoeconomic fragmentation. A subsequent 
firm-level analysis combines investment-level FDI data 
with a large sample of cross-country firm-level surveys 
to identify potential spillovers to firm labor productivity 
within and across sectors along the value chain.
Finally, the chapter calibrates a number of illustra-
tive hypothetical scenarios to provide a sense of the 
possible long-term economic implications of FDI frag-
mentation using a multiregion dynamic stochastic gen-
eral equilibrium (DSGE) model. It employs scenarios 
to explore the distribution of costs and benefits across 
economies, including those from spillovers through 
external demand and the reallocation of production 
capacity. Fragmentation is modeled as a permanent rise 
in investment barriers between opposing geopolitical 
blocs centered on the two largest economies (China 
and the US), with economies pursuing a nonaligned 
path potentially facing heightened uncertainty.
The main conclusions from the chapter 
are as follows:
•• The recent slowdown in FDI has been character-
ized by divergent patterns across host countries, 
particularly when considering investment in 
strategic sectors, like semiconductors. FDI flows 
are increasingly concentrated among countries that 
are geopolitically aligned. The role of geopolitical 
No mention of reshoring
With mention of reshoring
Figure 4.3.  Interest in Reshoring and Firm Characteristics
Firms more likely to reshore are larger and more productive.
Number of
employees
Sales
(dollars, logarithm)
Intangible assets
(share of total
assets)
Proﬁtability
(EBIT to assets)
–5
10
20
30
5
0
15
25
Sources: Compustat; Hassan and others (2019); NL Analytics; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Simple averages across ﬁrms that mentioned or did not mention reshoring, 
friend-shoring, and near-shoring in earnings calls. Differences across groups are 
statistically signiﬁcant. EBIT = earnings before interest and taxes.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
94
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
alignment in driving the geographic footprint of 
FDI is particularly relevant for emerging market and 
developing economies and has increased since 2018, 
with the resurgence of trade tensions between the 
US and China. Thus, if geopolitical tensions were 
to increase and countries were to move farther apart 
along geopolitical fault lines, FDI is likely to become 
more concentrated within blocs of aligned countries. 
Efforts to preserve a multilateral dialogue are needed 
to keep FDI fragmentation from increasing.
•• Analysis from a multidimensional index of vulner-
ability to FDI relocation suggests that, on average, 
emerging market and developing economies are 
more vulnerable to such relocation than advanced 
economies. This is mostly because of emerging mar-
ket and developing economies’ reliance on FDI from 
countries with which they are relatively unaligned 
geopolitically. Several large emerging markets, 
across different regions, show high vulnerabilities to 
relocation of FDI, indicating that the fragmentation 
scenario is not a risk only for a few countries. As 
better regulatory quality is associated with lower 
vulnerability, countries could mitigate their exposure 
to FDI relocation by introducing policies and regu-
lations to promote private sector development.
•• A further contraction in FDI and a shift in its geo-
graphic distribution would likely have large negative 
effects on host countries, through lower capital accu-
mulation and technological deepening. The chapter 
finds that vertical FDI, more likely to be targeted by 
policies aimed at friend-shoring investment in strate-
gic sectors, is associated with economic growth, not 
least because of its knowledge-intensive nature. The 
entry of multinational corporations also directly bene-
fits domestic firms. In advanced economies, increased 
competition from foreign firms pushes domestic firms 
to become more productive. In emerging market and 
developing economies, domestic suppliers benefit 
from technology transfers and increased local demand 
for inputs from foreign firms in downstream sectors.
•• Illustrative model-based scenarios suggest that FDI 
fragmentation—modeled as a permanent rise in 
cross-bloc barriers to importing investment inputs—
could substantially reduce global output, by about 
2 percent in the long term. Simulations of various 
hypothetical scenarios suggest that the losses are 
likely to be unevenly distributed, with emerging 
market and developing economies with reduced 
access to advanced economies particularly affected, 
through both lower capital formation and reduced 
productivity gains. While the diversion of invest-
ment inputs could allow some economies to gain, 
such benefits could be significantly offset by spill-
overs from lower external demand. Alternate sce-
narios are used to highlight that nonaligned regions 
could have some negotiating power vis-à-vis the 
geopolitical blocs. However, uncertainty regarding 
their alignment could restrict their ability to attract 
investment. The estimated output losses highlight 
the importance of carefully balancing the strategic 
motivations behind reshoring and friend-shoring 
against economic costs to the countries themselves 
and to third parties, including through multilateral 
consultations to reduce uncertainty for bystanders.
Early Signs of FDI Fragmentation
Recent trends point to the emergence of FDI fragmen-
tation. This chapter relies on investment-level data on 
new (greenfield) FDI from fDi Markets, which provides 
data on about 300,000 investments from the first quarter 
of 2003 to the fourth quarter of 2022. The richness 
of the data—which include information on the source 
and host countries and on the sector and purpose of the 
investment—allows for zooming in on specific regions, 
country pairs, and industries.4 It also permits classifica-
tion of certain sectors as “strategic”: those for which poli-
cymakers may be particularly interested in relocation due 
to national and economic security interests.5 Throughout 
the chapter, the number of greenfield foreign direct 
investments is used as the measure of FDI.6
4As the data do not show divestment, the chapter studies the 
geographic footprint of new direct investments. Once aggregated 
at the host country–year level, the investment-level data are highly 
correlated with gross FDI inflows, and the distributions of the two 
show a large degree of overlap, as also shown by Toews and Vézina 
(2022). As data on mergers and acquisitions are not available from 
the same data source, the analysis is based exclusively on greenfield 
investments. New (greenfield) investments are more numerous than 
mergers and acquisitions, especially in emerging market and devel-
oping economies; are more highly correlated with aggregate data on 
FDI; and are less frequently concentrated in tax havens. To mitigate 
the risk that findings are affected by phantom FDI (Damgaard, 
Elkjaer, and Johannesen 2019), the robustness of the analysis is 
tested excluding FDI from and to international financial centers. 
More details are discussed in Online Annex 4.1. All online annexes 
are available at www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WEO.
5The chapter defines strategic sectors at the three-digit industry 
level. More details are discussed in Online Annex 4.1.
6As investment values in the fDi Markets data set are often estimated, 
the chapter’s main analysis relies on the number of investments; in the 
chapter, a change in FDI refers to a change in the number of greenfield 
foreign direct investments. Online Annex 4.1 shows that the main 
results are robust to the use of investment values.
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
95
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Many factors likely contributed to the slowdown 
in FDI before the pandemic, such as increasing 
automation and other technological changes (Alonso 
and others 2022). Yet some recent patterns point to 
increased FDI fragmentation as geopolitical tensions 
and inward-looking policies have gained importance. 
The flow of strategic FDI to Asian countries started 
to decline in 2019 and has recovered only mildly 
in recent quarters. By contrast, flows of strategic 
investments to the US and Europe have proved more 
resilient. As a result, by the fourth quarter of 2022, 
a significant gap emerged between new investment 
directed to these regions, with strategic FDI to Europe 
about twice that going to Asian countries (Figure 4.4, 
panel 1). Fragmentation—and specifically the lack of 
recovery of FDI to China—is even more apparent for 
foreign investment in R&D and in specific strate-
gic industries, such as the semiconductor industry 
(Figure 4.4, panel 2), which both the US and the 
European Union have targeted with policies directed at 
strengthening domestic production and reducing the 
vulnerability from unaligned foreign suppliers.
These patterns are indicative of a more general 
process of reallocation of FDI flows across countries. 
FDI declined in the post-pandemic period from the 
second quarter of 2020 to the fourth quarter of 2022 by 
almost 20 percent compared to the post–global financial 
crisis pre-pandemic average. But this decline has been 
extremely uneven across regions, with the emergence of 
relative winners and losers as both source and host of FDI 
(Figure 4.5). Asia became less relevant both as a source 
and host, losing market share vis-à-vis almost all other 
regions. Notably, FDI to and from China declined by 
even more than the Asian average, although the persistent 
effect of the pandemic and prolonged lockdowns could 
also have contributed to the fall in foreign investment. 
In other regions, such as the US and emerging Europe, 
greenfield FDI declined less and, in some cases, even 
increased (for example, inflows to emerging Europe).
United States
Europe
China
Asia (excluding China)
US-China
trade war
COVID-19
US-China
trade war
COVID-19
Ukraine
war 
Ukraine
war 
Figure 4.4.  Foreign Direct Investment Fragmentation
(Number of investments, four-quarter moving average, 2015:Q1 = 100)
Foreign direct investment ﬂows to different regions are diverging, with China 
losing market share.
1. In Strategic Sectors
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2015:
Q1
17:Q1
19:Q1
21:Q1
22:
Q4
2. In Semiconductor Industry
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2015:
Q1
17:Q1
19:Q1
21:Q1
22:
Q4
Sources: fDi Markets; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Vertical lines indicate the start of US-China trade war, the start of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, and the start of the Ukraine war, respectively.
26.4
7.1
5.3
11.4
–3.7
–24.7
18.6
–22.1
–6.9
–17.8
–31.3
–44.3
–31.9
–3.2
–8.7
–11.7
–2.4
–23.7
–49.2
–4.4
27.6
2.9
9.9
18.1
–22.3
13.9
–11.5
7.5
–11.7
9.3
–0.9
–9.8
–19.7
8.6
18.6
27.3
14.9
34.0
5.9
–13.3
27.6
9.2
0.6
19.4
2.3
–40.6
21.6
Figure 4.5.  Foreign Direct Investment Reallocation across 
Regions, 2020:Q2–22:Q4 versus 2015:Q1–20:Q1
(Percentage point deviation from aggregate change)
The regional shift in foreign direct investment ﬂows shows winners and losers.
Source regions
Rest of
the world
China
Asia excl.
China
Emerging
Europe
Advanced
Europe
Americas
excl. US
United States
United
States
Americas
excl. US
Advanced
Europe
Emerging
Europe
Asia
excl.
China 
China Rest of
the
world
Destination regions
Sources: fDi Markets; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows deviation of regional foreign direct investment change from 
aggregate change (19.5 percent decline). Changes are computed using the number 
of greenﬁeld foreign direct investments in 2020:Q2–22:Q4 and average number in 
2015:Q1–20:Q1. Green (red) shading denotes positive (negative) numbers. 
Excl. = excluding.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
96
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
In regard to outward FDI from the US, the bot-
tom row of Figure 4.5 shows that US FDI to China 
declined by much more than the average global decline. 
At the same time, US FDI to other regions—and 
particularly to emerging Europe—was more resilient. 
This shift in the composition of outward US FDI can 
be analyzed in detail, looking at differences between 
host economies (Figure 4.6). Among major Asian and 
European recipients of US FDI, some of the relative 
winners (for example, Canada, Korea) are politically 
closer to the US than the relative losers (for example, 
China, Vietnam). This suggests that geopolitical factors 
have driven part of the shift in FDI flows in recent 
years. The next section investigates this issue in detail.
FDI Is Becoming More Responsive to Geopolitical Factors
Rising geopolitical tensions are a key driver of 
FDI fragmentation, as bilateral FDI is increasingly 
concentrated among countries that share similar 
geopolitical views (Figure 4.7). This chapter measures 
geopolitical alignment between countries using the 
“ideal point distance” proposed by Bailey, Strezhnev, 
and Voeten (2017), which is based on the similarity 
of ­voting patterns at the United Nations General 
Assembly.7 As transportation costs and geographic 
frictions also influence FDI decisions (Alfaro and 
Chen 2018; Ramondo, Rodríguez-Clare, and Tintelnot 
2015), it is informative to compare their roles with 
that of geopolitical alignment. The share of FDI 
among countries that are geopolitically aligned is larger 
than the share going to countries geographically close, 
suggesting that geopolitical preferences play a key role 
as a driver of FDI. In addition, the importance of geo-
political alignment has increased over the last decade, 
7Recent analysis of geoeconomic fragmentation looks at recent 
votes, such as the UN General Assembly vote on Resolution ES-11/1 
on aggression against Ukraine on March 2, 2022 (Chapter 3 of 
the October 2022 Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific; 
Javorcik and others 2022). However, this chapter looks at the role of 
geopolitical alignment over a longer period: the last 20 years. In this 
respect, the ideal point distance has the advantage of being compa-
rable over time. Although the ideal point distance is widely used in 
political science and in economics, scholars have proposed alternative 
measures. The findings of the chapter are robust to the use of the 
S score used in the April 2023 Global Financial Stability Report and 
proposed by Signorino and Ritter (1999), who assign numeric values 
to voting behavior in the UN General Assembly and calculate the 
degree of disagreement between two countries by computing the 
sum of squared differences of these values.
–40
0
40
80
120
CRI
COL
IND
CAN
KOR
TWN
MYS
SGP
AUS
MEX
BRA
VNM
JPN
ARG
PHL
HKG
CHN
Sources: fDi Markets; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows the deviation of outward US foreign direct investment change 
by destination from aggregate change (24 percent decline). Changes are 
computed using the number of greenﬁeld foreign direct investments from the 
United States to Europe and Asia in 2020:Q4–22:Q2 and average number in 
2015:Q1–20:Q1. Labels on the x-axis use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes. “TWN” refers to “Taiwan Province of China.”
US foreign direct investment partly shifted from less to more aligned countries.
Figure 4.6.  Change in Outward US Foreign Direct Investment, 
2020:Q2–22:Q4 versus 2015:Q1–20:Q1
(Percentage point deviation from aggregate change)
Geopolitical distance
Geographical distance
30
35
40
45
50
55
2003
06
09
12
15
18
21
Figure 4.7.  Foreign Direct Investment between 
Geographically and Geopolitically Close Countries
(Percent)
Sources: Bailey, Strezhnev, and Voeten (2017); Centre d’études prospectives et 
d’informations internationales, Gravity database; fDi Markets; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Figure shows the annual share of total foreign direct investments between 
country pairs that are similarly distant (that is, in same quintile of distance 
distribution), geopolitically and geographically, from the United States.
The importance of geopolitical distance for foreign direct investment has 
increased.
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
97
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
and increased more steeply than the importance of geo-
graphic distance, especially for FDI in strategic sectors.
The role of geopolitical alignment is significant and 
economically relevant, particularly for emerging market 
and developing economies, in a gravity model that con-
trols for other potential drivers of FDI flows. In the base-
line specification, an increase in the ideal point distance 
from the first to the third quartile of its distribution 
(equivalent to moving the distance from that between 
Canada and Japan to that between Canada and Jordan) 
is associated with a decline in FDI between countries of 
about 17 percent. This average effect is much stronger 
when emerging market and developing economies are 
either a source or a host country. Moreover, since 2018, 
coincident with increasing trade tensions between China 
and the US, geopolitical factors have become more rele-
vant to FDI flows. Finally, the analysis suggests that these 
factors matter more in regard to investments in strategic 
sectors (Figure 4.8). Thus, if countries move farther apart 
along geopolitical fault lines, FDI is likely to become 
more concentrated within blocs of geopolitically aligned 
countries. Moreover, fragmentation risks are not confined 
to FDI flows. Zooming in on non-FDI flows points out 
a sharp increase in countries’ exposure to financial frag-
mentation risk, which could trigger a significant global 
reallocation of capital in response to a rise in geopolitical 
tensions (Box 4.2). Such tensions matter significantly 
for cross-border portfolio allocation and could cause a 
sudden reversal of cross-border capital flows, especially 
in emerging market and developing economies (see the 
April 2023 Global Financial Stability Report).
The findings reported in Figure 4.8 are based on a 
gravity model that takes bilateral FDI as the depen-
dent variable and controls for standard push-and-pull 
factors, including a set of time-varying fixed effects for 
source and host countries (Kox and Rojas-Romagosa 
2020).8 To minimize the possibility that the coefficient 
8The analysis is based on estimating the following specification:  
​= f​(​α ​IPD​ sdt−1​ + β ​Gravity​ sd​ + ​τ​ st​ + ​υ​ dt​, ​ε​ sdt​)​, where bilateral FDI flows 
(measured by the number of investments) from the source country s 
to the host country d in year t is a function of the lagged value of IPD 
(the ideal point distance) between countries d and s. As is standard in 
gravity models, the specification controls for the geographic distance 
between source and host countries and other standard gravity controls, 
and absorbs any time-varying unobservable push-and-pull factors, 
adding source country × year and host country × year fixed effects. 
These fixed effects would capture, for instance, business cycle dynam-
ics that could push FDI outflows from a source country and attract 
inflows into a host country. As, by construction, most of the ​FDI​ sdt​ 
cells are 0, the model is estimated using Poisson pseudo-maximum 
likelihood (Santos Silva and Tenreyro 2006). Standard errors are 
clustered at the country-pair level.
on the index of geopolitical distance captures the 
role of other factors that could drive FDI, the model 
is augmented to include measures of geographic, 
cultural, and institutional distance and a historical 
measure of colonial ties. As expected, the inclusion 
of these variables—which are indeed associated with 
bilateral FDI flows—reduces the size of the coefficient 
of the ideal point distance, which however remains 
statistically and economically significant. The findings 
are also robust to considering FDI in manufacturing 
or services separately; excluding financial centers or 
China; controlling for the announcement and imple-
mentation of bilateral trade barriers, for the volume of 
bilateral trade, and for exchange rate effects; measuring 
FDI by its size rather than the number of investments; 
and considering cross-border mergers and acquisitions 
rather than greenfield FDI. The methodology and the 
results are described in Online Annex 4.1.
Which Host Countries Are More Vulnerable to 
FDI Relocation?
To assess the exposure of the stock of FDI hosted 
by an economy to geoeconomic fragmentation, the 
Time periods
Strategic
sectors
Income groups
Strategic
Nonstrategic
2018–21
2009–17
2003–08
EMDEs (destination)
EMDEs (source)
AEs (destination)
AEs (source)
All
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Sources: Atlantic Council; Bailey, Strezhnev, and Voeten (2017); Centre d’études 
prospectives et d’informations internationales, Gravity database; fDi Markets; NL 
Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Coefﬁcients of ideal point distance are estimated from gravity model for 
number of foreign direct investments. See Online Annex 4.1 for details.
AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies.
Greater geopolitical distance is associated with less foreign direct investment, 
especially in EMDEs, in recent years and in strategic sectors.
Figure 4.8.  Gravity Model for Ideal Point Distance and 
Foreign Direct Investment
(Semielasticities)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
98
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
chapter develops a multidimensional index of vulner-
ability. It combines three subindices, based on three 
dimensions relevant to geoeconomic fragmentation: 
(1) the geopolitical distance between source and 
host countries, (2) the degree of market power that 
host countries have in each industry in which they 
receive FDI, and (3) the strategic component of the 
stock of FDI.
•• The geopolitical index captures the idea that the 
greater the geopolitical distance between source 
and host countries, the greater the vulnerability 
to friend-shoring. The index is calculated for each 
host country by multiplying the share of invest-
ment from each source country by the geopolit-
ical distance between host and source countries. 
Given that most countries receive much of their 
FDI from advanced economies and given that 
those economies are geopolitically closer to one 
another than to emerging market and develop-
ing economies, these economies are more geo-
politically vulnerable than advanced economies 
(Figure 4.9, panel 1).
•• Countries with high market shares in trade of a 
given sector may be less vulnerable to relocation 
pressures in that sector, as foreign investors may 
have fewer options for relocating investment. The 
index of market power captures this dimension by 
treating FDI in a particular sector as less vulnerable 
if the host country is among the top 10 exporters in 
that sector. By contrast, FDI in host countries that 
are not among the top 10 exporters in that sector is 
treated as fully vulnerable. Though the vast majority 
of economies show low levels of protection from 
market power, some large economies (for exam-
ple, China, Germany, US) do enjoy some level of 
protection, being large exporters in many sectors 
(Figure 4.9, panel 2).
•• The strategic index measures the share of inward 
FDI in strategic sectors. This dimension of vulner-
ability shows substantial overlap between advanced 
and emerging market and developing economies 
(Figure 4.9, panel 3).
The geopolitical and strategic dimensions of 
vulnerability are broadly uncorrelated and capture 
distinct aspects of countries’ vulnerability to geoeco-
nomic fragmentation (Figure 4.10). Whereas geopo-
litical vulnerability is concentrated among emerging 
market and developing economies—as shown by the 
disproportionate share of red squares in the figure 
Germany China
China Germany
United
States
Figure 4.9.  Vulnerability Index
Emerging market and developing economies tend to be more vulnerable to 
relocation of foreign direct investment than advanced economies.
1. Geopolitical
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
AEs
EMDEs
SSA
Europe
Americas
Asia-Paciﬁc
MENAP-CCA
2. Market Power
0.65
0.75
0.85
0.95
1.05
AEs
EMDEs
SSA
Europe
Americas
Asia-Paciﬁc
MENAP-CCA
3. Strategic
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
AEs
EMDEs
SSA
Europe
Americas
Asia-Paciﬁc
MENAP-CCA
4. Aggregate
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
AEs
EMDEs
SSA
Europe
Americas
Asia-Paciﬁc
MENAP-CCA
Sources: Atlantic Council; Bailey, Strezhnev, and Voeten (2017); fDi Markets; NL 
Analytics; Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows distribution of vulnerability index by income and regional 
groups, based on post-2009 foreign direct investment ﬂows. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies;
MENAP-CCA = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Caucasus, and 
Central Asia; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
99
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
to the right of the vertical line denoting the median 
geopolitical index—many large advanced economies, 
including the US, Germany, and Korea, are in the 
top half of the distribution of strategic vulnerability. 
The cluster of countries particularly vulnerable along 
both dimensions includes some large emerging market 
economies, such as Brazil, China, and India, but also 
several other emerging market economies, suggesting 
that FDI fragmentation is likely to be an issue for a 
large set of countries.
The three subindices are combined to construct 
an aggregate index. The aggregate index adds the 
strategic and geopolitical dimensions, with the latter 
multiplied by the market power index. Multiplying 
the geopolitical dimension by the market power 
index—bounded between 0 and 1—allows for a 
dampening of the geopolitical vulnerability com-
ponent. This captures the idea that multinationals 
that would like to move their investments out of 
geopolitically distant countries will find it more 
difficult to do so if the host country is a key player 
in the global market in that sector. The strategic 
dimension is added to the combined geopolitical and 
market power component, as it reflects the height-
ened vulnerability of investments in specific sectors 
in all host countries, not only those that are geopo-
litically distant, and such sectors are more likely to 
be targeted with reshoring policies, offsetting any 
protection from market power.9 Overall, emerging 
market and developing economies are more vulnera-
ble to FDI fragmentation than advanced economies, 
even if there is large variation in the distribution of 
the index and some overlap between advanced and 
emerging market economies (for instance, 14 percent 
of emerging market and developing economies have 
a vulnerability index lower than the median for 
advanced economies). The distribution across regions 
shows the better position of Europe, while all other 
regions show higher and similar levels of vulnerability 
(Figure 4.9, panel 4).
While the aggregate vulnerability index is 
intended to describe exposures of existing stocks to 
relocation as they stand, policy measures could help 
reduce future vulnerabilities. Beyond multilateral 
9Rather than simply combining a host country’s scores for the 
three subindices, the aggregate index is built up from the sector–
source country level, such that market power offsets geopolitical 
distance only for sectors in which the host economy is among the 
top 10 exporters. The methodology for constructing the vulnerability 
indices is discussed in Online Annex 4.2.
efforts to preserve cooperation, domestic policies 
could also help, allowing economies to mitigate 
some risks even in a geopolitically tense world. 
Figure 4.11 suggests that stronger regulatory quality 
tends to be associated with lower aggregate vulner-
ability to relocation of FDI. Improved regulatory 
quality tends also to be associated with higher 
exports, which could offer protection against reloca-
tion pressures.
FDI Spillovers to Host Countries
Besides direct effects on job creation and capital 
formation, inward FDI could have spillover effects 
on domestic firms through technology diffusion, 
backward and forward linkages, and productivity 
gains from increased competition.10 When it comes 
to empirical results, however, the effects are mixed 
(Görg and Greenaway 2004; Bénétrix, Pallan, and 
Panizza 2022). Cross-country studies reveal that the 
effect of inward FDI is uneven and depends on host 
10Formal descriptions of each channel are developed in 
Rodríguez-Clare (1996) for backward and forward linkages, Glass 
and Saggi (1998) for the technology spillover effect, and Barba 
Navaretti and Venables (2004) for the pro-competitive effect. For 
a more skeptical view on the gains from financial integration, see 
Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006).
Advanced economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
SYC
GUY
CPV
BLZ
ZAF
HUN
VNM
IND
CHN
BRA
KOR
ITA
FIN
USA
DEU
Figure 4.10.  Geopolitical Index and Strategic Index
Strategic and geopolitical indices capture distinct vulnerabilities.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Strategic index
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Geopolitical index
Sources: Atlantic Council; Bailey, Strezhnev, and Voeten (2017); fDi Markets; NL 
Analytics; Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data are based on post-2009 foreign direct investment ﬂows. Horizontal line 
indicates the median value of strategic index, 0.09, and vertical line indicates the 
median value of geopolitical index, 0.5. Labels in the ﬁgure use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
100
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
countries’ human capital (Borensztein, De Gregorio, 
and Lee 1998), institutional quality (Kose and others 
2009), and financial development (Alfaro and others 
2004). The lack of consistent findings may stem from 
FDI heterogeneity along the mode of entry, the type 
of investment, and the relationship between foreign 
and domestic firms. The evidence is generally more 
informative for specific types of FDI and spillovers 
along the value chain (Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare 
2010). Hence, the analysis here explores two important 
dimensions: the distinction between horizontal and 
vertical FDI and differences in spillovers within and 
across industries.11
Horizontal versus Vertical FDI
Horizontal FDI refers to foreign firms entering a 
country to directly serve local markets. By contrast, 
vertical FDI takes place when foreign firms enter 
a country to produce inputs that will be supplied 
11The interpretation of the results should take into account the 
potential endogeneity of FDI, which is in part addressed by using 
lagged values of FDI and including fixed effects (especially in the 
firm-level analysis).
to affiliated firms.12 This distinction is particularly 
relevant in the context of geoeconomic fragmentation, 
given that vertical FDI is likely more exposed to FDI 
fragmentation risk than horizontal FDI. Higher trade 
barriers, for instance, would make horizontal FDI 
more attractive—as it could be a substitute for trade 
(Brainard 1997)—while making vertical FDI less 
attractive. Moreover, vertical FDI is often centered on 
advanced technology embodied in input production 
and thus is more likely to be the target of policies 
aimed at reshoring strategic production.
Vertical FDI is positively associated with economic 
growth, as it is concentrated among intermediate-goods 
producers that adopt more sophisticated (and 
skill-intensive) technology (Atalay, Hortaçsu, and 
Syverson 2014; Ramondo, Rappoport, and Ruhl 
2016). This is not the case for horizontal FDI, more 
likely to be found among final-goods producers, which 
tend to transfer simple (and labor-intensive) assembly 
technology to host countries (Figure 4.12). These find-
ings are obtained from cross-country growth regres-
sions, which are estimated separately for countries 
more likely to receive vertical or horizontal FDI.13
Spillovers within and across Industries
The effects of the entry of a multinational corpo-
ration on domestic firms could be different depend-
ing on whether those firms are in the same sector 
or in other sectors—either upstream or downstream 
along the value chain. For instance, consider Toshiba 
setting up a chip-making plant in China. The Chinese 
chipmakers are directly affected by the entry of 
Toshiba (within-industry spillovers), as the increased 
competition can either provide local firms with a 
greater incentive to innovate, and thus to become 
more productive, or crowd out local firms by stealing 
12The Samsung Electronics smartphone factory in India is 
an example of horizontal FDI, as most of its products are sold 
to Indian customers, whereas its semiconductor factory in 
Vietnam is an example of vertical FDI, as its products are sold 
mainly to Samsung’s own affiliates worldwide. Other relatively 
minor types of FDI include export-platform FDI (for example, 
Volkswagen’s plant in Mexico, which sells mostly to the US) and 
export-supporting FDI (for example, Toyota Financial Services 
USA, which offers US consumers financing options to facilitate 
export sales from Japan).
13This classification is based on detailed foreign subsidiary–level 
sales information from the Export-Import Bank of Korea. The esti-
mation results are robust to alternative classifications based on parent 
and subsidiary firms’ sector affiliations from Orbis. The methodology 
and the results are described in more detail in Online Annex 4.3.
Linear ﬁt
Figure 4.11.  Vulnerability Index and Regulatory Quality
Higher regulatory quality is associated with lower vulnerabilities.
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Aggregate vulnerability index
–1.5
–0.5
–1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Regulatory quality index
Sources: Atlantic Council; Bailey, Strezhnev, and Voeten (2017); fDi Markets; NL
Analytics; Trade Data Monitor; World Bank, World Governance Indicators; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Sample includes a cross section of 128 countries. The binned scatterplots
are obtained from a regression of the aggregate vulnerability index against the
regulatory quality index, controlling for the logarithm of real GDP, trade (percent of
GDP), and foreign direct investment inﬂows (percent of GDP). All variables are
averaged over 2010–19. The regressions give a coefﬁcient of the regulatory 
quality index equal to –0.057 (p-value of 0.000).
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
101
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
market share (Markusen and Venables 1999). At the 
same time, there are spillovers to other industries 
(cross-industry spillovers): Chinese silicon produc-
ers are also affected as they are big suppliers to the 
chip-making industry (backward linkages). Moreover, 
Chinese firms in the automobile industry will also be 
affected as they are heavy users of semiconductor chips 
(forward linkages).
Results based on a large sample of firm-level data 
from the World Bank Enterprise Surveys covering 
over 120,000 firms in 150 countries from 2006 to 
2021 show positive spillovers to domestic firms in 
the same industry (Figure 4.13, top graph). Positive 
within-industry spillovers to firms’ labor productivity 
are confined to advanced economies, where firms react 
to fiercer competition from multinational corpora-
tions by becoming more productive. In the case of 
cross-industry spillovers, domestic suppliers benefit 
from the entry of foreign firms in downstream sectors, 
as the latter may source inputs locally and increase 
local demand for inputs produced by domestic firms. 
Local suppliers may also benefit from learning by 
doing via direct contact with foreign buyers with 
better technology. These positive spillovers to domestic 
suppliers are driven by FDI in emerging market and 
developing economies.14 By contrast, there is no evi-
dence of spillovers to domestic users, even in emerg-
ing market and developing economies. This could be 
because foreign firms in upstream sectors mostly sell 
abroad, implying limited scope for positive technol-
ogy spillovers via direct contact with local buyers 
(Figure 4.13, bottom two graphs).
A Model-Based Quantification of the Costs of 
FDI Fragmentation
To investigate the long-term implications of poten-
tial FDI fragmentation, this section uses a multiregion 
DSGE model to explore possible scenarios.15 The sim-
ulations focus on fragmentation of investment flows 
14These findings are consistent with those of Mercer-Blackman, 
Xiang, and Khan (2021) on a smaller sample covering mostly 
Asian countries.
15The analysis uses the IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and 
Fiscal Model, further elaborated in Online Annex 4.4. A detailed 
exposition of the model and its properties may be found in Kumhof 
and others (2010) and Anderson and others (2013).
Figure 4.12.  Foreign Direct Investment and Growth: 
Horizontal versus Vertical
(Standardized coefﬁcients)
Vertical foreign direct investment is associated with higher GDP growth in 
emerging market and developing economies.
All
AEs
EMDEs
Vertical
All
AEs
EMDEs
Horizontal
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Sources: Export-Import Bank of Korea; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure reports the standardized coefﬁcients obtained from cross-country 
growth regression estimated separately for countries with horizontal foreign direct 
investment and those with vertical. Solid bars indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 
1 percent level. See Online Annex 4.3 for details. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 4.13.  Firm-Level Foreign Direct Investment Spillovers: 
within Industries versus across Industries
(Standardized coefﬁcients)
Foreign direct investment spillovers take place within industries in advanced 
economies, while domestic suppliers beneﬁt from foreign direct investment in 
emerging market and developing economies.
–0.4
–0.6
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Sources: Eora Global Supply Chain Database; fDi Markets; World Bank Enterprise
Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure reports the standardized coefﬁcients obtained from ﬁrm-level 
regression of labor productivity growth as a function of foreign direct investment 
within and across industries. Solid bars indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 
1 percent level. See Online Annex 4.3 for details. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Within industries
All
AEs
EMDEs
All
AEs
EMDEs
All
AEs
EMDEs
Domestic
supplier
Domestic
user
Across industries
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
102
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
arising from permanent barriers between geopolitical 
blocs, as well as heightened uncertainty about the geo-
political alignment of different regions. The analysis, 
and the various hypothetical scenarios, are intended to 
illustrate some of the key economic mechanisms likely 
to be at play and to provide a sense of overall output 
losses and the distribution of costs and benefits across 
economies, including those from spillovers through 
external demand and the reallocation of production 
capacity. The geopolitical coalitions considered are for 
analytical purposes only and are not intended to indi-
cate alignment choices countries are likely to make.
The analysis focuses on two key roles of FDI: 
its contribution to capital formation in host econ-
omies and the transmission of technologies and 
productivity-enhancing management practices from 
advanced to emerging market and developing econ-
omies. The model does not have explicit foreign 
ownership of productive capital, and thus there is no 
direct mapping to FDI.16 The bilateral cross-border 
flow of inputs into investment is instead used as a 
proxy, since similarly to reductions in FDI, barriers to 
the flow of such inputs directly reduce capital forma-
tion. The scenarios illustrate a 50 percent reduction 
of such flows. Alongside, empirical estimates of the 
correlation between FDI flows and labor productivity 
are used to discipline the associated productivity losses 
from a reduction in such flows. The analysis comple-
ments the literature, which has focused on the impact 
of fragmentation through trade and associated knowl-
edge spillovers (Cerdeiro and others 2021; Eppinger 
and others 2021; Góes and Bekkers 2022; Javorcik and 
others 2022), although a full analysis of the interaction 
between different aspects of geoeconomic fragmen-
tation is beyond the scope of this chapter. Box 4.3 
discusses new evidence suggesting that the fragmen-
tation of international trade as a result of geopolitical 
tensions could lead to lower output in most countries, 
with emerging market and developing economies more 
adversely affected than other country groups.
The simulations center on decoupling between the 
two largest economies—China and the US—which is 
likely to be the most economically consequential form 
of fragmentation. Although how other countries and 
regions might align themselves in such a decoupling 
remains unclear and will depend on a multitude of 
16With a few exceptions (Arkolakis and others 2018; 
Reyes-Heroles, Traiberman, and Van Leemput 2020), multicountry 
trade models used in the literature tend to abstract from investment.
factors (for example, strength of existing trade and 
financial links and national security considerations), 
scenario analysis is used to highlight the implications 
of different geopolitical-alignment choices for eco-
nomic outcomes.
The model allows for up to eight regions. China, 
the EU+ (that is, the EU and Switzerland), and the 
US are assigned their own regions, as the policy 
choices of these economies are likely to shape global 
fragmentation scenarios. To illustrate the interaction 
between alignment choices and economic outcomes for 
emerging market and developing economies, includ-
ing through investment diversion, a region is assigned 
to Latin America and the Caribbean and another to 
India and Indonesia, two representative Asian emerg-
ing market and developing economies with relatively 
neutral measures of geopolitical distance from the US 
and China. The remaining three regions comprise the 
rest of southeast Asia, other advanced economies (for 
example, Australia, Canada, Japan, UK), and the rest 
of the world (for example, central Asia, Middle East, 
Russia, sub-Saharan Africa).
While geopolitical-alignment choices are highly 
uncertain, to discipline the analysis, the chapter con-
structs a baseline hypothetical scenario for alignments 
using the ideal point distance. Relative distances from 
either the US or China, based on the latest ideal point 
distance data, are used to assign regions to geopolit-
ical blocs aligned with either the US or China, or as 
nonaligned. Additional scenarios, focusing on different 
alignment choices for the EU+, India and Indone-
sia, and Latin America and the Caribbean, explore 
the interaction between geopolitical alignment and 
economic outcomes (Table 4.1). In reality, geopolit-
ical alignments are not givens and likely require the 
balancing of multiple considerations (beyond the scope 
of this chapter) under frictions and uncertainty.
In the first scenario, in which the world splin-
ters into a US-centered bloc and a China-centered 
bloc, and with both India and Indonesia and Latin 
America and the Caribbean remaining nonaligned, 
global output is about 1 percent lower after five years 
(relative to the no-fragmentation scenario). Global 
output losses increase as the impact on capital stocks 
and productivity from lower investment input flows 
cumulate, with long-term output lower by 2 percent 
(Figure 4.14). Output losses are generally larger in 
the emerging-market-dominated China bloc, as these 
regions face heightened barriers to the major sources of 
investments, namely, advanced economies. The losses 
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
103
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
are also nonnegligible for the US bloc, however, driven 
by some members’ strong links to China (such as Japan 
and Korea in the other advanced economies region and 
Germany in the EU+ region).
For the nonaligned economies, the impact depends 
on the outcome of two competing channels. On the 
one hand, the substantial reduction in global activity 
reduces external demand, weighing on net exports 
and investment. On the other hand, these regions also 
benefit from the diversion of investment flows, which—
if sufficiently large—could boost investment and 
output. The importance of the second channel increases 
with the ease with which investment goods from 
different regions can be substituted for one another by 
the importing region. In the benchmark assumption 
for the elasticity of substitution across source regions of 
investment inputs, the first channel dominates, and the 
nonaligned regions experience a small drop in output 
(Figure 4.14, darker bars). Alongside the benchmark 
case, an alternative case uses a higher elasticity of substi-
tution (double in value). In the alternative case, higher 
diversion yields a small net increase in investment and 
output (Figure 4.14, lighter bars).17
In reality, a geoeconomically fragmented world might 
entail substantial policy uncertainty for economies that 
try to remain open to both geopolitical blocs. Rather 
than having their nonaligned status accepted, these 
economies may need to walk a narrow path amid pres-
sures from both sides, with the attendant risk of falling 
out with one bloc or the other. This type of policy 
17Similar to the cases of India and Indonesia and Latin America 
and the Caribbean, losses are significantly lower for other regions, 
such as southeast Asia, if they are also nonaligned, as shown in 
additional simulations in Online Annex 4.4.
uncertainty, in which investors perceive a risk that 
current policy stances toward that economy could shift 
radically in the future, can act as an economically mean-
ingful barrier to trade and investment, as documented 
in the literature (for example, Handley and Limão 
2022). While the exact degree of such uncertainty in 
a hypothetical fragmented future is impossible to pin 
down, a case involving a high level of uncertainty—in 
which investors in both blocs perceive a 50 percent 
chance that the nonaligned region will fall in with the 
opposing bloc over the long term—is a natural analyti-
cal complement to the baseline no-uncertainty scenario 
already discussed.18 Specifically, investors behave as if 
investment input flows to (from) these regions face half 
the barriers faced by regions in the opposing bloc. As 
shown in Figure 4.15, losses are significantly amplified 
for nonaligned regions under such uncertainty, as they 
face reduced inflows from both blocs, with some nega-
tive spillovers to other regions as well.
Alternative alignment choices highlight their sig-
nificant impact on outcomes. For example, a world 
in which the EU+ remains nonaligned entails sig-
nificantly lower costs for both itself and the China 
bloc economies. However, the EU+ might face 
heavy costs if such a policy approach significantly 
raises the possibility of barriers between itself and 
the US—due to greater uncertainty about its future 
alignment (Figure 4.16, panel 1). Under the base-
line, the two nonaligned regions generally tend to be 
18The scenario illustrates the case with India and Indonesia and 
the Latin America and Caribbean regions remaining nonaligned 
indefinitely, but with investors perceiving a risk they will pick a side 
in the future (and therefore face the associated barriers). Alongside 
the 50–50 scenario presented here, Online Annex 4.4 discusses a 
range of possible levels of uncertainty.
Table 4.1. Modeled Fragmentation Scenarios
  US Bloc       
  China Bloc       
  Nonaligned
Model Region
GDP Share (Percent)
Two Blocs + 
Nonaligned EMDE 
Regions
Nonaligned EU+
Nonaligned EMDEs  
Join China Bloc
Nonaligned EMDEs  
Join US Bloc
United States
16.0
China
17.5
EU+
15.6
Other AEs
13.8
India and Indonesia
9.6
Southeast Asia 
4.0
LAC
6.5
ROW
17.0
Source: IMF staff compilation.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; EU+ = European Union and Switzerland; LAC = Latin America and the 
Caribbean; ROW = rest of the world.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
104
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
worse off when aligning with either bloc, as opposed 
to remaining open to both. However, given that the 
advanced-economy-dominated US bloc is the major 
source of investment flows, they are better off joining 
this bloc if forced to choose, especially if they were to 
face uncertainty otherwise (Figure 4.16, panel 2).
Blocs’ incentive to attract emerging market and 
developing economies might give nonaligned regions 
some bargaining power but could also generate the 
type of damaging uncertainty that reduces investment 
(Figure 4.17). Unsurprisingly, existing bloc members 
would gain when their bloc attracts the nonaligned 
regions and lose when nonaligned regions join the oppos-
ing bloc. The gain to the existing bloc members could 
outweigh the losses to the joining regions, suggesting 
some scope for transfers to implement such an outcome. 
Potential transfers could take several forms, including 
favorable trade and investment treatment or fiscal mea-
sures to encourage friend-shoring to target economies.19 
19For example, see the announcement that the US will support invest-
ment in India by the largest US solar manufacturer (Sharma 2022).
The opposing bloc would likely want to avoid such an 
outcome. In reality, alignment choices are likely to be 
dependent on multiple considerations and subject to 
coordination frictions, further underscoring the uncer-
tainty that could itself weigh on investment.
Policy Implications
The findings of this chapter contribute to under-
standing how fragmentation pressures may already be 
affecting investment flows across economies, as well 
as the long-term implications for the global economy 
if such pressures lead to a substantial relocation of 
FDI. Vulnerabilities to FDI fragmentation are broadly 
shared across many emerging market and developing 
economies, and advanced economies are not immune, 
particularly those with significant FDI stocks in 
strategic sectors. As vulnerabilities can also extend to 
non-FDI flows (see the April 2023 Global Financial 
Stability Report), a rise in political tensions could trig-
ger large reallocation of capital flows at the global level, 
with effects particularly pronounced for emerging mar-
ket and developing economies. The chapter’s analysis 
Cross-bloc investment barriers
Nonaligned uncertainty
Total
Figure 4.15.  Long-Term GDP Losses, with Uncertainty for 
Nonaligned Economies
(Percent deviation from no-fragmentation scenario)
Policy uncertainty could amplify losses for nonaligned economies.
0
1
–8
–7
–5
–6
–4
–3
–2
–1
United
States
EU+
Other
AEs
China
SE
Asia
ROW
India and
Indonesia
LAC
World
US bloc
China bloc
Nonaligned
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Darker bars denote scenario with lower elasticity of substitution (1.5) 
between foreign sources of investment inputs. Lighter bars denote scenario with 
higher elasticity of substitution (3.0) between foreign sources of investment inputs 
and thus a greater role for diversion. AEs = advanced economies; EU+ = European 
Union and Switzerland; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; ROW = rest of the 
world; SE = Southeast.
Barriers to investment
Productivity losses
Medium-term total
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Baseline fragmentation scenario represents barriers generating 50 percent 
decline in investment input ﬂows between China and US blocs, with no barriers 
with two nonaligned regions (India and Indonesia and Latin America and the 
Caribbean). Darker bars denote scenario with lower elasticity of substitution (1.5) 
between foreign sources of investment inputs. Lighter bars denote scenario with 
higher elasticity of substitution (3.0) between foreign sources of investment inputs 
and thus a greater role for diversion. 
AEs = advanced economies; EU+ = European Union and Switzerland; LAC = Latin 
America and the Caribbean; ROW = rest of the world; SE = Southeast.
Fragmentation could lower global output by up to 2 percent.
0
1
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
United
States
EU+
Other
AEs 
China
SE
Asia
ROW
India and
Indonesia
LAC
World
US bloc
China bloc
Nonaligned
Figure 4.14.  Impact of Investment Flow Barriers on GDP
(Percent deviation from no-fragmentation scenario)
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
105
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
suggests that a fragmented global economy is likely 
to be a poorer one. While there may be relative—and 
possibly absolute—winners from diversion, such gains 
are subject to substantial uncertainty.
The chapter does not attempt to measure the success 
of the policies driving geoeconomic fragmentation in 
meeting the objectives often ascribed to them, such as 
enhancing national security or maintaining a tech-
nological advantage over rival countries, especially in 
strategic sectors. Instead, its analysis highlights that 
the pursuit of these objectives entails large economic 
costs, not just for a country’s rivals and (possibly) other 
nonaligned countries, but also for the country itself 
and countries aligned with it. These costs need to be 
considered carefully.
In regard to policies, the large and widespread 
economic costs from strategic decoupling provide a 
rationale for a robust defense of global integration, at a 
time when several actors are advocating more barriers 
and inward-looking policies. For instance, increasing 
diversification in international sourcing of inputs 
away from domestic sources can make supply chains 
more resilient to shocks (see Chapter 4 of the April 
2022 World Economic Outlook), without imposing 
costs on the world economy. At the same time, the 
current rules-based multilateral system must adapt to 
the changing world economy and should be com-
plemented by credible “guardrails” to mitigate global 
spillovers and by domestic policies targeted at those 
adversely affected by global integration (Aiyar and 
others 2023).
As policy uncertainty amplifies losses from frag-
mentation, especially for nonaligned countries, effort 
should be devoted to minimizing such uncertainty. 
Improving information sharing through multilateral 
dialogue would support this goal. In particular, the 
development of a framework for international consul-
tations (for instance, on the use of subsidies to provide 
incentives for reshoring or friend-shoring of FDI) 
could help identify unintended consequences. It could 
also mitigate cross-border spillovers by reducing uncer-
tainty and promoting transparency on policy options.
Finally, in a more geopolitically tense world, coun-
tries can reduce their vulnerability to FDI relocation 
by implementing policies and regulations to pro-
mote private sector development. Moreover, a more 
EU+ in US bloc
EU+ nonaligned, with uncertainty
EU+ nonaligned, no uncertainty
Uncertainty for
nonaligned
Cross-bloc investment
barriers
Figure 4.16.  Impact on GDP for Bloc Members: Tripolar World 
and Nonaligned Joining Blocs
(Percent deviation from no-fragmentation scenario)
1. Impact of Nonaligned EU+, with and without Uncertainty
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
EU+
China bloc
2. Impact of Nonaligned Joining Blocs
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
Both nonaligned
Both join China bloc
Both join US bloc
Remaining nonaligned with certainty tends to limit losses.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EU+ = European Union and Switzerland.
China bloc
US bloc
China bloc, with new members
US bloc, with new members
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Nonaligned joining China bloc
Nonaligned joining US bloc
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The nonaligned include India and Indonesia and Latin America and the 
Caribbean.
Figure 4.17.  Impact on GDP for Bloc Members: Nonaligned 
Joining Blocs
(Percent deviation from nonaligned scenario with uncertainty)
Blocs have incentives to attract nonaligned regions and discourage nonaligned 
from joining the opposing bloc. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
106
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
fragmented world in which large economies implement 
policies to promote friend-shoring of FDI could be 
an opportunity for some countries to benefit from 
diversion of investment flows by attracting new FDI. 
Measures that can increase countries’ attractiveness as 
investment destinations include undertaking structural 
reforms (Campos and Kinoshita 2010), establishing 
investment promotion agencies to reduce informa-
tion asymmetries and ease bureaucratic procedures 
(Harding and Javorcik 2011; Crescenzi, Di Cataldo, 
and Giua 2021), and improving infrastructure (Chen 
and Lin 2020).
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
107
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
This box provides a summary and timeline of recent 
events behind US-China trade tensions, one of the 
major drivers behind the rising risk of geoeconomic 
fragmentation.
China’s accession to the World Trade Organization 
(WTO) in 2001, following its ambitious economic 
reforms of the 1990s, was a pivotal milestone, with 
world trade volumes almost doubling since then 
and China becoming the world’s top exporter and 
second-largest economy. However, trade tensions 
have been growing over the subsequent years as 
China’s rapid export growth has affected segments 
The author of this box is JaeBin Ahn.
of European and US industry. As China’s economic 
reforms slowed and even reversed, major trading 
partners became increasingly concerned by the 
economic role of the state in domestic and export 
markets, including technology transfer practices 
and the footprint of state-owned enterprises with 
an international presence. The inability of WTO 
members to agree on reforms in these and other 
sensitive areas has exacerbated trade tensions (Aiyar 
and others 2023).
The US imposition of tariffs against China in July 
2018 triggered an immediate Chinese response and 
was followed by rounds of back-and-forth escala-
tions (Figure 4.1.1). The Phase One trade agreement 
Box 4.1. Rising Trade Tensions
Jul.–Sep. 2018
Dec. 2018
May 2019
Aug. 2019
Jan. 2020
Feb.–Sep. 2020
Jan.–Feb. 2021
Sep. 2021
Jan. 2022
May 2022
Aug. 2022
Oct. 2022
Dec. 2022
Sources: China and US authorities; World Trade Organization; and IMF staff compilation.
US imposes 25% tariff on $34
billion in Chinese imports
US Treasury designates China a currency manipulator
Tariff wars undone, with exemptions/bans
25% tariff retaliation on $34 billion in US imports
Truce in trade war
25% tariff retaliation on $60 billion in US imports
Phase One trade agreement
Biden administration’s ofﬁcial statement
to keep tariffs on China in place
Extended ban on investments in 
Chinese companies
with ties to the Chinese military
President Biden signs Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce 
Semiconductors and Science Act, and Inﬂation Reduction Act
Indo-Paciﬁc Economic
Framework for Prosperity
launched with a dozen
partners
New export controls prohibiting 
sales of advanced chips and
chip-making technology to China
Sanctions imposed on 28 former
Trump administration ofﬁcials
World Trade Organization authorizes China to impose compensatory tariffs after US 
refusal to adjust antisubsidy duties inconsistent with World Trade Organization
World Trade Organization rules against the US 
in Section 232 tariffs on steel and aluminum 
and Hong Kong SAR labeling disputes
US-China trade war resumes, with 
Huawei added to entity list and additional 
25% tariff on $200 billion in Chinese imports
Figure 4.1.1.  A Timeline of US-China Trade Tensions
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
108
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
between the two countries, signed in early 2020, 
helped avert further escalation but did little to reverse 
the increase in trade restrictions. Tensions have sub-
sequently widened to a new technological front, with 
the US explicitly aiming to hinder China’s advance-
ment in sectors such as semiconductors and green 
energy equipment. For example, the US has imposed 
export controls to restrict China’s access to advanced 
computing and semiconductor items. The Creat-
ing Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors 
(CHIPS) and Science Act and the Inflation Reduction 
Act (IRA) aim to advance US global leadership in 
key technologies by imposing high domestic-content 
requirements. Meanwhile, because of the ongoing US 
blockage of WTO Appellate Body appointments, most 
disputes are being left unresolved, undercutting the 
value of trade rules.
Recent initiatives, and the uncertainties surrounding 
them, have the potential to reshape global value chains 
along geopolitical lines and have already begun to 
affect production and sourcing strategies. For example, 
the proposed US Chip 4 alliance with three key Asian 
economies seeks to set up a semiconductor industry 
supply chain independent of China. Other major 
economies are also reacting as the case for more active, 
inward-looking regional industrial policies gains prom-
inence. For example, the EU’s proposed European 
Chips Act aims to boost the bloc’s semiconductor 
industry to 20 percent of global production capacity 
by 2030, with more than €43 billion in investments.
Box 4.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
109
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
This box complements the analysis in the chapter by 
constructing a new measure of financial exposure to 
fragmentation risk, defined as the stock of non–foreign 
direct investment (FDI) foreign assets (liabilities) 
invested in (borrowed from) countries with diverging 
geopolitical views, for major advanced and emerging 
market economies.
Cross-border non-FDI financial linkages are con-
structed using IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment 
Survey (CPIS) statistics and Bank for International 
Settlements Locational Banking Statistics. Since a large 
share of positions in the CPIS are booked to financial 
centers, bilateral portfolio holdings are first reallocated 
to their proper source and host countries following 
Coppola and others (2021). Bank and portfolio invest-
ments are then aggregated to derive bilateral foreign 
assets and liabilities for 38 countries during 2001–21 
whose GDP accounts for 86 percent of world GDP. 
These positions are combined with bilateral measures 
of political proximity as captured by the ideal point 
distance, normalized into a continuous variable that 
takes the value 1 for the politically closest country 
and 0 for the most distant country. Bilateral holdings 
are then weighted by the political proximity index to 
generate a politically discounted measure of foreign 
assets and liabilities. The exposure to fragmentation 
is defined as the difference between undiscounted posi-
tions and their politically weighted counterparts and 
captures the stock of assets (or liabilities) that could be 
at risk in a fragmentation scenario.
Exposures are large and have roughly doubled over 
the past 20 years. While gross foreign investment posi-
tions (assets plus liabilities) as a share of GDP have 
more than doubled since 2001, politically weighted 
positions have not grown as fast, suggesting that cap-
ital has been increasingly invested in (borrowed from) 
countries with political views that are further apart 
(Figure 4.2.1, panel 1). This is particularly the case for 
advanced economies, but it is also the case for emerg-
ing markets. Exposures vary significantly across the 
Group of Twenty (G20) (Figure 4.2.1, panel 2). They 
The authors of this box are Ariadne Checo de Los Santos, 
Rui Mano, and Damien Puy, with assistance from Fujie Wang. 
Online Annex 4.5 reports details about the empirical analysis, 
additional results, and robustness checks.
are concentrated on the asset side in advanced econ-
omies and on the liability side in emerging markets. 
In aggregate, exposures have now reached 42 percent 
of GDP, or 24 percent of all non-FDI cross-border 
holdings. Therefore, a rise in political tensions could 
trigger a significant reallocation of capital at the global 
level, although exposures vary significantly across the 
G20 (see Online Annex 4.5).
AEs total
EMs total
AEs politically
weighted
EMs politically
weighted
AE exposure
EM exposure
Asset
Liability
Asset (percent of
total position) 
Liability (percent
of total position)
Figure 4.2.1.  Gross Exposures to 
Fragmentation, Assets and Liabilities
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2001
04
10
07
13
16
19
21
0
20
40
60
80
SAU
CHN
ITA
ARG
MEX
RUS
IND
IDN
TUR
DEU
AUS
KOR
BRA
ZAF
USA
GBR
CAN
FRA
JPN
1. Exposures, AEs and EMs, 2001–21
2. Exposures, G20 Countries as of 2021
Sources: Bailey, Strezhnev, and Voeten (2017); Bank for 
International Settlements; IMF Coordinated Portfolio 
Investments Statistics Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Gross positions are aggregated by country group and 
divided by sum of each group’s respective GDP. See Online 
Annex 4.5 for details on country group composition. 
Economy labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) country codes. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging market economies; 
G20 = Group of Twenty.
Box 4.2. Balance Sheet Exposure to Fragmentation Risk
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
110
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
This box presents new evidence that trade fragmen-
tation could lower output for most countries, especially 
for emerging market and developing economies. To 
assess countries’ exposure to geoeconomic fragmenta-
tion in trade, the box estimates the impact of geopo-
litical alignment on sector-level bilateral trade data for 
189 countries (in 10 broad manufacturing sectors) using 
structural gravity regressions. These estimates show that 
divergences in individual countries’ geopolitical align-
ment act as a barrier to trade. This effect is concentrated 
in some sectors, notably food, but also in transportation 
equipment and other manufacturing, which account 
for a large share of foreign direct investment (FDI)–
intensive global value chain trade (Figure 4.3.1).
These estimates are used to calibrate a multicountry, 
multisector general equilibrium trade model to gauge 
the macroeconomic impact of a fragmentation scenario 
defined as an increase in alignment among countries 
within the US, China, and nonaligned blocs, which 
reduces the alignment across the blocs, and a dou-
bling of the estimated sensitivity of trade barriers to 
geopolitical alignment. Countries are assigned to blocs 
based on whether their current geopolitical treaties are 
stronger with the US, stronger with China, or equally 
strong with both.1 Three main factors drive countries’ 
exposure to geoeconomic fragmentation: (1) economy 
size: a given rise in trade barriers is more damag-
ing to smaller economies (in terms of population 
and GDP), which tend to rely more on international 
trade; (2) comparative advantage: fragmentation has a 
greater effect on countries that import in sectors with 
trade barriers more sensitive to geopolitical alignment; 
and (3) geoeconomic alignment: fragmentation is more 
damaging, for a given bloc membership, to countries 
that are not closely aligned with either of the world’s 
two major economies.
While geoeconomic fragmentation leads to income 
losses for most countries, it hurts emerging market and 
The authors of this box are Shushanik Hakobyan, Sergii 
Meleshchuk, and Robert Zymek. For details on data, estimation 
methodology, and modeling, see Hakobyan, Meleshchuk, and 
Zymek (2023).
1Unlike in this box, the nonaligned regions in the chapter 
text do not face increasing barriers with respect to the two blocs, 
particularly in the case in which there is no uncertainty regarding 
their alignment.
developing economies more than advanced economies. 
For the median emerging market economy in Africa 
and central Asia, real income losses due to geoeco-
nomic fragmentation are more than twice as large 
as for the median advanced economy (Figure 4.3.2). 
This is primarily because these regions comprise many 
emerging market and developing economies that are 
small in economic size and relatively unaligned with 
major geopolitical blocs.
Box 4.3. Geopolitical Tensions, Supply Chains, and Trade
Sources: Alliance Treaty Obligations and Provisions (ATOP) 
project; Caliendo and Parro (2015) project; Eora Global 
Supply Chain Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars show estimates from sector-level gravity 
regressions on 2017–19 average trade values, with importer 
and exporter ﬁxed effects, geography, cultural ties, and 
economic agreements controlled for. Geopolitical alignment 
is measured by the foreign-treaty s-score from ATOP (Leeds  
and others 2002). A one-standard-deviation decrease in 
geopolitical alignment corresponds roughly to the difference 
between two average North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
members and two average nonmembers. Pet./Chem./ 
Nonmetal = petroleum, chemical, and nonmetal minerals.
Figure 4.3.1.  Impact of One-Standard- 
Deviation Decrease in Geopolitical Alignment 
on Tariff-Equivalent Trade Barrier
(Log change)
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Agriculture/Fishing
Mining/Quarry
Food/Beverages
Textiles/Apparel
Wood/Paper
Pet./Chem./Nonmetal
Metal
Electrical/Machinery
Transport equipment
Other manufacturing
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
111
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Box 4.3 (continued)
Figure 4.3.2.  Change in Real Per Capita 
Income Due to Fragmentation
(Percent)
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
AEs
EM Asia
EM
Europe
LAC
ME&CA
SSA
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the distribution of outcomes based 
on baseline fragmentation scenario in Hakobyan, 
Meleshchuk, and Zymek (2023), where the horizontal lines 
stand for the medians, the box represents the 25th and 75th 
percentiles, and the whiskers represent the extremes, 
excluding outliers. AEs = advanced economies; 
EM = emerging and developing; LAC = Latin America and 
the Caribbean; ME&CA = Middle East and Central Asia; 
SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
112
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
References
Aiyar, Shekhar, Jiaqian Chen, Christian Ebeke, Roberto 
Garcia-Saltos, Tryggvi Gudmundsson, Anna Ilyina, Alvar 
Kangur, and others. 2023. “Geoeconomic Fragmentation 
and the Future of Multilateralism.” Staff Discussion Note 
2023/001, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​Staff​-Discussion​-Notes/​
Issues/​2023/​01/​11/​Geo​-Economic​-Fragmentation​-and​-the​
-Future​-of​-Multilateralism​-527266.
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and 
Selin Sayek. 2004. “FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of 
Local Financial Markets.” Journal of International Economics 64 
(1): 89–112. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​S0022​-1996(03)00081​-3.
Alfaro, Laura, and Maggie Xiaoyang Chen. 2018. “Transpor-
tation Cost and the Geography of Foreign Investment.” In 
Handbook of International Trade and Transportation, edited by 
Bruce A. Blonigen and Wesley W. Wilson, 369–406. London: 
Elgar. https://​doi​.org/​10​.4337/​9781785366154​.00019.
Alonso, Cristian, Andrew Berg, Siddharth Kothari, Chris 
Papageorgiou, and Sidra Rehman. 2022. “Will the AI Revolu-
tion Cause a Great Divergence?” Journal of Monetary Economics 
127: 18–37. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jmoneco​.2022​.01​.004.
Anderson, Derek, Benjamin Hunt, Mika Kortelainen, Michael 
Kumhof, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir, Susanna Mursula, 
and Stephen Snudden. 2013. “Getting to Know GIMF: The 
Simulation Properties of the Global Integrated Monetary 
and Fiscal Model.” IMF Working Paper 13/55, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​
en/​Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2016/​12/​31/​Getting​-to​-Know​
-GIMF​-The​-Simulation​-Properties​-of​-the​-Global​-Integrated​
-Monetary​-and​-Fiscal​-40357.
Antràs, Pol. 2021. “De-globalisation? Global Value Chains in the 
Post-COVID-19 Age.” In Central Banks in a Shifting World: 
Conference Proceedings—ECB Forum on Central Banking, 
11–12 November 2020, edited by European Central Bank, 
28–80. Frankfurt: European Central Bank. https://​data​
.europa​.eu/​doi/​10​.2866/​268938.
Antràs, Pol, and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2014. “Multinational 
Firms and the Structure of International Trade.” In Hand-
book of International Economics, vol. 4, edited by Gita 
Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, 55–130. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​B978​-0​
-444​-54314​-1​.00002​-1.
Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andres Rodríguez-Clare, 
and Stephen Yeaple. 2018. “Innovation and Production in 
the Global Economy.” American Economic Review 108 (8): 
2128–73. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​aer​.20141743.
Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortaçsu, and Chad Syverson. 2014. “Verti-
cal Integration and Input Flows.” American Economic Review 
104 (4): 1120–48. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​aer​.104​.4​.1120.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi. 
2020. “Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Conse-
quences of Rising Trade Exposure.” American Economic Review 
110 (10): 3139–83. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​aer​.20170011.
Bailey, Michael A., Anton Strezhnev, and Erik Voeten. 2017. 
“Estimating Dynamic State Preferences from United Nations 
Voting Data.” Journal of Conflict Resolution 61 (2): 430–56. 
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1177/​0022002715595700.
Baldwin, Richard. 2022. “Globotics and Macroeconomics: 
Globalisation and Automation of the Service Sector.” NBER 
Working Paper 30317, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA. https://​doi​.org/​10​.3386/​w30317.
Barba Navaretti, Giorgio, and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. 
Multinational Firms in the World Economy. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. https://​press​.princeton​.edu/​
books/​paperback/​9780691128030/​multinational​-firms​-in​-the​
-world​-economy.
Bénétrix, Agustin, Hayley Pallan, and Ugo Panizza. 2022. “The Elu-
sive Link between FDI and Economic Growth.” CEPR Discus-
sion Paper 17692, Centre for Economic Policy Research, Paris.
Bloomberg News. 2022. “China Orders Government, State Firms 
to Dump Foreign PCs.” Bloomberg News, May 5. https://​
www​.bloomberg​.com/​news/​articles/​2022​-05​-06/​china​-orders​
-government​-state​-firms​-to​-dump​-foreign​-pcs​#xj4y7vzkg.
Borensztein, Eduardo, Jose De Gregorio, and Jong-Wha Lee. 
1998. “How Does Foreign Direct Investment Affect Eco-
nomic Growth?” Journal of International Economics 45 (1): 
115–35. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​S0022​-1996(97)00033​-0.
Brainard, S. Lael. 1997. “An Empirical Assessment of the 
Proximity-Concentration Trade-Off between Multinational 
Sales and Trade.” American Economic Review 87 (4): 520–44. 
https://​www​.jstor​.org/​stable/​2951362.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2015. “Estimates of the 
Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA.” Review of Economic 
Studies 82 (1): 1–44. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​restud/​rdu035.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro. 2021. “Trade Policy.” 
In Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4, edited by Gita 
Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, 219–95. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​bs​
.hesint​.2022​.02​.004.
Campos, Nauro F., and Yuko Kinoshita. 2010. “Structural 
Reforms, Financial Liberalization, and Foreign Direct Invest-
ment.” IMF Staff Papers 57 (2): 326–65. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1057/​imfsp​.2009​.17.
Cerdeiro, Diego A., Johannes Eugster, Rui C. Mano, Dirk 
Muir, and Shanaka J. Peiris. 2021. “Sizing Up the Effects 
of Technological Decoupling.” IMF Working Paper 21/69, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​
.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2021/​03/​12/​Sizing​-Up​
-the​-Effects​-of​-Technological​-Decoupling​-50125.
Chen, Maggie Xiaoyang, and Chuanhao Lin. 2020. “Geographic 
Connectivity and Cross-Border Investment: The Belts, Roads 
and Skies.” Journal of Development Economics 146: 102469. 
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jdeveco​.2020​.102469.
Colantone, Italo, and Piero Stanig. 2018. “The Trade Origins 
of Economic Nationalism: Import Competition and Voting 
Behavior in Western Europe.” American Journal of Political 
Science 62 (4): 936–53. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1111/​ajps​.12358/​.
CHAPTER 4 
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment
113
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Coppola, Antonio, Matteo Maggiori, Brent Neiman, and Jesse 
Schreger. 2021. “Redrawing the Map of Global Capital 
Flows: The Role of Cross-Border Financing and Tax Havens.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 136 (3): 1499–556. https://​doi​
.org/​10​.1093/​qje/​qjab014.
Crescenzi, Riccardo, Marco Di Cataldo, and Mara Giua. 2021. 
“FDI Inflows in Europe: Does Investment Promotion Work?” 
Journal of International Economics 132: 103497. https://​doi​
.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jinteco​.2021​.103497.
Damgaard, Jannick, Thomas Elkjaer, and Niels Johannesen. 
2019. “What Is Real and What Is Not in the Global FDI 
Network?” IMF Working Paper 19/274, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​
Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2019/​12/​11/​what​-is​-real​-and​-what​-is​
-not​-in​-the​-global​-fdi​-network.
Eppinger, Peter, Gabriel J. Felbermayr, Oliver Krebs, and 
Bohdan Kukharskyy. 2021. “Decoupling Global Value 
Chains.” Working Paper 9079, CESifo, Munich. https://​www​
.cesifo​.org/​en/​publications/​2021/​working​-paper/​decoupling​
-global​-value​-chains.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., and Amit K. Khandelwal. 2022. “The 
Economic Impacts of the US–China Trade War.” Annual 
Review of Economics 14: 205–28. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1146/​
annurev​-economics​-051420​-110410.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1998. “Integration of Trade and Disintegration 
of Production in the Global Economy.” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 12 (4): 31–50. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​jep​.12​.4​.31.
Felbermayr, Gabriel J., Hendrik Mahlkow, and Alexander 
Sandkamp. 2022. “Cutting through the Value Chain: The 
Long-Run Effects of Decoupling the East from the West.” 
EconPol Policy Brief 41, CESifo, Munich. https://​www​.cesifo​
.org/​en/​publications/​2022/​working​-paper/​cutting​-through​
-value​-chain​-long​-run​-effects​-decoupling​-east​-west.
Giammetti, Raffaele, Luca Papi, Désirée Teobaldelli, and Davide 
Ticchi. 2022. “The Network Effect of Deglobalization on 
European Regions.” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and 
Society 15 (2): 207–35. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​cjres/​rsac006.
Glass, Amy Jocelyn, and Kamal Saggi. 1998. “International 
Technology Transfer and the Technology Gap.” Journal of 
Development Economics 55 (2): 369–98. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1016/​S0304​-3878(98)00041​-8.
Góes, Carlos, and Eddy Bekkers. 2022. “The Impact of Geo-
political Conflicts on Trade, Growth, and Innovation.” Staff 
Working Paper ERSD-2022–09, Economic Research and Sta-
tistics Division, World Trade Organization, Geneva. https://​
www​.wto​.org/​english/​res​_e/​reser​_e/​ersd202209​_e​.htm.
Görg, Holger, and David Greenaway. 2004. “Much Ado about 
Nothing? Do Domestic Firms Really Benefit from Foreign 
Direct Investment?” World Bank Research Observer 19 (2): 
171–98. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​wbro/​lkh019.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2006. “The Elu-
sive Gains from International Financial Integration.” Review 
of Economic Studies 73 (3): 715–41. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1111 
/​j​.1467​-937X​.2006​.00393​.x.
Hakobyan, Shushanik, Sergii Meleshchuk, and Robert Zymek. 
2023. “Divided We Fall: Differential Exposure to Geopolitical 
Fragmentation in Trade.” Unpublished, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC.
Handley, Kyle, and Nuno Limão. 2022. “Trade Policy Uncer-
tainty.” Annual Review of Economics 14: 363–95. https://​doi​
.org/​10​.1146/​annurev​-economics​-021622​-020416.
Harding, Torfinn, and Beata S. Javorcik. 2011. “Roll Out the 
Red Carpet and They Will Come: Investment Promotion and 
FDI Inflows.” Economic Journal 121 (557): 1445–76. https://​
doi​.org/​10​.1111/​j​.1468​-0297​.2011​.02454​.x.
Harrison, Ann, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, 
Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy for Developing 
Countries.” In Handbook of Development Economics, vol. 5, 
edited by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, 4039–214. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​B978​-0​
-444​-52944​-2​.00001​-X.
Hassan, Tarek A., Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and 
Ahmed Tahoun. 2019. “Firm-Level Political Risk: Measure-
ment and Effects.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (4): 
2135–202. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​qje/​qjz021.
Javorcik, Beata. 2004. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase 
the Productivity of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers 
through Backward Linkages.” American Economic Review 
94 (3): 605–27. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1257/​0002828041464605.
Javorcik, Beata, Lucas Kitzmüller, Helena Schweiger, 
and Muhammed Yildirim. 2022. “Economic Costs 
of Friend-Shoring.” Discussion Paper 17764, Centre 
for Economic Policy Research, Paris. https://​cepr​.org/​
publications/​dp17764.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin 
Wei. 2009. “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal.” IMF Staff 
Papers 56 (1): 8–62. https://​www​.jstor​.org/​stable/​40377798.
Kox, Henk L. M., and Hugo Rojas-Romagosa. 2020. “How 
Trade and Investment Agreements Affect Bilateral For-
eign Direct Investment: Results from a Structural Gravity 
Model.” World Economy 43 (12): 3203–42. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1111/​twec​.13002.
Kumhof, Michael, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir, and Susanna 
Mursula. 2010. “The Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal 
Model (GIMF)—Theoretical Structure.” IMF Working Paper 
10/34, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​Publications/​WP/​Issues/​2016/​12/​31/​
The​-Global​-Integrated​-Monetary​-and​-Fiscal​-Model​-GIMF​
-Theoretical​-Structure​-23615.
Leeds, Brett A., Jeffrey M. Ritter, Sara McLaughlin Mitchell, 
and Andrew G. Long. 2002. “Alliance Treaty Obligations 
and Provisions, 1815–1944.” International Interactions 28: 
237–60. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1080/​03050620213653.
Markusen, James R., and Anthony J. Venables. 1999. “Foreign 
Direct Investment as a Catalyst for Industrial Development.” 
European Economic Review 43 (2): 335–56. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1016/​S0014​-2921(98)00048​-8.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
114
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Mercer-Blackman, Valerie, Wei Xiang, and Fahad Khan. 
2021. “Understanding FDI Spillovers in the Presence of 
GVCs.” Policy Research Working Paper 9645, World Bank, 
Washington, DC. https://​openknowledge​.worldbank​.org/​
handle/​10986/​35523.
Pastor, L’uboš, and Pietro Veronesi. 2021. “Inequality Aver-
sion, Populism, and the Backlash against Globalization.” 
Journal of Finance 76 (6): 2857–906. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1111/​jofi​.13081.
Ramondo, Natalia, Veronica Rappoport, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2016. 
“Intrafirm Trade and Vertical Fragmentation in U.S. Multi-
national Corporations.” Journal of International Economics 98: 
51–59. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jinteco​.2015​.08​.002.
Ramondo, Natalia, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Felix Tintelnot. 
2015. “Multinational Production: Data and Stylized Facts.” 
American Economic Review 105 (5): 530–36. https://​doi​.org/​
10​.1257/​aer​.p20151046.
Reyes-Heroles, Ricardo, Sharon Traiberman, and Eva Van Leemput. 
2020. “Emerging Markets and the New Geography of Trade: 
The Effects of Rising Trade Barriers.” IMF Economic Review 68: 
456–508. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1057/​s41308​-020​-00117​-1.
Rodríguez-Clare, Andrés. 1996. “Multinationals, Linkages, and 
Economic Development.” American Economic Review 86 (4): 
852–73. https://​www​.jstor​.org/​stable/​2118308.
Rodrik, Dani. 2018. “Populism and the Economics of Global-
ization.” Journal of International Business Policy 1: 12–33. 
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1057/​s42214​-018​-0001​-4.
Santos Silva, J. M. C., and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of 
Gravity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 641–58. 
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1162/​rest​.88​.4​.641.
Sharma, Ashok. 2022. “Yellen Visits India to Shore Up 
US-Indo-Pacific Partnership.” AP News, November 11. 
https://​apnews​.com/​article/​putin​-health​-india​-covid​-business​
-d32c4edf25accb5f28b2b01862da2965.
Signorino, Curtis S., and Jeffrey M. Ritter. 1999. “Tau-b or Not 
Tau-b: Measuring the Similarity of Foreign Policy Positions.” 
International Studies Quarterly 43 (1): 115–44. https://​www​
.jstor​.org/​stable/​2600967.
Tamma, Paola, and Samuel Stolton. 2023. “Revealed: France’s 
Massive ‘Made in Europe’ Strategy.” POLITICO, January 13. 
https://​www​.politico​.eu/​article/​france​-europe​-strategy​-revealed​
-revealed​-frances​-massive​-made​-in​-europe​-strategy/​.
Toews, Gerhard, and Pierre-Louis Vézina. 2022. “Resource Dis-
coveries, FDI Bonanzas, and Local Multipliers: Evidence from 
Mozambique.” Review of Economics and Statistics 104 (5): 
1046–58. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1162/​rest​_a​_00999.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD). 2022. World Investment Report 2022: Interna-
tional Tax Reforms and Sustainable Investment. Geneva: United 
Nations. https://​worldinvestmentreport​.unctad​.org/​.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD). 2023. “The Evolution of FDI Screening 
Mechanisms: Key Trends and Features.” Investment Policy 
Monitor 25, UNCTAD, Geneva. https://​unctad​.org/​publication/​
evolution​-fdi​-screening​-mechanisms​-key​-trends​-and​-features.
Yellen, Janet L. 2022. “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury 
Janet L. Yellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy.” 
Press Release, US Department of the Treasury, Washington, 
DC, April 13. https://​home​.treasury​.gov/​news/​press​
-releases/​jy0714.
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
115
T
he Statistical Appendix presents historical 
data as well as projections. It comprises eight 
sections: Assumptions, What’s New, Data and 
Conventions, Country Notes, Classification 
of Countries, General Features and Composition of 
Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification, 
Key Data Documentation, and Statistical Tables.
The first section summarizes the assump-
tions underlying the estimates and projections for 
2023–24. The second section briefly describes the 
changes to the database and statistical tables since 
the October 2022 World Economic Outlook (WEO). 
The third section offers a general description of the 
data and the conventions used for calculating coun-
try group composites. The fourth section presents 
selected key information for each country. The fifth 
section summarizes the classification of countries in 
the various groups presented in the WEO, and the 
sixth section explains that classification in further 
detail. The seventh section provides information on 
methods and reporting standards for the member 
countries’ national account and government finance 
indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the sta-
tistical tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included 
here; Statistical Appendix B is available online at 
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.) 
Data in these tables have been compiled on the basis 
of information available through March 28, 2023. The 
figures for 2023–24 are shown with the same degree 
of precision as the historical figures solely for conve-
nience; because they are projections, the same degree 
of accuracy is not to be inferred.
Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econo-
mies are assumed to remain constant at their average 
levels measured during February 15, 2023–March 15, 
2023. For 2023 and 2024 these assumptions imply 
average US dollar–special drawing right conversion 
rates of 1.334 and 1.333, US dollar–euro conversion 
rates of 1.063 and 1.054, and yen–US dollar conver-
sion rates of 135.4 and 137.4, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average 
$73.13 a barrel in 2023 and $68.90 a barrel in 2024.
National authorities’ established policies are assumed 
to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific 
policy assumptions underlying the projections for 
selected economies.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the 
three-month government bond yield for the United States 
will average 5.1 percent in 2023 and 4.5 percent in 2024, 
that for the euro area will average 2.8 percent in 2023 
and 3.0 percent in 2024, and that for Japan will average 
–0.1 percent in 2023 and 0.0 percent in 2024. Further 
it is assumed that the 10-year government bond yield for 
the United States will average 3.8 percent in 2023 and 
3.6 percent in 2024, that for the euro area will average 
2.5 percent in 2023 and 2.8 percent in 2024, and that 
for Japan will average 0.6 percent in 2023 and 2024.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
1 euro	 =	
13.7603	
Austrian schillings
	
=	
40.3399	
Belgian francs
	
=	
7.53450	
Croatian kuna1
	
=	
0.585274	
Cyprus pound2
	
=	
1.95583	
Deutsche marks
	
=	
15.6466	
Estonian krooni3
	
=	
5.94573	
Finnish markkaa
	
=	
6.55957	
French francs
	
=	
340.750	
Greek drachmas4
	
=	
0.787564	
Irish pound
	
=	
1,936.27	
Italian lire
	
=	
0.702804	
Latvian lat5
	
=	
3.45280	
Lithuanian litas6
	
=	
40.3399	
Luxembourg francs
	
=	
0.42930	
Maltese lira2
	
=	
2.20371	
Netherlands guilders
	
=	
200.482	
Portuguese escudos
	
=	
30.1260	
Slovak koruna7
	
=	
239.640	
Slovenian tolars8
	
=	
166.386	
Spanish pesetas
1Established on January 1, 2023.
2Established on January 1, 2008.
3Established on January 1, 2011.
4Established on January 1, 2001.
5Established on January 1, 2014.
6Established on January 1, 2015.
7Established on January 1, 2009.
8Established on January 1, 2007.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
116	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
As a reminder, in regard to the introduction of the 
euro, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the 
euro and currencies of the member countries adopting 
the euro are as shown on the previous page. Unless 
otherwise noted, these fixed conversion rates were 
decided by the Council of the European Union effec-
tive as of January 1, 1999. See Box 5.4 of the October 
1998 WEO as well for details on how the conversion 
rates were established.
What’s New
•	 Beginning with the April 2023 WEO, ASEAN-5 
comprises the five ASEAN (Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations) founding member nations: Indonesia, 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
•	 On January 1, 2023, Croatia became the 20th 
country to join the euro area. Data for Croatia are 
now included in aggregates for the euro area and for 
advanced economies and relevant subgroups.
•	 For Ecuador, fiscal sector projections are excluded 
from publication for 2023–28 because of ongoing 
program discussions.
Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 196 economies form the 
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are 
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department 
and regional departments, with the latter regularly 
updating country projections based on consistent 
global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the 
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions, 
international organizations are also involved in statisti-
cal issues, with the objective of harmonizing meth-
odologies for the compilation of national statistics, 
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, 
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the 
production of economic statistics. The WEO database 
reflects information from both national source agencies 
and international organizations. 
Most countries’ macroeconomic data as presented in 
the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version of the 
System of National Accounts (SNA 2008). The IMF’s 
sector statistical standards—the sixth edition of the Bal-
ance of Payments and International Investment Position 
Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Financial Statistics 
Manual and Compilation Guide, and the Government 
Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM 2014)—have 
been aligned with the SNA 2008. These standards 
reflect the IMF’s special interest in countries’ external 
positions, financial sector stability, and public sector 
fiscal positions. The process of adapting country data to 
the new standards begins in earnest when the manuals 
are released. However, full concordance with the manu-
als is ultimately dependent on the provision by national 
statistical compilers of revised country data; hence, 
the WEO estimates are only partly adapted to these 
manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, conversion 
to the updated standards will have only a small impact 
on major balances and aggregates. Many other coun-
tries have partially adopted the latest standards and will 
continue implementation over a number of years.1 
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the 
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF 
staff estimates. While attempts are made to align gross 
and net debt data with the definitions in the GFSM 
2014, as a result of data limitations or specific country 
circumstances, these data can sometimes deviate from 
the formal definitions. Although every effort is made to 
ensure the WEO data are relevant and internationally 
comparable, differences in both sectoral and instru-
ment coverage mean that the data are not universally 
comparable. As more information becomes available, 
changes in either data sources or instrument coverage 
can give rise to data revisions that are sometimes sub-
stantial. For clarification on the deviations in sectoral 
or instrument coverage, please refer to the metadata for 
the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are 
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual 
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages 
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates 
of change.2 Arithmetically weighted averages are used 
for all data for the emerging market and developing 
economies group—except data on inflation and money 
growth, for which geometric averages are used. The 
following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, inter-
est rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are 
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market 
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three years) 
as a share of group GDP.
1 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European 
System of National and Regional Accounts 2010, and a few coun-
tries use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar 
adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please 
refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards to which each 
country adheres.
2 Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and com-
modity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of 
change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based 
on the simple arithmetic average.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
117
Composites for other data relating to the domestic 
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted 
by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share 
of total world or group GDP.3 For the aggregation of 
world and advanced economies (and subgroups) infla-
tion, annual rates are simple percentage changes from 
the previous years; for the aggregation of emerging 
market and developing economies (and subgroups) 
inflation, annual rates are based on logarithmic 
differences. 
Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing-
power-parity terms are sums of individual country data 
after conversion to international dollars in the years 
indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors 
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepan-
cies in intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual GDP 
data are used for the euro area and for the majority 
of individual countries, except for Cyprus, Ireland, 
Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-adjusted 
data. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 
1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver-
age market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment 
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group 
labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are 
sums of individual country data after conversion to 
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the 
years indicated for balance of payments data and at 
end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denomi-
nated in currencies other than US dollars. 
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes 
and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent 
changes for individual countries weighted by the US 
dollar value of exports or imports as a share of total 
world or group exports or imports (in the preceding 
year). 
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are 
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group 
weights is represented.
3 See Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO for a summary of the 
revised purchasing-power-parity-based weights as well as “Revised 
Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 WEO Update, 
Appendix 1.1 of the April 2008 WEO, Box A2 of the April 2004 
WEO, Box A1 of the May 2000 WEO, and Annex IV of the May 
1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne Schulze-
Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the World 
Economic Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook 
(Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, December 1993), 
106–23.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of 
a few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the 
economies with exceptional reporting periods for 
national accounts and government finance data. 
For some countries, the figures for 2022 and earlier 
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; 
Table G lists the latest actual outturns for the indi-
cators in the national accounts, prices, government 
finance, and balance of payments for each country.
Country Notes
For Afghanistan, data and projections for 2021–28 
are omitted because of an unusually high degree of 
uncertainty given that the IMF has paused its engage-
ment with the country owing to a lack of clarity 
within the international community regarding the 
recognition of a government in Afghanistan.
For Algeria, total government expenditure and net 
lending/borrowing include net lending by the govern-
ment, which mostly reflects support to the pension 
system and other public sector entities.
For Argentina, the official national consumer price 
index (CPI) starts in December 2016. For earlier peri-
ods, CPI data for Argentina reflect the Greater Buenos 
Aires Area CPI (prior to December 2013), the national 
CPI (IPCNu, December 2013 to October 2015), the 
City of Buenos Aires CPI (November 2015 to April 
2016), and the Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (May 
2016 to December 2016). Given limited comparability 
of these series on account of differences in geographi-
cal coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology, 
the WEO does not report average CPI inflation for 
2014–16 and end-of-period inflation for 2015–16. 
Also, Argentina discontinued the publication of labor 
market data starting in the fourth quarter of 2015, 
and new series became available starting in the second 
quarter of 2016. 
Data and forecasts for Bangladesh are presented 
on a fiscal year basis. However, country group 
aggregates that include Bangladesh use calendar 
year estimates of real GDP and purchasing-power-
parity GDP.
For Costa Rica, the central government definition 
has been expanded as of January 1, 2021, to include 
51 public entities as per Law 9524. Data back to 2019 
are adjusted for comparability.
The fiscal series for the Dominican Republic have 
the following coverage: Public debt, debt service, and 
the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the 
consolidated public sector (which includes the central 
government, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector, 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
118	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
and the central bank); the remaining fiscal series are 
for the central government.
For Ecuador, the authorities are undertaking revi-
sions of the historical fiscal data with technical support 
from the IMF. Fiscal sector projections are excluded 
from publication for 2023–28 because of ongoing 
program discussions.
India’s real GDP growth rates are calculated as 
per national accounts: for 1998–2011 with base year 
2004/05 and, thereafter, with base year 2011/12.
For Lebanon, data and projections for 2021–28 
are omitted owing to an unusually high degree of 
uncertainty.
Sierra Leone redenominated its currency on July 1, 
2022; however, local currency data are expressed in the 
old leone for the April 2023 WEO.
For Sri Lanka, certain projections for 2023–28 are 
excluded from publication owing to ongoing discus-
sions on sovereign debt restructuring.
Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward 
because of the uncertain political situation.
For Turkmenistan, real GDP data are IMF staff 
estimates compiled in line with international meth-
odologies (SNA), using official estimates and sources 
as well as United Nations and World Bank databases. 
Estimates of and projections for the fiscal balance 
exclude receipts from domestic bond issuances as well 
as privatization operations, in line with the GFSM 
2014. The authorities’ official estimates for fiscal 
accounts, which are compiled using domestic statisti-
cal methodologies, include bond issuance and privati-
zation proceeds as part of government revenues.
For Ukraine, all projections for 2024–28 are omit-
ted owing to an unusually high degree of uncertainty. 
Revised national accounts data are available beginning 
in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 
2010 onward.
In December 2020 the Uruguay authorities began 
reporting the national accounts data according to the 
SNA 2008, with the base year 2016. The new series 
begin in 2016.  Data prior to 2016 reflect the IMF 
staff’s best effort to preserve previously reported data 
and avoid structural breaks.
Since October 2018 Uruguay’s public pension 
system has been receiving transfers in the context 
of a new law that compensates persons affected by 
the creation of the mixed pension system. These 
funds are recorded as revenues, consistent with the 
IMF’s methodology. Therefore, data and projec-
tions for 2018–22 are affected by these transfers, 
which amounted to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2018, 
1.1 percent of GDP in 2019, 0.6 percent of GDP 
in 2020, and 0.3 percent of GDP in 2021 and are 
projected to be 0.1 percent of GDP in 2022 and 
0 percent thereafter. See IMF Country Report 19/64 
for further details.4 The disclaimer about the public 
pension system applies only to the revenues and net 
lending/borrowing series.
The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was 
changed from consolidated public sector to nonfinan-
cial public sector with the October 2019 WEO. In 
Uruguay, nonfinancial public sector coverage includes 
the central government, local government, social 
security funds, nonfinancial public corporations, and 
Banco de Seguros del Estado. Historical data were 
also revised accordingly. Under this narrower fiscal 
perimeter—which excludes the central bank—assets 
and liabilities held by the nonfinancial public sector 
for which the counterpart is the central bank are not 
netted out in debt figures. In this context, capitaliza-
tion bonds issued in the past by the government to the 
central bank are now part of the nonfinancial public 
sector debt. Gross and net debt estimates for 2008–11 
are preliminary.
Projecting the economic outlook for Venezu-
ela, including assessing past and current economic 
developments used as the basis for the projections, is 
rendered difficult by the lack of discussions with the 
authorities (the most recent Article IV consultation 
took place in 2004), incomplete metadata of lim-
ited reported statistics, and difficulties in reconciling 
reported indicators with economic developments. The 
fiscal accounts include the budgetary central govern-
ment; social security; FOGADE (insurance deposit 
institution); and a reduced set of public enterprises, 
including Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA).  
Following some methodological upgrades to achieve 
a more robust nominal GDP, historical data and 
indicators expressed as a percentage of GDP have 
been revised from 2012 onward. For most indicators, 
data for 2018–22 are IMF staff estimates. The effects 
of hyperinflation and the paucity of reported data 
mean that the IMF staff’s projected macroeconomic 
indicators should be interpreted with caution. Broad 
uncertainty surrounds these projections. Venezuela’s 
consumer prices are excluded from all WEO group 
composites. 
In 2019 Zimbabwe authorities introduced the Real 
Time Gross Settlement dollar, later renamed the 
Zimbabwe dollar, and are in the process of redenomi-
nating their national accounts statistics. Current data 
are subject to revision. The Zimbabwe dollar previ-
ously ceased circulating in 2009, and during 2009–19 
Zimbabwe operated under a multicurrency regime 
with the US dollar as the unit of account.
4 Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Country 
Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 
February 2019).
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
119
Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the 
world into two major groups: advanced economies 
and emerging market and developing economies.5 This 
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic 
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objec-
tive is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably 
meaningful method of organizing data. Table A pro-
vides an overview of the country classification, showing 
the number of countries in each group by region and 
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size 
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports 
of goods and services, and population). 
Some countries remain outside the country classifica-
tion and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba 
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are 
examples of countries that are not IMF members, and 
the IMF therefore does not monitor their economies.
General Features and Composition of Groups in 
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
Table B lists the 41 advanced economies. The seven 
largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange 
rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, France, 
Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute 
the subgroup of major advanced economies, often 
referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of the 
euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Com-
posite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover 
the current members for all years, even though the 
membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European 
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced 
economies in the WEO.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing 
economies (155) comprises all those that are not classi-
fied as advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and 
developing economies are emerging and developing Asia; 
emerging and developing Europe (sometimes also referred 
to as “central and eastern Europe”); Latin America and 
5 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always 
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by interna-
tional law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are 
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate 
and independent basis.
the Caribbean; Middle East and Central Asia (which 
comprises the regional subgroups Caucasus and Central 
Asia; and Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan); and sub-Saharan Africa.
Emerging market and developing economies are also 
classified according to analytical criteria that reflect 
the composition of export earnings and a distinc-
tion between net creditor and net debtor economies. 
Tables D and E show the detailed composition of 
emerging market and developing economies in the 
regional and analytical groups. 
The analytical criterion source of export earnings 
distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard 
International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and 
nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products 
(SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized 
into one of these groups if their main source of export 
earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on aver-
age between 2017 and 2021.
The financial and income criteria focus on net 
creditor economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted 
poor countries (HIPCs), low-income developing countries 
(LIDCs), and emerging market and middle-income 
economies (EMMIEs). Economies are categorized as 
net debtors when their latest net international invest-
ment position, where available, was less than zero or 
their current account balance accumulations from 1972 
(or earliest available data) to 2021 were negative. Net 
debtor economies are further differentiated on the basis 
of experience with debt servicing.6 
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are 
or have been considered by the IMF and the World 
Bank for participation in their debt initiative known as 
the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external 
debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustain-
able” level in a reasonably short period of time.7 Many 
of these countries have already benefited from debt 
relief and have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita 
income levels below a certain threshold (set at $2,700 
in 2016 as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas 
method), structural features consistent with limited 
development and structural transformation, and exter-
nal financial linkages insufficiently close for them to be 
widely seen as emerging market economies.
The EMMIEs group comprises emerging market and 
developing economies that are not classified as LIDCs.
6 During 2017–21, 38 economies incurred external payments 
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling 
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or 
rescheduling during 2017–21.
7 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and 
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The 
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
120	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods  
and Services, and Population, 20221
(Percent of total for group or world)
GDP
Exports of Goods  
and Services
Population
Number of 
Economies
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced Economies
  41
100.0
41.7
100.0
60.5
100.0
13.9
United States
37.3
15.6
16.0
9.7
30.7
4.3
Euro Area
  20
28.8
12.0
41.4
25.0
31.8
4.4
Germany
7.8
3.3
11.0
6.6
7.7
1.1
France
5.4
2.3
5.4
3.3
6.1
0.8
Italy
4.5
1.9
3.9
2.4
5.4
0.8
Spain
3.3
1.4
3.1
1.9
4.4
0.6
Japan
9.0
3.8
4.9
3.0
11.5
1.6
United Kingdom
5.4
2.3
5.3
3.2
6.2
0.9
Canada
3.3
1.4
3.8
2.3
3.6
0.5
Other Advanced Economies
  17
16.1
6.7
28.5
17.3
16.0
2.2
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
    7
72.8
30.4
50.4
30.5
71.3
9.9
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
155
100.0
58.3
100.0
39.5
100.0
86.1
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
  30
56.3
32.8
49.6
19.6
55.9
48.1
China
31.7
18.5
30.4
12.0
21.1
18.1
India
12.4
7.3
6.2
2.5
21.2
18.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
  15
12.8
7.4
15.9
6.3
5.5
4.7
Russia
5.0
2.9
5.1
2.0
2.1
1.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
  33
12.6
7.3
13.4
5.3
9.6
8.3
Brazil
4.0
2.3
3.1
1.2
3.2
2.7
Mexico
3.1
1.8
5.1
2.0
1.9
1.7
Middle East and Central Asia
  32
13.0
7.6
16.9
6.7
12.5
10.7
Saudi Arabia
2.3
1.3
3.6
1.4
0.5
0.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
  45
5.4
3.1
4.2
1.7
16.6
14.3
Nigeria
1.3
0.8
0.5
0.2
3.2
2.8
South Africa
1.0
0.6
1.1
0.4
0.9
0.8
Analytical Groups2
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
  24
9.7
5.6
15.2
6.0
9.0
7.8
Nonfuel
129
90.3
52.6
84.8
33.5
90.9
78.2
Of which, Primary Products 
  36
5.2
3.1
5.2
2.0
9.0
7.7
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies 
120
50.3
29.3
43.4
17.2
68.7
59.2
Of which, Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
  38
5.3
3.1
3.8
1.5
12.1
10.4
Other Groups2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
  95
91.6
53.4
92.9
36.7
76.5
65.9
Low-Income Developing Countries
  59
8.4
4.9
7.1
2.8
23.5
20.2
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
  39
2.8
1.6
2.0
0.8
12.1
10.4
1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those 
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Syria and West Bank and Gaza are omitted from the source of export earnings, and Syria is omitted from the net external position group composites 
because of insufficient data. Syria is not included in Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies or Low-Income Developing Countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
121
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Germany
Malta
Belgium
Greece
The Netherlands
Croatia
Ireland
Portugal
Cyprus
Italy
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Finland
Lithuania
Spain 
France
Luxembourg
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
United States
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Andorra
Israel
San Marino
Australia
Korea
Singapore
Czech Republic
Macao SAR2
Sweden
Denmark
New Zealand
Switzerland
Hong Kong SAR1
Norway
Taiwan Province of China
Iceland
Puerto Rico
1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a 
Special Administrative Region of China.
Table C. European Union
Austria
France
Malta
Belgium
Germany
The Netherlands
Bulgaria
Greece
Poland
Croatia
Hungary
Portugal
Cyprus
Ireland
Romania
Czech Republic
Italy
Slovak Republic
Denmark
Latvia
Slovenia
Estonia
Lithuania
Spain 
Finland
Luxembourg
Sweden
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
122	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings1
Fuel
Nonfuel Primary Products
Emerging and Developing Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Kiribati
Timor-Leste
Marshall Islands
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
Latin America and the Caribbean
Ecuador
Argentina
Venezuela
Bolivia
Chile
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Middle East and Central Asia
Algeria
Afghanistan
Azerbaijan
Mauritania
Bahrain
Somalia
Iran
Sudan
Kazakhstan
Tajikistan
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Chad
Botswana
Republic of Congo
Burkina Faso
Equatorial Guinea
Burundi
Gabon
Central African Republic
Nigeria
Democratic Republic of the Congo
South Sudan
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe
1Emerging and Developing Europe is omitted because no economies in the group have fuel or nonfuel primary products as the main source of export 
earnings.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
123
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
*
Bhutan
*
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
•
Cambodia
*
*
China
•
•
Fiji
*
•
India
*
•
Indonesia
*
•
Kiribati
•
*
Lao P.D.R.
*
*
Malaysia
•
•
Maldives
*
•
Marshall Islands
•
•
Micronesia
•
•
Mongolia
*
•
Myanmar
*
*
Nauru
•
•
Nepal
*
*
Palau
*
•
Papua New Guinea
*
*
Philippines
*
•
Samoa
*
•
Solomon Islands
*
*
Sri Lanka
*
•
Thailand
•
•
Timor-Leste
•
*
Tonga
*
•
Tuvalu
•
•
Vanuatu
*
•
Vietnam
*
*
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
•
Belarus
*
•
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
•
Bulgaria
*
•
Hungary
*
•
Kosovo
*
•
Moldova
*
*
Montenegro
*
•
North Macedonia
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Poland
*
•
Romania
*
•
Russia
•
•
Serbia
*
•
Türkiye
*
•
Ukraine
*
•
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
•
Argentina
•
•
Aruba
*
•
The Bahamas
*
•
Barbados
*
•
Belize
*
•
Bolivia
*
•
•
Brazil
*
•
Chile
*
•
Colombia
*
•
Costa Rica
*
•
Dominica
*
•
Dominican Republic
*
•
Ecuador
*
•
El Salvador
*
•
Grenada
*
•
Guatemala
*
•
Guyana
*
•
•
Haiti
*
•
*
Honduras
*
•
*
Jamaica
*
•
Mexico
*
•
Nicaragua
*
•
*
Panama
*
•
Paraguay
*
•
Peru
*
•
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
•
St. Lucia
*
•
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
*
•
Suriname
*
•
Trinidad and Tobago
•
•
Uruguay
*
•
Venezuela
•
•
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries,  
and Per Capita Income Classification 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
124	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
•
•
*
Algeria
•
•
Armenia
*
•
Azerbaijan
•
•
Bahrain
•
•
Djibouti
*
*
Egypt
*
•
Georgia
*
•
Iran
•
•
Iraq
•
•
Jordan
*
•
Kazakhstan
*
•
Kuwait
•
•
Kyrgyz Republic
*
*
Lebanon
*
•
Libya
•
•
Mauritania
*
•
*
Morocco
*
•
Oman
*
•
Pakistan
*
•
Qatar
•
•
Saudi Arabia
•
•
Somalia
*
*
*
Sudan
*
*
*
Syria4
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
*
*
Tunisia
*
•
Turkmenistan
•
•
United Arab Emirates
•
•
Uzbekistan
•
*
West Bank and Gaza
*
•
Yemen
*
*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
*
•
Benin
*
•
*
Botswana
•
•
Burkina Faso
*
•
*
Burundi
*
•
*
Cabo Verde
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Cameroon
*
•
*
Central African Republic
*
•
*
Chad
*
•
*
Comoros
*
•
*
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
*
•
*
Republic of Congo
*
•
*
Côte d’Ivoire
*
•
*
Equatorial Guinea
•
•
Eritrea
•
*
*
Eswatini
•
•
Ethiopia
*
•
*
Gabon
•
•
The Gambia
*
•
*
Ghana
*
•
*
Guinea
*
•
*
Guinea-Bissau
*
•
*
Kenya
*
*
Lesotho
*
*
Liberia
*
•
*
Madagascar
*
•
*
Malawi
*
•
*
Mali
*
•
*
Mauritius
•
•
Mozambique
*
•
*
Namibia
*
•
Niger
*
•
*
Nigeria
*
*
Rwanda
*
•
*
São Tomé and Príncipe
*
•
*
Senegal
*
•
*
Seychelles
*
•
Sierra Leone
*
•
*
South Africa
•
•
South Sudan
* 
*
Tanzania
*
•
*
Togo
*
•
*
Uganda
*
•
*
Zambia
*
•
*
Zimbabwe
*
*
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries,  
and Per Capita Income Classification (continued)
1Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3Dot (star) indicates that the country is classified as an emerging market and middle-income economy (low-income developing country).
4Syria is omitted from the net external position group and per capita income classification group composites for lack of a fully developed database.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
125
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
Government Finance
The Bahamas
Jul/Jun
Bangladesh
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Barbados
Apr/Mar
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Apr/Mar
Dominica
Jul/Jun
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Apr/Mar
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Fiji
Aug/Jul
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
Apr/Mar
India
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Apr/Mar
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Jul/Jun
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
St. Lucia
Apr/Mar
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Apr/Mar
Thailand
Oct/Sep
Tonga
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Trinidad and Tobago
Oct/Sep
1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
126	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Albania
Albanian lek
IMF staff
2021
1996
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2022
Algeria
Algerian dinar
NSO
2021
2001
SNA 1993
From 2005
NSO
2022
Andorra
Euro
NSO
2021
2010
. . .
NSO
2022
Angola
Angolan kwanza
NSO and MEP
2021
2002
ESA 1995
NSO
2022
Antigua and 
Barbuda
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
CB
2021
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Argentina
Argentine peso
NSO
2021
2004
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Armenia
Armenian dram
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Aruba
Aruban florin
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2022
Australia
Australian dollar
NSO 
2022
2020
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2022
Austria
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan manat
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2022
The Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Bahrain
Bahrain dinar
NSO and IMF staff
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Bangladesh
Bangladesh taka
NSO
2021/22
2015/16
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
Barbados
Barbados dollar
NSO and CB
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
NSO
2022
2018
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2022
Belgium
Euro
CB
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
CB
2022
Belize
Belize dollar
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Benin
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Bhutan
Bhutanese 
ngultrum
NSO
2020/21
1999/20006
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
NSO
2021
1990
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bosnian convertible 
marka
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2022
Botswana
Botswana pula
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Brazil
Brazilian real
NSO
2022
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Brunei Darussalam
Brunei dollar
MoF
2021
2010
SNA 2008
MoF
2022
Bulgaria
Bulgarian lev
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2022
Burkina Faso
CFA franc
NSO and MEP
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Burundi
Burundi franc
NSO and IMF staff
2019
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verdean 
escudo
NSO
2021
2007
SNA 2008
From 2011
NSO
2021
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
NSO
2021
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Cameroon
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
From 2016
NSO
2021
Canada
Canadian dollar
NSO
2022
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
MoF and NSO
2022
Central African 
Republic
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Chad
CFA franc
CB
2021
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Chile
Chilean peso
CB
2022
20186
SNA 2008
From 2003
NSO
2022
China
Chinese yuan
NSO
2022
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Colombia
Colombian peso
NSO
2022
2015
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2022
Comoros
Comorian franc
NSO
2021
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
Congolese franc
NSO
2020
2005
SNA 1993
From 2005
CB
2020
Republic of Congo
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colón
CB
2022
2017
SNA 2008
CB
2022
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
127
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Afghanistan
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
NSO, MoF, and CB
2020
BPM 6
Albania
IMF staff
2022
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
. . .
CB
2021
BPM 6
Algeria
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Andorra
NSO and MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Angola
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
. . .
CB
2021
BPM 6
Antigua and 
Barbuda
MoF
2020
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Argentina
MEP
2021
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Armenia
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Aruba
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Australia
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,TG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Austria
NSO
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Azerbaijan
MoF
2022
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
The Bahamas
MoF
2021/22
2014
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bahrain
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bangladesh
MoF
2020/21
. . .
CG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
Barbados
MoF
2021/22
2001
BCG
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Belarus
MoF
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Belgium
CB
2021
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Belize
MoF
2021
1986
CG,MPC
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Benin
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bhutan
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
Bolivia
MoF
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS,NMPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Botswana
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Brazil
MoF
2022
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Brunei Darussalam
MoF
2021
1986
CG,BCG
C
NSO and MEP
2021
BPM 6
Bulgaria
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Burkina Faso
MoF
2021
2001
CG
CB
CB
2021
BPM 6
Burundi
MoF
2020
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Cabo Verde
MoF
2021
2001
CG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Cambodia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Cameroon
MoF
2021
2001
CG,NFPC,NMPC
Mixed
MoF
2021
BPM 5
Canada
MoF and NSO
2022
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
A
NSO
2022
BPM 6
Central African 
Republic
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Chad
MoF
2021
1986
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Chile
MoF
2022
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
China
MoF
2022
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
GAD
2022
BPM 6
Colombia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
. . .
CB and NSO
2022
BPM 6
Comoros
MoF
2021
1986
CG
Mixed
CB and IMF staff
2021
BPM 5
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Republic of Congo
MoF
2021
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Costa Rica
MoF and CB
2022
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
128	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Côte d’Ivoire
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Croatia
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
Cyprus
Euro
NSO
2022
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Denmark
Danish krone
NSO
2022
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
Djibouti
Djibouti franc
NSO
2020
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Dominica
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
From 2007
CB
2022
Ecuador
US dollar
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
NSO and CB
2022
Egypt
Egyptian pound
MEP
2021/22
2016/17
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
El Salvador
US dollar
CB
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Equatorial Guinea
CFA franc
MEP and CB
2021
2006
SNA 1993
MEP
2022
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
IMF staff
2019
2011
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Estonia
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2022
Eswatini
Swazi lilangeni
NSO
2021
2011
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
NSO
2020/21
2015/16
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Fiji
Fijian dollar
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Finland
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
France
Euro
NSO
2021
2014
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Gabon
CFA franc
MEP
2021
2001
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
The Gambia
Gambian dalasi
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Georgia
Georgian lari
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1996
NSO
2022
Germany
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1991
NSO
2022
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Greece
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Grenada
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2021
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Guatemala
Guatemalan 
quetzal
CB
2021
2013
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2021
Guinea
Guinean franc
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Guinea-Bissau
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
NSO
2021
20126
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Haiti
Haitian gourde
NSO
2020/21
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
Honduras
Honduran lempira
CB
2021
2000
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong dollar
NSO
2021
2020
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Hungary
Hungarian forint
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Iceland
Icelandic króna
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1990
NSO
2021
India
Indian rupee
NSO
2021/22
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
NSO
2022
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Iran
Iranian rial
CB
2021/22
2016/17
SNA 2008
CB
2021/22
Iraq
Iraqi dinar 
NSO
2021
2007
. . .
NSO
2021
Ireland
Euro
NSO
2022
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Israel
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2021
Italy
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
NSO
2021
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
129
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Côte d’Ivoire
MoF
2022
1986
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Croatia
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Cyprus
NSO
2022
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
Czech Republic
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Denmark
NSO
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2022
BPM 6
Djibouti
MoF
2021
2001
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 5
Dominica
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Dominican Republic
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ecuador
CB and MoF
2021
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Egypt
MoF
2021/22
2001
CG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 5
El Salvador
MoF and CB
2021
1986
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Equatorial Guinea
MoF and MEP
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Eritrea
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2018
BPM 5
Estonia
MoF
2022
1986/2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Eswatini
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ethiopia
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
Fiji
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Finland
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2022
BPM 6
France
NSO
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Gabon
IMF staff
2021
2001
CG
A
IMF
2019
BPM 5
The Gambia
MoF
2022
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2021
BPM 6
Georgia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Germany
NSO
2022
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
Ghana
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Greece
NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Grenada
MoF
2020
2014
CG
CB
CB
2021
BPM 6
Guatemala
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Guinea
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB and MEP
2021
BPM 6
Guinea-Bissau
MoF
2021
2001
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Guyana
MoF
2021
1986
CG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Haiti
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
Honduras
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS,other
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Hong Kong SAR
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Hungary
MEP and NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Iceland
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
India
MoF and IMF staff
2020/21
1986
CG,SG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
Indonesia
MoF
2022
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
Iran
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 5
Iraq
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ireland
MoF and NSO
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Israel
MoF and NSO
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
. . .
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Italy
NSO
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2022
BPM 6
Jamaica
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
130	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Japan
Japanese yen
GAD
2022
2015
SNA 2008
From 1980
GAD
2022
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2022
Kenya
Kenyan shilling
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Kiribati
Australian dollar
NSO
2021
2006
SNA 2008
IMF staff
2022
Korea
South Korean won
CB
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2022
Kosovo
Euro
NSO
2021
2016
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
MEP and NSO
2020
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2022
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz som
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 2010
NSO
2021
Lao P.D.R.
Lao kip
NSO
2020
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Latvia
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Lebanon
Lebanese pound
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2022
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
NSO
2020/21
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Liberia
US dollar
IMF staff
2021
2018
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Libya
Libyan dinar
MEP
2021
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Lithuania
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 2005
NSO
2022
Luxembourg
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2022
Macao SAR
Macanese pataca
NSO
2022
2020
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2022
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
NSO
2022
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
NSO
2021
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MoF and NSO
2020
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Mali
CFA franc
NSO
2020
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Malta
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2022
Marshall Islands
US dollar
NSO
2020/21
2014/15
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Mauritania
New Mauritanian 
ouguiya
NSO
2021
1998
SNA 2008
From 2014
NSO
2021
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
NSO
2022
2006
SNA 2008
From 1999
NSO
2021
Mexico
Mexican peso
NSO
2022
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Micronesia
US dollar
NSO
2017/18
2003/04
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Moldova
Moldovan leu
NSO
2022
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Mongolia
Mongolian tögrög  
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Montenegro
Euro
NSO
2021
2006
ESA 2010
NSO
2022
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2021
Mozambique
Mozambican metical
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Myanmar
Myanmar kyat
MEP
2019/20
2015/16
. . .
NSO
2020/21
Namibia
Namibian dollar
NSO
2022
2015
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Nauru
Australian dollar
IMF staff
2018/19
2006/07
SNA 2008
NSO and IMF 
staff
2020/21
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NSO
2020/21
2000/01
SNA 1993
CB
2020/21
The Netherlands
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NSO
2021
20096
SNA 2008
From 1987
NSO and IMF 
staff
2021
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan 
córdoba
CB
2021
2006
SNA 2008
From 1994
CB
2022
Niger
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NSO
2022
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
North Macedonia
Macedonian denar
NSO
2021
2005
ESA 2010
NSO
2022
Norway
Norwegian krone
NSO
2022
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
131
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Japan
GAD
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
MoF
2022
BPM 6
Jordan
MoF
2021
2001
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kazakhstan
MoF
2022
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kenya
MoF
2022
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kiribati
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
NSO and IMF staff
2021
BPM 6
Korea
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Kosovo
MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kuwait
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kyrgyz Republic
MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Lao P.D.R.
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Latvia
MoF
2022
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Lebanon
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2021
BPM 5
Lesotho
MoF
2021/22
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
Liberia
MoF
2021
2001
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 5
Libya
CB
2022
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020
BPM 5
Lithuania
MoF
2022
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Luxembourg
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Macao SAR
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SS
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Madagascar
MoF
2022
1986
CG
CB
CB
2022
BPM 6
Malawi
MoF
2021
2014
CG
C
NSO and GAD
2021
BPM 6
Malaysia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Maldives
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Mali
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Malta
NSO
2021
2001
CG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Marshall Islands
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2020/21
BPM 6
Mauritania
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Mauritius
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Mexico
MoF
2022
2014
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Micronesia
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,SG
. . .
NSO
2017/18
BPM 6
Moldova
MoF
2022
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Mongolia
MoF
2022
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Montenegro
MoF
2022
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Morocco
MEP
2021
2001
CG
A
GAD
2021
BPM 6
Mozambique
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG
Mixed
CB
2022
BPM 6
Myanmar
MoF
2019/20
2014
CG,NFPC
C
IMF staff
2020/21
BPM 6
Namibia
MoF
2022
2001
CG
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Nauru
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2021/22
BPM 6
Nepal
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
The Netherlands
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
New Zealand
NSO
2020
2014
CG, LG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Nicaragua
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
IMF staff
2021
BPM 6
Niger
MoF
2021
1986
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Nigeria
MoF
2022
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
North Macedonia
MoF
2021
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Norway
NSO and MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2022
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
132	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Oman
Omani rial
NSO
2021
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Pakistan
Pakistan rupee
NSO
2020/21
2015/166
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Palau
US dollar
MoF
2020/21
2018/19
SNA 1993
MoF
2021/22
Panama
US dollar
NSO
2021
2007
SNA 1993
From 2007
NSO
2022
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea 
kina
NSO and MoF
2020
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Paraguay
Paraguayan 
guaraní
CB
2021
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Peru
Peruvian sol
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
CB
2022
Philippines
Philippine peso
NSO
2022
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Poland
Polish zloty
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 2015
NSO
2022
Portugal
Euro
NSO
2022
2016
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
Puerto Rico
US dollar
NSO
2020/21
1954
. . .
NSO
2021
Qatar
Qatari riyal
NSO and MEP
2021
2018
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2021
Romania
Romanian leu
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2022
Russia
Russian ruble
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2021
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
NSO
2021
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Samoa
Samoan tala
NSO
2021/22
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
San Marino
Euro
NSO
2020
2007
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
São Tomé and 
Príncipe dobra
NSO
2020
2008
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
NSO
2022
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Senegal
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Serbia
Serbian dinar
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2021
Seychelles
Seychelles rupee
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean 
leone
NSO
2021
2006
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2022
Singapore
Singapore dollar
NSO
2022
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2022
Slovak Republic
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1997
NSO
2022
Slovenia
Euro
NSO
2022
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2022
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands 
dollar
CB
2020
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Somalia
US dollar
NSO
2021
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
South Africa
South African rand
NSO
2022
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
South Sudan
South Sudanese 
pound
NSO and IMF staff
2018
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Spain
Euro
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
Other
2022
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
St. Kitts and Nevis
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2021
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
St. Lucia
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2021
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2021
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Sudan
Sudanese pound
NSO
2019
1982
. . .
NSO
2022
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
133
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Oman
MoF
2022
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Pakistan
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
Palau
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
. . .
MoF
2020/21
BPM 6
Panama
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Papua New Guinea
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Paraguay
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Peru
CB and MoF
2022
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Philippines
MoF
2022
2014
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Poland
MoF and NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Portugal
NSO
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
Puerto Rico
MEP
2019/20
2001
. . .
A
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
MoF
2021
1986
CG,other
C
CB and IMF staff
2021
BPM 5
Romania
MoF
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
Russia
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Rwanda
MoF
2021
2014
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Samoa
MoF
2021/22
2001
CG
A
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
San Marino
MoF
2021
. . .
CG
. . .
Other
2020
BPM 6
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
MoF and Customs
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Saudi Arabia
MoF
2021
2014
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Senegal
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2021
BPM 6
Serbia
MoF
2021
1986/2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Seychelles
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Sierra Leone
MoF
2022
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Singapore
MoF and NSO
2021/22
2014
CG
C
NSO
2022
BPM 6
Slovak Republic
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Slovenia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
Solomon Islands
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Somalia
MoF
2022
2001
CG
C
CB
2022
BPM 5
South Africa
MoF
2022
2001
CG,SG,SS,other
C
CB
2022
BPM 6
South Sudan
MoF and MEP
2019
. . .
CG
C
MoF, NSO, MEP, and 
IMF staff
2018
BPM 6
Spain
MoF and NSO
2020
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Sri Lanka
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
St. Kitts and Nevis
MoF
2021
1986
CG,SG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
St. Lucia
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
MoF
2022
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Sudan
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Suriname
MoF
2021
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
134	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Sweden
Swedish krona
NSO
2022
2021
ESA 2010
From 1993
NSO
2022
Switzerland
Swiss franc
NSO
2022
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
Syria
Syrian pound
NSO
2010
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2011
Taiwan Province of 
China
New Taiwan dollar
NSO
2022
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Tajikistan
Tajik somoni
NSO
2022
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
Tanzania
Tanzanian shilling
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Thailand
Thai baht
MEP
2021
2002
SNA 1993
From 1993
MEP
2022
Timor-Leste
US dollar
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Togo
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Tonga
Tongan pa’anga
CB
2020/21
2016/17
SNA 2008
CB
2021/22
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and 
Tobago dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 1993
From 2009
NSO
2022
Türkiye
Turkish lira
NSO
2022
2009
ESA 2010
From 2009
NSO
2022
Turkmenistan
New Turkmen 
manat
IMF staff
2021
2006
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2021
Tuvalu
Australian dollar
PFTAC advisors
2021
2016
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2022
United Arab 
Emirates
U.A.E. dirham
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
United Kingdom
British pound
NSO
2022
2019
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2022
United States
US dollar
NSO
2022
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2022
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
CB
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Uzbekistan
Uzbek som
NSO
2021
2020
SNA 1993
NSO and IMF 
staff
2021
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
NSO
2019
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolívar
CB
2018
1997
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
NSO
2022
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2022
West Bank and Gaza
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
Yemen
Yemeni rial
IMF staff
2020
1990
SNA 1993
NSO,CB, and 
IMF staff
2020
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2022
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
135
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Sweden
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2022
BPM 6
Switzerland
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Syria
MoF
2009
1986
CG
C
CB
2009
BPM 5
Taiwan Province of 
China
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Tajikistan
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Tanzania
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Thailand
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,BCG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Timor-Leste
MoF
2019
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Togo
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Tonga
MoF
2020/21
2014
CG
C
CB and NSO
2020/21
BPM 6
Trinidad and Tobago
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Tunisia
MoF
2022
1986
CG
C
CB
2022
BPM 5
Türkiye
MoF
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS,other
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
Turkmenistan
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Tuvalu
MoF
2021
. . .
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2021
BPM 6
Uganda
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ukraine
MoF
2022
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
United Arab 
Emirates
MoF
2021
2014
CG,BCG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
United Kingdom
NSO
2022
2001
CG,LG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
United States
MEP
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Uruguay
MoF
2022
1986
CG,LG,SS,NFPC, 
NMPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Uzbekistan
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB and MEP
2021
BPM 6
Vanuatu
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Venezuela
MoF
2017
2001
BCG,NFPC,SS,other
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Vietnam
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2022
BPM 5
West Bank and Gaza
MoF
2022
2001
CG
Mixed
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Yemen
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
C
IMF staff
2021
BPM 5
Zambia
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Zimbabwe
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB and MoF
2021
BPM 6
Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, 
Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to 
calculate the index. 
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers 
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public 
corporation; NMPC  = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitment basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.  
6Base year deflator is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
136	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in 
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally 
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for 
differences between the national authorities and the 
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions and 
projected fiscal outturns. When no official budget 
has been announced, projections incorporate policy 
measures judged likely to be implemented. The 
medium-term fiscal projections are similarly based 
on a judgment about policies’ most likely path. For 
cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient informa-
tion to assess the authorities’ budget intentions and 
prospects for policy implementation, an unchanged 
structural primary balance is assumed unless indi-
cated otherwise. Specific assumptions used in regard 
to selected advanced and emerging market economies 
follow. (See also Tables B5 to B9 in the online sec-
tion of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net 
lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the 
available information regarding budget outturn, 
budget plans, and IMF-supported program targets 
for the federal government; on fiscal measures 
announced by the authorities; and on IMF staff 
macroeconomic projections. 
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on data 
from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the fis-
cal year (FY)2022/23 budget published by the 
Commonwealth government in October 2022, 
the FY2022/23 budget and its midyear fiscal 
update published by the respective state/territory 
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a 
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed 
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the 
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output 
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, 
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition 
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include 
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in 
interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluc-
tuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of struc-
tural balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of potential 
GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of 
the October 1993 WEO.) Estimates of the output gap and of 
the structural balance are subject to significant margins of uncer-
tainty. Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus financial assets 
corresponding to debt instruments.
governments, and the IMF staff’s estimates and 
projections.
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on the 2023 
budget and the Austria Medium Term Strategy 
Programme. The NextGenerationEU (NGEU) fund 
and the latest announcement on fiscal measures 
have also been incorporated.
Belgium: Projections are based on the Belgian 
Stability Program 2022–25, the 2023 Budget-
ary Plan, and other available information on the 
authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the 
IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections for 2023 reflect current 
policies in place.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts 
from the Government of Canada’s Fall Economic 
Statement 2022 and the latest provincial budgets. 
The IMF staff makes some adjustments to these 
forecasts, including those for differences in mac-
roeconomic projections. The IMF staff’s forecast 
also incorporates the most recent data releases from 
Statistics Canada’s National Economic Accounts, 
including quarterly federal, provincial, and territo-
rial budgetary outturns.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’ 
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF 
staff’s projections for GDP, copper prices, deprecia-
tion, and inflation. 
China: Staff fiscal projections incorporate the 
2023 budget as well as estimates of off-budget 
financing.
Denmark: Estimates for the current year are 
aligned with the latest official budget numbers, 
adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff’s 
macroeconomic assumptions. Beyond the current 
year, the projections incorporate key features of 
the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the 
authorities’ latest budget. Structural balances are 
net of temporary fluctuations in some revenues 
(for example, North Sea revenue, pension yield tax 
revenue) and one-offs (COVID-19–related one-offs 
are, however, included).
France: Projections for 2022 and projections for 
2023 onward are based on the 2018–23 budget 
laws, the 2023 amending social security finance bill, 
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
137
Stability Program 2022–27, draft medium-term 
programming bill, and other available information 
on the authorities’ fiscal plans, adjusted for differ-
ences in revenue projections and assumptions on 
macroeconomic and financial variables. 
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2023 
and beyond are based on the 2023 budgets and 
data updates from the national statistical agency 
(Destatis) and the ministry of finance, adjusted 
for differences in the IMF staff’s macroeconomic 
framework and assumptions concerning revenue 
elasticities. 
Greece: Data since 2010 reflect adjustments in 
line with the primary balance definition under the 
enhanced surveillance framework for Greece.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projec-
tions are based on the authorities’ medium-term 
fiscal projections for expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF 
staff’s projections for the macroeconomic frame-
work and fiscal policy plans announced in the 2023 
budget.
India: Projections are based on available informa-
tion on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions. Subnational 
data are incorporated with a lag of up to one year; 
general government data are thus finalized well after 
central government data. IMF and Indian presenta-
tions differ, particularly regarding disinvestment and 
license-auction proceeds, net versus gross recording 
of revenues in certain minor categories, and some 
public sector lending. Starting with FY2020/21 
data, expenditure also includes the off-budget 
component of food subsidies, consistent with the 
revised treatment of food subsidies in the budget. 
The IMF staff adjusts expenditure to take out pay-
ments for previous years’ food subsidies, which are 
included as expenditure in budget estimates for 
FY2020/21.
Indonesia: The IMF staff’s projections are based 
on maintaining a neutral fiscal stance, accompanied 
by moderate tax policy and administration reforms, 
some expenditure realization, and a gradual increase 
in capital spending over the medium term in line 
with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the coun-
try’s Budget 2023. 
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the fiscal plans included in the 
government’s 2023 budget and amendments. The 
stock of maturing postal bonds is included in the 
debt projections.
Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures the 
government has already announced, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Korea: The forecast incorporates the overall fis-
cal balance in the 2022 annual budget and two 
supplementary budgets, the proposed 2023 budget 
and medium-term fiscal plan, and the IMF staff’s 
adjustments.
Mexico: The 2020 public sector borrowing 
requirements estimated by the IMF staff adjust for 
some statistical discrepancies between above-the-
line and below-the-line numbers. Fiscal projections 
for 2023 are informed by the estimates in Criterios 
2023; projections for 2024 onward assume contin-
ued compliance with rules established in the Federal 
Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law.
The Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2022–28 
are based on the IMF staff’s forecast framework and 
are also informed by the authorities’ draft budget 
plan and Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
projections. 
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the 
FY2022/23 budget (May 2022) and the IMF staff’s 
estimates. 
Portugal: The projections for the current year are 
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted 
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast. 
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption 
of unchanged policies. Projections for 2023 reflect 
information available in the 2023 budget proposal.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are informed by 
the Certified Fiscal Plan for the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, which was prepared in January 2022, 
certified by the Financial Oversight and Manage-
ment Board.
Russia: The fiscal rule was suspended last year 
by the government in response to the sanctions 
imposed after the invasion of Ukraine, allowing for 
Box A1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
138	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
windfall oil and gas revenues above benchmark to 
be used to finance a larger deficit in 2022. Savings 
accumulated in the National Welfare Fund can 
also now be used this way. A new fiscal rule will 
become fully effective in 2025. The new rule allows 
for higher oil and gas revenues to be spent, but it 
simultaneously targets a smaller primary structural 
deficit.
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff’s baseline fiscal 
projections are based primarily on its understand-
ing of government policies as outlined in the 2022 
budget. Export oil revenues are based on WEO 
baseline oil price assumptions and the IMF staff’s 
understanding of current oil policy under the 
OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC 
oil exporters) agreement.
Singapore: FY2020 figures are based on budget 
execution. FY2021 projections are based on revised 
figures based on budget execution through the 
end of 2021. FY2022 projections are based on the 
initial budget of February 18, 2022. The IMF staff 
assumes gradual withdrawal of remaining pandemic-
related measures and the implementation of various 
revenue measures announced in the FY2022 budget 
for the remainder of the projection period. These 
include (1) an increase in the Goods and Services 
Tax from 7 percent to 8 percent on January 1, 
2023, and to 9 percent on January 1, 2024; (2) an 
increase in property taxes in 2023 for non-owner-
occupied properties (from 10–20 percent to 
12–36 percent) and for owner-occupied properties 
with an annual value in excess of S$30,000 (from 
4–16 percent to 6–32 percent); and (3) an increase 
of the carbon tax from S$5 a tonne to S$25 a tonne 
in 2024 and 2025 and S$45 a tonne in 2026 and 
2027. 
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions draw on the 
2022 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement. 
Nontax revenue excludes transactions in finan-
cial assets and liabilities, as they involve primarily 
revenues associated with realized exchange rate valu-
ation gains from the holding of foreign currency 
deposits, sale of assets, and conceptually similar 
items.
Spain: Fiscal projections for 2022 include 
COVID-19– and energy-related support measures, 
a legislated increase in pensions, and legislated reve-
nue measures. Fiscal projections from 2023 onward 
assume energy support measures amounting to 1 
percent of GDP in 2023. Projections for 2021–25 
reflect disbursements under the EU Recovery and 
Resilience Facility.
Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2022 and 2023 are 
based on the authorities’ Budget Bill and have been 
updated with the authorities’ latest interim forecast. 
The impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal 
accounts is calculated using the 2014 Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development 
elasticity2 to take into account output and employ-
ment gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal 
policy is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal bal-
ances in line with the requirements of Switzerland’s 
fiscal rules.
Türkiye: The basis for the projections is the 
IMF-defined fiscal balance, which excludes some 
revenue and expenditure items that are included in 
the authorities’ headline balance. 
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based 
on the latest GDP data published by the Office of 
National Statistics on January 21, 2023, and fore-
casts by the Office for Budget Responsibility from 
March 15, 2023. Revenue projections are adjusted 
for differences between the IMF staff’s forecasts for 
macroeconomic variables (such as GDP growth 
and inflation) and the forecasts for these variables 
assumed in the authorities’ fiscal projections. 
IMF baseline projections take Office for Budget 
Responsibility forecasts only as a reference and do 
not necessarily assume that the new fiscal rules 
announced on November 17, 2022, will be met at 
the end of the forecast period. The IMF staff’s data 
exclude public sector banks and the effect of trans-
ferring assets from the Royal Mail Pension Plan to 
2 Robert Price, Thai-Thanh Dang, and Yvan Guillemette, 
“New Tax and Expenditure Elasticity Estimates for EU Budget 
Surveillance,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper 
1174, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment, Paris, 2014.
Box A1 (continued)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
139
the public sector in April 2012. Real government 
consumption and investment are part of the real 
GDP path, which, according to the IMF staff, may 
or may not be the same as projected by the Office 
for Budget Responsibility. Data are presented on a 
calendar year basis.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on 
the February 2023 Congressional Budget Office 
baseline, adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and 
macroeconomic assumptions. Projections incorpo-
rate the effects of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
and Inflation Reduction Act. Fiscal projections are 
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s forecasts for key 
macroeconomic and financial variables and differ-
ent accounting treatment of financial sector support 
and of defined-benefit pension plans and are con-
verted to a general government basis. 
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the 
established policy framework in each country. 
In most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative 
stance over the business cycle: Official interest rates 
will increase when economic indicators suggest 
that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or 
range; they will decrease when indicators suggest 
that inflation will not exceed the acceptable rate 
or range, that output growth is below its potential 
rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy is 
significant. With regard to interest rates, please refer 
to the “Assumptions” section at the beginning of 
the Statistical Appendix.
Argentina: Monetary projections are consistent 
with the overall macroeconomic framework, the 
fiscal and financing plans, and the monetary and 
foreign exchange policies under the crawling-peg 
regime.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the IMF staff’s analysis and the expected infla-
tion path.
Austria: Monetary growth projections are in 
proportion to nominal GDP growth.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with the convergence of inflation within the 
tolerance band by the end of 2024.
Canada: Projections reflect monetary policy 
tightening by the Bank of Canada and increased 
long-term yields, in response to inflation signifi-
cantly overshooting its target. It is expected that the 
Bank of Canada will keep the rates high for most of 
2023 to bring down inflation back to its target by 
the end of 2024.
Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with attaining the inflation target.
China: The overall monetary policy stance 
was moderately accommodative in 2022 and is 
expected to remain broadly accommodative in 
2023.
Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg 
to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro 
area member countries are drawn from a suite of 
models (semistructural, dynamic stochastic general 
equilibrium [DSGE], Taylor rule), market expecta-
tions, and the European Central Bank Governing 
Council communication.
Greece: Broad money projections are based on 
monetary financial institution balance sheets and 
deposit flow assumptions.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The 
IMF staff assumes that the currency board system 
will remain intact.
Hungary: The IMF staff’s judgment is based on 
recent developments.
India: Monetary policy projections are consistent 
with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation 
target over the medium term, despite a recent uptick 
in inflation that exceeded the upper target band.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in 
line with inflation within the central bank’s target 
band over the medium term.
Israel: Monetary policy assumptions are based on 
gradual normalization of monetary policy.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the actual outturn from and 
policy plans by the Bank of Italy and the European 
Central Bank’s monetary policy stance forecast from 
the IMF’s euro area team. 
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with market expectations.
Box A1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
140	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Korea: Projections assume that the policy rate will 
evolve in line with market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with attaining the inflation target.
The Netherlands: Monetary projections are based 
on the IMF staff’s estimated six-month euro London 
interbank offered rate projections.
New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on 
the IMF staff’s analysis and expected inflation path. 
Portugal: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the IMF staff’s spreadsheets, given input projec-
tions for the real and fiscal sectors.
Russia: Monetary policy projections assume 
that the Central Bank of the Russian Federation is 
adopting a tight monetary policy stance.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are 
based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg 
to the US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in 
line with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with maintaining inflation within the 
3–6 percent target band over the medium term.
Spain: Monetary growth projections are in pro-
portion to nominal GDP growth.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with 
Riksbank projections.
Switzerland: The inflation outlook suggests that 
the Swiss National Bank may need to continue 
monetary tightening in 2023.
Türkiye: The baseline assumes that the mon-
etary policy stance will remain in line with market 
expectations.
United Kingdom: The short-term inter-
est rate path is based on market interest rate 
expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal 
Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the 
federal funds target rate in line with the broader 
macroeconomic outlook.
Box A1 (continued)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
141
List of Tables1
Output
A1.	 Summary of World Output
A2.	 Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3.	 Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
A4.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Inflation
A5. Summary of Inflation
A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Financial Policies
A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt
Foreign Trade
A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
1 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
142	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
World
3.9
3.4
3.3
3.8
3.6
2.8
–2.8
6.3
3.4
2.8
3.0
3.0
Advanced Economies
1.5
2.3
1.8
2.5
2.3
1.7
–4.2
5.4
2.7
1.3
1.4
1.8
United States
1.6
2.7
1.7
2.2
2.9
2.3
–2.8
5.9
2.1
1.6
1.1
2.1
Euro Area
0.8
2.0
1.9
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.1
5.4
3.5
0.8
1.4
1.4
Japan
0.5
1.6
0.8
1.7
0.6
–0.4
–4.3
2.1
1.1
1.3
1.0
0.4
Other Advanced Economies2
2.6
2.1
2.3
3.0
2.5
1.9
–4.1
5.8
3.1
1.3
1.9
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.1
4.4
4.4
4.7
4.7
3.6
–1.8
6.9
4.0
3.9
4.2
3.9
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.3
6.8
6.8
6.6
6.4
5.2
–0.5
7.5
4.4
5.3
5.1
4.4
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.7
1.0
1.8
4.2
3.6
2.5
–1.6
7.3
0.8
1.2
2.5
2.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
3.5
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.2
–6.8
7.0
4.0
1.6
2.2
2.3
Middle East and Central Asia
4.5
3.0
4.3
2.2
2.8
1.6
–2.7
4.6
5.3
2.9
3.5
3.7
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.5
3.2
1.5
2.9
3.2
3.3
–1.7
4.8
3.9
3.6
4.2
4.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
4.6
1.7
1.4
0.7
0.6
–0.5
–3.7
4.1
4.8
3.1
3.2
2.9
Nonfuel
6.3
4.7
4.8
5.2
5.1
4.1
–1.6
7.2
3.9
4.0
4.3
4.0
Of which, Primary Products
4.3
2.6
1.6
2.8
1.6
1.0
–5.7
8.0
3.8
1.8
3.4
3.0
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
5.2
4.1
4.0
4.7
4.6
3.3
–3.2
6.6
4.8
3.7
4.5
4.6
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
4.5
1.5
2.9
3.3
3.6
3.4
–0.9
3.4
0.6
2.7
4.3
5.1
Other Groups
European Union
1.1
2.5
2.0
3.0
2.3
2.0
–5.6
5.6
3.7
0.7
1.6
1.7
Middle East and North Africa
4.2
2.9
4.7
1.6
2.1
1.0
–3.1
4.3
5.3
3.1
3.4
3.5
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
6.1
4.3
4.5
4.7
4.6
3.5
–2.0
7.1
3.9
3.9
4.0
3.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
6.0
4.8
3.9
4.8
5.1
5.0
1.1
4.1
5.0
4.7
5.4
5.6
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
1.7
2.3
2.2
3.0
2.8
2.0
–4.3
5.9
3.4
1.3
1.7
2.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.6
3.4
3.4
3.7
3.5
3.1
–3.5
4.6
4.0
3.4
3.6
3.4
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.9
3.0
2.9
2.8
3.0
2.4
–5.5
4.7
4.0
3.0
3.2
3.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.3
4.3
4.4
4.3
4.1
4.5
–0.5
4.3
3.9
4.1
4.6
4.7
Output per Capita3
Advanced Economies
0.9
1.7
1.3
2.1
1.9
1.3
–4.7
5.3
2.3
0.9
1.0
1.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
2.8
2.9
3.3
3.3
2.3
–3.1
6.1
2.8
2.8
3.0
2.7
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.6
3.0
3.2
3.5
3.6
2.5
–3.0
6.4
3.1
3.1
3.3
2.9
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.5
2.2
1.5
2.5
2.7
2.6
–1.2
2.6
2.7
2.5
3.2
3.3
World Growth Rate Based on Market 
Exchange Rates
2.6
2.8
2.6
3.3
3.2
2.5
–3.2
6.0
3.0
2.4
2.4
2.6
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
65,531
74,968
76,228
81,051
85,967
87,284
84,895
96,314
100,218
105,569
110,764
134,950
At Purchasing Power Parities
89,412
111,934 116,227 122,392 129,799 135,745 133,368 147,910
163,510
174,471
183,654
223,272
1Real GDP.
2Excludes euro area countries, Japan, and the United States.
3Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
143
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Q4 over Q42
Average
Projections
Projections 
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
2022:Q4
2023:Q4 2024:Q4
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
1.5
2.3
1.8
2.5
2.3
1.7
–4.2
5.4
2.7
1.3
1.4
1.8
1.2
1.1
1.6
United States
1.6
2.7
1.7
2.2
2.9
2.3
–2.8
5.9
2.1
1.6
1.1
2.1
0.9
1.0
1.3
Euro Area
0.8
2.0
1.9
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.1
5.4
3.5
0.8
1.4
1.4
1.9
0.7
1.8
Germany
1.4
1.5
2.2
2.7
1.0
1.1
–3.7
2.6
1.8
–0.1
1.1
1.1
0.9
0.2
1.8
France
1.0
1.1
1.0
2.4
1.8
1.9
–7.9
6.8
2.6
0.7
1.3
1.4
0.5
0.8
1.4
Italy
–0.5
0.8
1.3
1.7
0.9
0.5
–9.0
7.0
3.7
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.4
0.4
1.1
Spain
0.5
3.8
3.0
3.0
2.3
2.0
–11.3
5.5
5.5
1.5
2.0
1.6
2.7
1.3
2.1
The Netherlands
1.1
2.0
2.2
2.9
2.4
2.0
–3.9
4.9
4.5
1.0
1.2
1.6
3.3
0.0
2.8
Belgium
1.4
2.0
1.3
1.6
1.8
2.2
–5.4
6.1
3.1
0.7
1.1
1.3
1.4
0.7
1.3
Ireland
1.8
24.4
2.0
9.0
8.5
5.4
6.2
13.6
12.0
5.6
4.0
3.0
13.1
5.2
3.3
Austria
1.3
1.0
2.0
2.3
2.4
1.5
–6.5
4.6
5.0
0.4
1.1
1.5
3.0
0.1
1.3
Portugal
–0.2
1.8
2.0
3.5
2.8
2.7
–8.3
5.5
6.7
1.0
1.7
1.9
3.2
0.9
2.2
Greece
–2.1
–0.2
–0.5
1.1
1.7
1.9
–9.0
8.4
5.9
2.6
1.5
1.2
5.2
1.0
2.5
Finland
0.7
0.5
2.8
3.2
1.1
1.2
–2.4
3.0
2.1
0.0
1.3
1.2
0.3
0.7
1.5
Slovak Republic
3.9
5.2
1.9
2.9
4.0
2.5
–3.4
3.0
1.7
1.3
2.7
2.7
1.2
1.8
2.7
Croatia
0.4
2.5
3.6
3.4
2.8
3.4
–8.6
13.1
6.3
1.7
2.3
2.8
4.5
3.2
1.1
Lithuania
3.0
2.0
2.5
4.3
4.0
4.6
0.0
6.0
1.9
–0.3
2.7
2.0
–0.5
1.2
3.0
Slovenia
1.3
2.2
3.2
4.8
4.5
3.5
–4.3
8.2
5.4
1.6
2.1
3.0
0.2
2.3
1.9
Luxembourg
2.5
2.3
5.0
1.3
1.2
2.3
–0.8
5.1
1.5
1.1
1.7
2.3
–2.2
4.3
1.3
Latvia
2.1
3.9
2.4
3.3
4.0
2.6
–2.2
4.1
2.0
0.4
2.9
3.4
0.5
2.0
2.9
Estonia
2.2
1.9
3.2
5.8
3.8
3.7
–0.6
8.0
–1.3
–1.2
3.2
3.2
–4.4
2.0
3.7
Cyprus 
0.6
3.4
6.6
5.7
5.6
5.5
–4.4
6.6
5.6
2.5
2.8
2.9
4.5
1.7
3.4
Malta
3.6
9.6
3.4
10.9
6.2
7.0
–8.6
11.8
6.9
3.5
3.5
3.6
4.7
3.1
2.8
Japan
0.5
1.6
0.8
1.7
0.6
–0.4
–4.3
2.1
1.1
1.3
1.0
0.4
0.6
1.3
1.0
United Kingdom
1.2
2.4
2.2
2.4
1.7
1.6
–11.0
7.6
4.0
–0.3
1.0
1.5
0.4
–0.4
2.0
Korea
3.8
2.8
2.9
3.2
2.9
2.2
–0.7
4.1
2.6
1.5
2.4
2.2
1.3
3.1
1.3
Canada
1.9
0.7
1.0
3.0
2.8
1.9
–5.1
5.0
3.4
1.5
1.5
1.7
2.1
1.4
1.8
Taiwan Province of China
4.0
1.5
2.2
3.3
2.8
3.1
3.4
6.5
2.5
2.1
2.6
2.4
–0.5
1.1
2.2
Australia
2.8
2.3
2.7
2.4
2.8
1.9
–1.8
5.2
3.7
1.6
1.7
2.3
2.7
1.4
1.6
Switzerland
2.2
1.6
2.1
1.4
2.9
1.2
–2.5
4.2
2.1
0.8
1.8
1.8
0.8
1.2
1.8
Singapore
6.1
3.0
3.6
4.5
3.6
1.3
–3.9
8.9
3.6
1.5
2.1
2.5
2.1
2.1
1.9
Sweden
1.8
4.5
2.1
2.6
2.0
2.0
–2.2
5.4
2.6
–0.5
1.0
2.3
–0.1
0.0
1.3
Hong Kong SAR
3.9
2.4
2.2
3.8
2.8
–1.7
–6.5
6.4
–3.5
3.5
3.1
2.7
–4.2
6.8
1.8
Czech Republic
2.2
5.4
2.5
5.2
3.2
3.0
–5.5
3.6
2.4
–0.5
2.0
2.5
0.2
0.6
2.1
Israel
4.2
2.5
4.5
4.3
4.1
4.2
–1.9
8.6
6.4
2.9
3.1
3.6
2.7
2.1
3.4
Norway
1.4
1.9
1.2
2.5
0.8
1.1
–1.3
3.9
3.3
2.1
2.5
1.4
1.8
1.9
2.2
Denmark
0.7
2.3
3.2
2.8
2.0
1.5
–2.0
4.9
3.6
0.0
1.0
1.5
1.5
–0.8
1.5
New Zealand
2.0
3.7
3.9
3.5
3.5
3.1
–1.5
6.1
2.4
1.1
0.8
2.5
2.2
0.1
2.5
Puerto Rico
–1.1
–1.0
–1.3
–2.9
–4.4
1.7
–4.4
0.2
4.8
0.4
–1.6
–0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
10.2
–21.5
–0.7
10.0
6.5
–2.5
–54.2
19.3 –26.8
58.9
20.6
3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iceland
2.1
4.4
6.3
4.2
4.9
1.8
–7.2
4.3
6.4
2.3
2.1
2.3
4.2
0.0
3.1
Andorra
–0.8
1.4
3.7
0.3
1.6
2.0
–11.2
8.9
8.7
1.3
1.5
1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
San Marino
–2.2
2.7
2.3
0.3
1.5
2.1
–6.7
8.3
4.6
1.2
1.0
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.2
2.1
1.5
2.2
2.1
1.6
–4.5
5.3
2.3
1.1
1.1
1.6
0.9
0.8
1.4
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.3
2.6
2.0
2.5
2.3
2.0
–4.1
5.5
3.1
0.9
1.3
1.8
1.0
1.1
1.6
United States
1.4
3.4
1.8
2.3
3.1
2.3
–2.4
7.0
2.4
0.9
1.0
2.1
0.6
0.9
1.2
Euro Area
0.5
2.3
2.4
2.3
1.9
2.4
–5.8
4.2
3.7
0.7
1.2
1.4
1.1
0.8
1.6
Germany
1.1
1.4
3.1
2.6
1.6
1.7
–3.0
1.9
3.1
0.1
1.2
1.3
1.5
0.4
2.3
France
1.2
1.4
1.4
2.5
1.4
2.1
–6.7
6.6
3.3
0.3
0.3
1.4
1.3
–0.5
1.0
Italy
–0.8
1.2
1.8
1.8
1.3
–0.2
–8.4
7.2
4.3
0.7
0.9
1.0
0.3
1.8
0.5
Spain
–0.2
4.1
2.1
3.3
3.0
1.7
–9.4
5.3
2.9
1.6
1.9
1.2
0.7
2.5
1.5
Japan
0.5
1.1
0.3
1.1
0.6
0.0
–3.4
1.1
1.7
1.5
1.0
0.4
1.3
1.5
0.9
United Kingdom
1.2
2.9
3.2
2.1
1.2
1.8
–12.3
8.8
4.0
0.3
0.6
1.5
–0.3
1.6
2.0
Canada
2.7
–0.2
0.4
4.1
2.5
1.1
–6.0
6.6
4.7
–0.2
1.6
2.1
1.9
0.7
2.2
Other Advanced Economies3
2.8
2.6
2.9
3.6
2.7
1.6
–2.5
5.3
3.3
1.4
2.2
2.4
2.4
0.8
3.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.1
2.4
1.7
2.2
2.2
1.7
–4.2
5.8
2.8
0.8
1.0
1.7
0.8
0.9
1.3
1In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
144	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2005–14
2015–24
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
1.4
1.7
2.4
2.1
2.2
2.2
1.5
–5.5
5.4
3.6
1.5
1.4
United States
1.7
2.3
3.3
2.5
2.4
2.9
2.0
–3.0
8.3
2.8
1.5
0.9
Euro Area
0.5
1.1
1.9
2.0
1.8
1.5
1.4
–7.7
3.7
4.3
1.1
1.6
Germany
0.8
1.1
1.9
2.4
1.4
1.5
1.6
–5.6
0.4
4.3
1.3
2.2
France
1.2
1.0
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.0
1.8
–6.8
5.3
2.8
0.2
1.1
Italy
–0.4
0.6
1.9
1.2
1.5
1.0
0.2
–10.4
4.7
4.6
1.1
1.2
Spain
0.0
1.1
2.9
2.7
3.0
1.7
1.1
–12.2
6.0
4.3
1.1
1.7
Japan
0.7
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
1.1
0.2
–0.6
–4.7
0.4
2.1
1.7
1.0
United Kingdom
1.2
0.9
3.1
3.6
1.9
2.5
1.1
–13.2
6.2
5.4
–0.6
0.6
Canada
2.9
2.1
2.3
2.1
3.7
2.6
1.5
–6.1
5.0
4.8
3.3
1.9
Other Advanced Economies1
2.7
2.0
2.9
2.6
2.8
2.8
1.9
–5.5
4.3
4.1
2.2
2.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.3
1.6
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.1
1.4
–5.1
5.7
3.3
1.3
1.1
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
1.2
1.7
1.7
2.1
0.8
1.5
2.8
1.9
3.6
1.0
1.0
0.9
United States
0.3
1.4
1.6
1.9
–0.1
1.2
3.4
2.2
1.3
–0.2
1.6
1.2
Euro Area
1.2
1.4
1.3
1.9
1.1
1.0
1.7
1.0
4.3
1.1
0.3
0.5
Germany
1.7
2.1
2.9
4.0
1.7
0.8
2.6
4.0
3.8
1.2
–0.5
1.0
France
1.5
1.2
1.0
1.4
1.4
0.8
1.0
–4.0
6.4
2.7
0.9
0.9
Italy
–0.3
–0.3
–0.6
0.7
–0.1
0.1
–0.6
0.0
1.5
0.0
–0.9
–2.6
Spain
2.1
1.6
2.0
1.0
1.0
2.3
1.9
3.5
2.9
–0.9
2.0
0.7
Japan
1.3
1.4
1.9
1.6
0.1
1.0
1.9
2.4
3.5
1.5
0.1
0.5
United Kingdom
1.3
1.7
1.2
0.8
0.4
0.3
4.1
–7.3
12.5
1.9
2.6
1.6
Canada
1.7
2.0
1.4
1.8
2.1
3.2
1.0
1.3
6.4
2.0
0.1
1.0
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
3.0
2.8
3.5
2.4
3.5
3.7
4.6
4.5
2.6
1.2
1.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.8
1.4
1.6
1.9
0.4
1.1
2.6
1.1
3.3
0.6
1.0
0.9
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
0.9
2.1
3.6
2.6
3.8
3.1
3.0
–3.3
5.6
1.6
0.0
1.4
United States
1.2
2.1
3.7
2.1
3.8
4.7
2.6
–1.2
5.7
–0.5
–1.0
1.2
Euro Area
–0.3
2.5
4.7
4.0
3.9
3.1
6.9
–6.2
3.8
3.7
0.4
1.1
Germany
1.7
1.3
1.7
3.8
2.6
3.3
1.9
–2.3
1.2
0.4
–0.6
0.6
France
0.7
1.7
0.9
2.5
5.0
3.2
4.2
–8.4
11.3
2.3
–0.6
–1.9
Italy
–2.8
3.7
1.8
4.0
3.2
3.1
1.2
–7.9
18.6
9.4
2.3
2.8
Spain
–2.6
2.5
4.9
2.4
6.8
6.3
4.5
–9.7
0.9
4.3
1.3
3.9
Japan
–0.3
0.5
2.3
1.2
1.6
0.6
0.5
–3.6
–0.1
–0.9
2.3
1.7
United Kingdom
0.8
1.4
6.5
4.9
3.5
–0.2
1.9
–10.5
6.1
7.7
–4.1
–0.3
Canada
3.2
0.2
–5.2
–4.7
3.3
2.5
0.8
–2.4
7.4
–1.5
0.6
1.8
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.5
2.3
3.0
4.8
2.1
0.8
–1.1
7.7
2.2
0.9
2.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.8
1.8
2.8
2.2
3.4
3.3
2.2
–3.3
5.8
0.9
–0.5
1.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
145
Averages
Projections
2005–14
2015–24
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.8
2.6
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.1
–3.7
5.1
2.7
1.1
1.3
United States
1.4
2.1
3.1
2.3
2.3
3.0
2.3
–1.9
6.7
1.7
1.0
1.0
Euro Area
0.5
1.5
2.3
2.4
2.1
1.8
2.7
–5.5
3.9
3.4
0.8
1.2
Germany
1.2
1.4
2.1
3.1
1.7
1.8
1.9
–2.8
1.4
2.7
0.4
1.6
France
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.7
2.3
1.4
2.1
–6.5
6.9
2.7
0.2
0.3
Italy
–0.8
1.1
1.4
1.6
1.5
1.2
0.2
–8.0
6.6
4.7
1.0
0.9
Spain
–0.1
1.5
3.1
2.3
3.3
2.7
1.9
–8.6
4.2
3.1
1.4
2.0
Japan
0.5
0.5
0.8
0.3
1.0
0.5
0.2
–3.0
1.0
1.2
2.0
1.0
United Kingdom
1.1
1.2
3.3
3.3
1.9
1.6
1.8
–11.6
7.5
5.1
–0.6
0.6
Canada
2.7
1.5
0.3
0.5
3.3
2.7
1.3
–3.8
5.8
2.7
0.9
1.7
Other Advanced Economies1
2.8
2.3
2.7
2.9
3.4
2.4
1.8
–2.5
5.2
3.2
1.7
2.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.1
1.6
2.3
2.0
2.0
2.2
1.8
–3.6
5.5
2.3
0.9
1.0
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.3
0.5
–0.2
0.0
United States
0.0
0.0
0.3
–0.5
0.0
0.2
0.0
–0.5
0.2
0.7
–0.1
0.0
Euro Area
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.3
0.3
–0.1
–0.1
Germany
–0.1
0.0
–0.7
0.0
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.5
0.4
–0.3
–0.3
France
0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.3
0.7
0.2
0.0
Italy
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
–0.5
–0.5
0.5
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
Spain
–0.1
–0.4
–1.5
–0.1
0.0
0.3
–0.2
–0.8
–1.1
–0.7
0.2
0.0
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.3
–0.1
0.1
0.2
–0.1
–0.5
0.2
0.5
–0.1
0.0
United Kingdom
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.2
–0.5
0.1
–0.6
1.0
0.0
–0.3
0.0
Canada
0.0
0.2
–0.5
0.0
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–1.2
1.1
2.9
–1.2
–0.1
Other Advanced Economies1
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.3
–0.2
0.0
0.1
0.3
–0.4
–0.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.5
0.3
0.6
–0.2
–0.1
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
0.2
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.4
0.1
United States
0.2
–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
–0.3
–1.2
–0.4
0.6
0.1
Euro Area
0.3
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
0.4
0.0
–0.7
–0.5
1.3
–0.1
0.1
0.2
Germany
0.4
–0.3
0.3
–0.6
0.2
–0.6
–0.6
–0.8
0.8
–1.2
–0.1
–0.1
France
–0.2
–0.1
–0.4
–0.4
–0.1
0.4
–0.3
–1.0
0.0
–0.8
0.4
0.9
Italy
0.3
–0.2
–0.4
–0.5
0.0
–0.3
0.7
–0.8
0.0
–0.5
–0.1
–0.1
Spain
0.7
0.1
–0.1
1.0
–0.2
–0.6
0.4
–2.2
0.3
2.6
–0.1
0.1
Japan
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
1.0
–0.6
–0.1
0.0
United Kingdom
–0.1
–0.1
–0.4
–0.3
1.0
–0.1
–0.3
1.5
–1.2
–0.8
–0.7
0.4
Canada
–0.8
–0.1
0.8
0.4
–1.1
0.2
0.7
0.3
–2.1
–1.4
1.6
–0.1
Other Advanced Economies1
0.6
0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.2
0.5
0.6
0.5
–0.4
0.5
0.2
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.3
–0.6
–0.6
0.3
0.1
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
146	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.3
6.8
6.8
6.6
6.4
5.2
–0.5
7.5
4.4
5.3
5.1
4.4
Bangladesh
6.2
6.6
7.1
6.6
7.3
7.9
3.4
6.9
7.1
5.5
6.5
7.0
Bhutan
7.6
6.2
7.4
6.3
3.8
4.4
–2.3
–3.3
4.3
4.7
3.4
3.9
Brunei Darussalam
0.4
–0.4
–2.5
1.3
0.1
3.9
1.1
–1.6
–1.5
3.3
3.5
3.1
Cambodia
7.5
7.0
6.9
7.0
7.5
7.1
–3.1
3.0
5.0
5.8
6.2
6.3
China
10.0
7.0
6.9
6.9
6.8
6.0
2.2
8.4
3.0
5.2
4.5
3.4
Fiji
1.6
4.5
2.4
5.4
3.8
–0.6
–17.0
–5.1
14.5
7.0
5.0
3.5
India1
7.7
8.0
8.3
6.8
6.5
3.9
–5.8
9.1
6.8
5.9
6.3
6.0
Indonesia
5.9
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.2
5.0
–2.1
3.7
5.3
5.0
5.1
5.0
Kiribati
1.4
9.9
–0.5
–0.1
5.3
–2.1
–1.4
7.9
1.2
2.5
2.4
2.1
Lao P.D.R.
7.8
7.3
7.0
6.9
6.3
4.7
–0.4
2.1
2.3
4.0
4.0
4.5
Malaysia
4.9
5.0
4.4
5.8
4.8
4.4
–5.5
3.1
8.7
4.5
4.5
3.9
Maldives
5.1
2.9
6.3
7.2
8.1
6.9
–33.4
41.7
12.3
7.2
5.7
5.1
Marshall Islands
0.8
1.6
1.4
3.3
3.1
6.8
–1.6
1.7
1.3
3.0
2.0
1.5
Micronesia
–0.4
4.6
0.9
2.7
0.2
1.2
–1.8
–3.2
–0.6
2.8
2.8
0.6
Mongolia
8.5
2.4
1.5
5.6
7.7
5.6
–4.6
1.6
4.8
4.5
5.5
5.0
Myanmar
8.4
7.5
6.4
5.8
6.4
6.8
3.2
–17.9
2.0
2.6
2.6
3.4
Nauru
7.5
–5.7
8.0
–5.9
7.2
9.1
4.1
2.7
3.0
1.0
2.0
2.2
Nepal
4.3
4.0
0.4
9.0
7.6
6.7
–2.4
4.2
5.8
4.4
5.1
5.2
Palau
–0.1
9.6
3.7
–3.4
0.0
0.4
–7.5
–12.1
–2.9
8.7
9.6
3.2
Papua New Guinea
5.4
6.6
5.5
3.5
–0.3
4.5
–3.2
0.1
4.5
3.7
4.4
3.1
Philippines
5.4
6.3
7.1
6.9
6.3
6.1
–9.5
5.7
7.6
6.0
5.8
6.4
Samoa
1.5
3.9
8.0
1.4
–0.6
4.5
–3.1
–7.1
–6.0
5.0
3.6
2.3
Solomon Islands
4.7
1.7
5.6
3.1
2.7
1.7
–3.4
–0.6
–4.1
2.5
2.4
3.0
Sri Lanka
6.6
4.2
5.1
6.5
2.3
–0.2
–3.5
3.3
–8.7
–3.0
1.5
3.1
Thailand
3.5
3.1
3.4
4.2
4.2
2.1
–6.2
1.6
2.6
3.4
3.6
3.1
Timor-Leste2
5.7
2.8
3.4
–3.1
–0.7
2.1
–8.3
2.9
3.3
2.2
3.1
3.0
Tonga
0.5
1.2
6.6
3.3
0.2
0.7
0.5
–2.7
–2.0
2.5
2.8
1.8
Tuvalu
1.2
9.4
4.7
3.3
1.4
13.8
–4.3
1.8
0.7
4.3
3.1
2.2
Vanuatu
3.4
0.4
4.7
6.3
2.9
3.2
–5.0
0.6
1.9
3.5
3.6
2.5
Vietnam
6.3
7.0
6.7
6.9
7.5
7.4
2.9
2.6
8.0
5.8
6.9
6.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.7
1.0
1.8
4.2
3.6
2.5
–1.6
7.3
0.8
1.2
2.5
2.3
Albania
3.8
2.2
3.3
3.8
4.0
2.1
–3.5
8.5
3.7
2.2
3.3
3.4
Belarus
5.5
–3.8
–2.5
2.5
3.1
1.4
–0.7
2.3
–4.7
0.7
1.2
0.7
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2.5
4.3
3.2
3.2
3.8
2.9
–3.0
7.4
3.8
2.0
3.0
3.0
Bulgaria
2.8
3.4
3.0
2.8
2.7
4.0
–4.0
7.6
3.4
1.4
3.5
2.8
Hungary
1.0
3.7
2.2
4.3
5.4
4.9
–4.5
7.1
4.9
0.5
3.2
3.5
Kosovo
4.5
5.9
5.6
4.8
3.4
4.8
–5.3
10.7
2.7
3.5
3.9
3.5
Moldova
4.3
–0.3
4.4
4.2
4.1
3.6
–8.3
13.9
–5.6
2.0
4.3
5.1
Montenegro
2.9
3.4
2.9
4.7
5.1
4.1
–15.3
13.0
6.4
3.2
3.0
3.0
North Macedonia
3.3
3.9
2.8
1.1
2.9
3.9
–4.7
3.9
2.2
1.4
3.6
3.5
Poland
3.8
4.4
3.0
5.1
5.9
4.4
–2.0
6.8
4.9
0.3
2.4
3.1
Romania
3.0
3.2
2.9
8.2
6.0
3.8
–3.7
5.9
4.8
2.4
3.7
3.5
Russia 
3.6
–2.0
0.2
1.8
2.8
2.2
–2.7
5.6
–2.1
0.7
1.3
0.7
Serbia
2.7
1.8
3.3
2.1
4.5
4.3
–0.9
7.5
2.3
2.0
3.0
4.0
Türkiye
5.4
6.1
3.3
7.5
3.0
0.8
1.9
11.4
5.6
2.7
3.6
3.0
Ukraine1
0.7
–9.8
2.4
2.4
3.5
3.2
–3.8
3.4
–30.3
–3.0
. . .
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean
3.5
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.2
–6.8
7.0
4.0
1.6
2.2
2.3
Antigua and Barbuda
1.1
3.8
5.5
3.1
6.9
4.9
–20.2
5.3
6.4
5.5
5.4
2.7
Argentina
3.8
2.7
–2.1
2.8
–2.6
–2.0
–9.9
10.4
5.2
0.2
2.0
2.0
Aruba
–0.1
3.6
2.1
5.5
5.3
0.6
–18.6
17.2
5.7
1.6
1.2
1.1
The Bahamas
0.5
1.0
–0.9
3.1
1.8
1.9
–23.8
13.7
11.0
4.3
1.8
1.5
Barbados
0.2
2.4
2.5
0.5
–0.6
–0.5
–13.3
–0.2
10.0
4.9
3.9
2.0
Belize
2.1
3.4
0.1
–1.7
1.1
4.5
–13.4
15.2
11.4
3.0
2.0
2.0
Bolivia
5.0
4.9
4.3
4.2
4.2
2.2
–8.7
6.1
3.2
1.8
1.9
2.3
Brazil
3.5
–3.5
–3.3
1.3
1.8
1.2
–3.3
5.0
2.9
0.9
1.5
2.0
Chile
4.3
2.2
1.8
1.4
4.0
0.7
–6.1
11.7
2.4
–1.0
1.9
2.5
Colombia
4.7
3.0
2.1
1.4
2.6
3.2
–7.3
11.0
7.5
1.0
1.9
3.3
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
147
Average 
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
3.5
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.2
–6.8
7.0
4.0
1.6
2.2
2.3
Costa Rica
4.4
3.7
4.2
4.2
2.6
2.4
–4.3
7.8
4.3
2.7
3.2
3.2
Dominica
2.0
–2.7
2.8
–6.6
3.5
5.5
–16.6
4.8
6.0
4.9
4.7
2.7
Dominican Republic
5.6
6.9
6.7
4.7
7.0
5.1
–6.7
12.3
4.9
4.2
5.0
5.0
Ecuador
4.4
0.1
–1.2
2.4
1.3
0.0
–7.8
4.2
3.0
2.9
2.8
2.8
El Salvador
2.2
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.4
2.4
–8.2
10.3
2.8
2.4
1.9
2.1
Grenada
1.7
6.4
3.7
4.4
4.4
0.7
–13.8
4.7
6.0
3.7
4.1
2.8
Guatemala
3.7
4.1
2.7
3.1
3.4
4.0
–1.8
8.0
4.0
3.4
3.5
3.9
Guyana
3.5
0.7
3.8
3.7
4.4
5.4
43.5
20.1
62.3
37.2
45.3
3.3
Haiti
2.4
2.6
1.8
2.5
1.7
–1.7
–3.3
–1.8
–1.7
0.3
1.2
1.5
Honduras
3.8
3.8
3.9
4.8
3.8
2.7
–9.0
12.5
4.0
3.7
3.5
3.9
Jamaica
0.1
0.9
1.5
0.7
1.8
1.0
–9.9
4.6
4.0
2.2
2.0
1.6
Mexico
2.1
3.3
2.6
2.1
2.2
–0.2
–8.0
4.7
3.1
1.8
1.6
1.8
Nicaragua
4.0
4.8
4.6
4.6
–3.4
–3.8
–1.8
10.3
4.0
3.0
3.3
3.5
Panama
7.7
5.7
5.0
5.6
3.7
3.0
–17.9
15.3
10.0
5.0
4.0
4.0
Paraguay
4.6
3.0
4.3
4.8
3.2
–0.4
–0.8
4.0
0.2
4.5
3.5
3.5
Peru
6.1
3.3
4.0
2.5
4.0
2.2
–11.0
13.6
2.7
2.4
3.0
3.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.5
0.7
3.9
0.9
1.1
4.0
–14.5
–0.9
9.0
4.5
3.8
2.7
St. Lucia
1.4
–0.2
3.8
3.4
2.9
–0.7
–24.4
12.2
14.9
3.0
2.2
1.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
1.1
2.8
4.1
1.5
3.2
0.7
–3.7
0.8
5.3
6.0
5.0
2.7
Suriname
4.0
–3.4
–4.9
1.6
4.9
1.1
–15.9
–2.7
1.3
2.3
3.0
3.0
Trinidad and Tobago
3.7
–0.8
–6.8
–4.7
–0.9
0.1
–7.7
–1.0
2.5
3.2
2.3
1.5
Uruguay1
5.4
0.4
1.7
1.6
0.5
0.4
–6.1
4.4
4.9
2.0
2.9
2.2
Venezuela
3.6
–6.2
–17.0
–15.7
–19.7
–27.7
–30.0
0.5
8.0
5.0
4.5
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
4.5
3.0
4.3
2.2
2.8
1.6
–2.7
4.6
5.3
2.9
3.5
3.7
Afghanistan1
9.1
1.0
2.2
2.6
1.2
3.9
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
3.1
3.7
3.2
1.4
1.2
1.0
–5.1
3.4
2.9
2.6
2.6
1.8
Armenia
5.2
3.3
0.2
7.5
5.2
7.6
–7.2
5.7
12.6
5.5
5.0
4.5
Azerbaijan
11.6
1.0
–3.1
0.2
1.5
2.5
–4.2
5.6
4.6
3.0
2.6
2.6
Bahrain
5.0
2.5
3.6
4.3
2.1
2.2
–4.6
2.7
4.2
3.0
3.8
2.7
Djibouti
4.9
7.5
7.1
5.5
4.8
5.5
1.2
4.8
2.5
4.0
6.0
5.0
Egypt
4.6
4.4
4.5
2.4
5.3
5.5
3.5
3.3
6.6
3.7
5.0
6.0
Georgia
5.7
3.0
2.9
4.8
4.8
5.0
–6.8
10.5
10.1
4.0
5.0
5.2
Iran
2.5
–1.4
8.8
2.8
–1.8
–3.1
3.3
4.7
2.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
Iraq
5.6
2.5
15.2
–3.4
4.7
5.8
–15.7
7.7
8.1
3.7
3.1
2.2
Jordan
5.1
2.5
2.0
2.5
1.9
1.9
–1.6
2.2
2.7
2.7
2.7
3.0
Kazakhstan
6.3
1.0
0.9
3.9
4.1
4.5
–2.6
4.1
3.2
4.3
4.9
2.8
Kuwait
3.3
0.6
2.9
–4.7
2.4
–0.6
–8.9
1.3
8.2
0.9
2.7
2.7
Kyrgyz Republic
4.2
3.9
4.3
4.7
3.5
4.6
–8.6
3.7
7.0
3.5
3.8
4.0
Lebanon1
4.8
0.5
1.6
0.9
–1.9
–6.9
–25.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya
–3.6
–0.8
–1.5
32.5
7.9
–11.2
–29.5
28.3
–12.8
17.5
8.4
4.7
Mauritania
4.3
5.4
1.3
6.3
4.8
5.4
–0.9
2.4
5.0
4.4
5.1
4.0
Morocco
4.4
4.3
0.5
5.1
3.1
2.9
–7.2
7.9
1.1
3.0
3.1
3.4
Oman
4.8
5.0
5.0
0.3
1.3
–1.1
–3.2
2.9
4.3
1.7
5.2
2.6
Pakistan
4.3
4.1
4.6
4.6
6.1
3.1
–0.9
5.7
6.0
0.5
3.5
5.0
Qatar
12.7
4.8
3.1
–1.5
1.2
0.7
–3.6
1.6
4.2
2.4
1.8
3.6
Saudi Arabia
4.2
4.7
2.4
–0.1
2.8
0.8
–4.3
3.9
8.7
3.1
3.1
3.0
Somalia
. . .
4.6
4.7
2.2
3.7
2.7
–0.3
2.9
1.7
2.8
3.7
4.3
Sudan3
0.7
4.9
4.7
0.8
–2.3
–2.5
–3.6
0.5
–2.5
1.2
2.7
3.0
Syria4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
6.9
6.0
6.9
7.1
7.6
7.4
4.4
9.4
8.0
5.0
4.5
4.0
Tunisia
3.4
1.0
1.1
2.2
2.6
1.6
–8.8
4.4
2.5
1.3
1.9
2.6
Turkmenistan
9.3
3.0
–1.0
4.7
0.9
–3.4
–2.9
4.6
1.8
2.3
2.1
2.3
United Arab Emirates
3.8
6.8
5.6
0.7
1.3
1.1
–5.0
3.9
7.4
3.5
3.9
4.3
Uzbekistan
7.7
7.2
5.9
4.4
5.9
6.0
2.0
7.4
5.7
5.3
5.5
5.5
West Bank and Gaza
5.5
3.7
8.9
1.4
1.2
1.4
–11.3
7.0
4.0
3.5
2.7
2.0
Yemen
2.0
–28.0
–9.4
–5.1
0.8
1.4
–8.5
–1.0
1.5
–0.5
2.0
5.5
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
148	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Average 
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.5
3.2
1.5
2.9
3.2
3.3
–1.7
4.8
3.9
3.6
4.2
4.4
Angola
7.8
0.9
–2.6
–0.2
–1.3
–0.7
–5.6
1.1
2.8
3.5
3.7
4.2
Benin
4.2
1.8
3.3
5.7
6.7
6.9
3.8
7.2
6.0
6.0
5.9
5.9
Botswana
3.7
–4.9
7.2
4.1
4.2
3.0
–8.7
11.8
6.4
3.7
4.3
4.0
Burkina Faso
5.9
3.9
6.0
6.2
6.6
5.7
1.9
6.9
2.5
4.9
5.9
5.2
Burundi
4.5
–3.9
–0.6
0.5
1.6
1.8
0.3
3.1
1.8
3.3
6.0
5.5
Cabo Verde
3.7
1.0
4.7
3.7
14.6
5.7
–14.8
7.0
10.5
4.4
5.4
4.5
Cameroon 
3.6
5.6
4.5
3.5
4.0
3.4
0.5
3.6
3.4
4.3
4.4
4.7
Central African Republic
–1.5
4.3
4.7
4.5
3.8
3.0
1.0
1.0
0.4
2.5
3.8
3.3
Chad
5.4
1.8
–5.6
–2.4
2.4
3.4
–2.1
–1.1
2.5
3.5
3.7
3.7
Comoros
2.9
1.1
3.3
3.8
3.6
1.8
–0.2
2.1
2.4
3.0
3.6
4.2
Democratic Republic of the Congo
7.2
6.4
0.4
3.7
4.8
4.5
1.7
6.2
6.6
6.3
6.5
6.5
Republic of Congo
5.5
–3.6
–10.8
–4.4
–4.8
1.0
–6.2
1.5
2.8
4.1
4.6
4.0
Côte d’Ivoire
3.6
8.8
7.2
6.1
3.8
8.3
1.7
7.0
6.7
6.2
6.6
6.0
Equatorial Guinea
4.8
–9.1
–8.8
–5.7
–6.2
–5.5
–4.2
–3.2
1.6
–1.8
–8.2
–0.3
Eritrea
4.5
–20.6
7.4
–10.0
13.0
3.8
–0.5
2.9
2.6
2.8
2.9
2.9
Eswatini
3.5
2.2
1.1
2.0
2.4
2.7
–1.6
7.9
0.5
2.8
2.5
2.4
Ethiopia
10.8
10.4
8.0
10.2
7.7
9.0
6.1
6.3
6.4
6.1
6.4
7.0
Gabon
3.1
3.9
2.1
0.5
0.8
3.9
–1.9
1.5
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.5
The Gambia
1.7
4.1
1.9
4.8
7.2
6.2
0.6
4.3
4.4
5.6
6.3
5.0
Ghana
7.1
2.1
3.4
8.1
6.2
6.5
0.5
5.4
3.2
1.6
2.9
5.0
Guinea
3.8
3.8
10.8
10.3
6.4
5.6
4.9
4.3
4.3
5.6
5.7
5.0
Guinea-Bissau
3.5
6.1
5.3
4.8
3.8
4.5
1.5
6.4
3.5
4.5
5.0
4.5
Kenya
4.8
5.0
4.2
3.8
5.7
5.1
–0.3
7.5
5.4
5.3
5.4
5.5
Lesotho
3.6
3.2
1.9
–2.7
–1.3
–2.0
–3.9
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
1.1
Liberia
7.0
0.0
–1.6
2.5
1.2
–2.5
–3.0
5.0
4.8
4.3
5.5
5.4
Madagascar
2.9
3.1
4.0
3.9
3.2
4.4
–7.1
5.7
4.2
4.2
4.8
4.5
Malawi
5.8
3.0
2.3
4.0
4.4
5.4
0.9
4.6
0.8
2.4
3.2
4.6
Mali
4.1
6.2
5.9
5.3
4.7
4.8
–1.2
3.1
3.7
5.0
5.1
5.0
Mauritius
3.9
3.7
3.9
3.9
4.0
2.9
–14.6
3.5
8.3
4.6
4.1
3.3
Mozambique
7.3
6.7
3.8
3.7
3.4
2.3
–1.2
2.3
4.1
5.0
8.2
14.5
Namibia
4.3
4.3
0.0
–1.0
1.1
–0.8
–8.0
2.7
3.8
2.8
2.6
2.6
Niger
5.9
4.4
5.7
5.0
7.0
6.1
3.5
1.4
11.1
6.1
13.0
6.0
Nigeria
6.9
2.7
–1.6
0.8
1.9
2.2
–1.8
3.6
3.3
3.2
3.0
3.0
Rwanda
7.8
8.9
6.0
4.0
8.6
9.5
–3.4
10.9
6.8
6.2
7.5
7.3
São Tomé and Príncipe
5.5
3.8
4.2
3.9
3.0
2.2
3.0
1.9
0.9
2.0
2.5
3.7
Senegal
3.3
6.4
6.4
7.4
6.2
4.6
1.3
6.1
4.7
8.3
10.6
6.5
Seychelles
5.2
5.6
5.4
4.5
3.2
3.1
–7.7
7.9
8.8
3.9
3.9
3.6
Sierra Leone
7.6
–20.5
6.4
3.8
3.5
5.3
–2.0
4.1
2.8
3.1
4.8
4.6
South Africa
3.0
1.3
0.7
1.2
1.5
0.3
–6.3
4.9
2.0
0.1
1.8
1.4
South Sudan
. . .
–0.2
–13.3
–5.8
–2.1
0.9
–6.5
5.3
6.6
5.6
4.6
4.4
Tanzania
6.4
6.2
6.9
6.8
7.0
7.0
4.8
4.9
4.7
5.2
6.2
7.0
Togo
3.7
5.7
5.6
4.3
5.0
5.5
1.8
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.5
5.5
Uganda
7.1
8.0
0.2
6.8
5.5
7.8
–1.3
6.0
4.9
5.7
5.7
6.3
Zambia
7.4
2.9
3.8
3.5
4.0
1.4
–2.8
4.6
3.4
4.0
4.1
5.1
Zimbabwe1
2.6
1.8
0.5
5.0
4.7
–6.1
–7.8
8.5
3.0
2.5
2.6
2.9
1See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, India, Lebanon, Ukraine, Uruguay, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix. 
2Data for Timor-Leste exclude projections for oil exports from the Joint Petroleum Development Area.
3Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
4Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
149
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)
Average
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
1.5
1.3
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.5
1.6
3.1
5.4
3.9
2.5
1.8
United States
2.0
1.0
1.0
1.9
2.4
1.8
1.3
4.5
7.0
3.8
2.2
1.9
Euro Area
1.5
1.4
0.9
1.1
1.5
1.7
1.8
2.1
4.7
4.9
3.0
1.9
Japan
–0.7
2.1
0.4
–0.1
0.0
0.6
0.9
–0.2
0.3
3.8
2.6
1.3
Other Advanced Economies1
1.9
1.2
1.2
1.9
1.6
1.3
2.0
3.6
5.5
2.9
2.3
2.0
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.9
0.3
0.7
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.3
4.7
2.6
1.9
United States
2.3
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.3
4.7
8.0
4.5
2.3
2.1
Euro Area2
1.9
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.4
5.3
2.9
1.9
Japan
0.2
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.5
2.7
2.2
1.5
Other Advanced Economies1
2.3
0.5
0.9
1.8
1.9
1.4
0.6
2.5
6.5
4.8
2.7
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
6.2
4.8
4.4
4.5
4.9
5.1
5.2
5.9
9.8
8.6
6.5
4.4
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.9
2.7
2.9
2.4
2.6
3.3
3.2
2.2
3.8
3.4
3.0
2.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
8.0
10.7
5.6
5.6
6.4
6.7
5.4
9.6
27.9
19.7
13.2
8.0
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.8
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
14.0
13.3
9.0
5.7
Middle East and Central Asia
8.4
5.6
5.9
7.1
10.0
7.6
10.4
12.8
14.3
15.9
12.0
6.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.3
6.7
10.1
10.5
8.3
8.1
10.1
11.0
14.5
14.0
10.5
7.3
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
8.0
5.9
8.1
6.9
9.5
7.3
9.9
12.2
14.7
13.2
9.9
8.0
Nonfuel
5.9
4.6
4.0
4.2
4.4
4.9
4.7
5.2
9.3
8.2
6.1
4.1
Of which, Primary Products4
6.4
5.5
6.5
11.5
13.6
16.9
18.6
22.8
27.6
29.0
19.1
10.7
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
7.1
5.8
5.5
5.8
5.8
5.6
6.1
7.6
13.2
11.5
8.3
5.1
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
10.3
13.0
10.8
15.5
14.5
11.8
14.1
17.7
22.1
22.7
16.1
6.3
Other Groups
European Union
2.1
0.1
0.1
1.6
1.9
1.4
0.7
2.9
9.3
6.3
3.3
2.0
Middle East and North Africa
8.1
5.7
5.7
7.2
11.3
8.0
10.9
13.9
14.8
14.8
11.1
6.6
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
5.9
4.6
4.0
4.1
4.6
4.8
4.6
5.3
9.4
8.2
6.2
4.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
9.4
6.5
8.2
9.1
8.8
8.3
11.2
12.8
13.9
13.4
9.8
6.6
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
2.1
0.1
0.4
1.6
1.7
1.4
0.3
2.5
8.1
5.0
2.9
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
5.2
2.6
2.7
3.3
3.2
2.6
2.8
3.9
8.1
6.3
4.4
3.0
1Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
150	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average 
Projections
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
2022
2023
2024
Advanced Economies
1.9
0.3
0.7
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.3
4.7
2.6
1.9
7.3
3.3
2.3
United States
2.3
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.3
4.7
8.0
4.5
2.3
2.1
6.6
3.0
2.1
Euro Area3
1.9
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.4
5.3
2.9
1.9
9.2
3.8
2.7
Germany
1.7
0.7
0.4
1.7
1.9
1.4
0.4
3.2
8.7
6.2
3.1
2.0
9.8
3.6
2.9
France
1.6
0.1
0.3
1.2
2.1
1.3
0.5
2.1
5.9
5.0
2.5
1.6
7.0
3.5
2.3
Italy
2.0
0.1
–0.1
1.3
1.2
0.6
–0.1
1.9
8.7
4.5
2.6
2.0
12.3
4.5
2.6
Spain
2.2
–0.6
–0.3
2.0
1.7
0.8
–0.3
3.0
8.3
4.3
3.2
1.7
5.5
4.1
2.8
The Netherlands
1.7
0.2
0.1
1.3
1.6
2.7
1.1
2.8
11.6
3.9
4.2
2.0
11.1
2.4
3.6
Belgium
2.1
0.6
1.8
2.2
2.3
1.2
0.4
3.2
10.3
4.7
2.1
2.0
10.2
2.1
1.5
Ireland
1.1
0.0
–0.2
0.3
0.7
0.9
–0.5
2.4
8.1
5.0
3.2
2.0
8.1
3.0
3.3
Austria
2.1
0.8
1.0
2.2
2.1
1.5
1.4
2.8
8.6
8.2
3.0
2.0
10.5
5.6
2.5
Portugal
1.7
0.5
0.6
1.6
1.2
0.3
–0.1
0.9
8.1
5.7
3.1
2.0
9.8
4.8
2.9
Greece
2.2
–1.1
0.0
1.1
0.8
0.5
–1.3
0.6
9.3
4.0
2.9
1.8
7.6
3.0
2.7
Finland
2.1
–0.2
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.1
0.4
2.1
7.2
5.3
2.5
2.0
8.8
5.3
2.5
Slovak Republic
2.4
–0.3
–0.5
1.4
2.5
2.8
2.0
2.8
12.1
9.5
4.3
2.0
15.0
6.4
3.6
Croatia
2.6
–0.3
–0.6
1.3
1.6
0.8
0.0
2.7
10.7
7.4
3.6
2.1
12.7
5.0
2.5
Lithuania
3.7
–0.7
0.7
3.7
2.5
2.2
1.1
4.6
18.9
10.5
5.8
2.5
20.0
5.7
5.1
Slovenia
2.3
–0.5
–0.1
1.4
1.7
1.6
–0.1
1.9
8.8
6.4
4.5
2.0
10.3
4.7
3.5
Luxembourg
2.5
0.1
0.0
2.1
2.0
1.7
0.0
3.5
8.1
2.6
3.1
2.0
6.3
2.6
3.6
Latvia
4.7
0.2
0.1
2.9
2.6
2.7
0.1
3.2
17.2
9.7
3.5
2.5
20.7
4.5
3.0
Estonia
4.1
0.1
0.8
3.7
3.4
2.3
–0.6
4.5
19.4
9.7
4.1
2.5
17.5
5.5
4.0
Cyprus
2.0
–1.5
–1.2
0.7
0.8
0.6
–1.1
2.2
8.1
3.9
2.5
2.0
7.6
2.8
2.3
Malta
2.2
1.2
0.9
1.3
1.7
1.5
0.8
0.7
6.1
5.8
3.4
2.0
7.3
4.4
2.9
Japan
0.2
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.5
2.7
2.2
1.5
3.9
2.3
1.6
United Kingdom 
2.7
0.0
0.7
2.7
2.5
1.8
0.9
2.6
9.1
6.8
3.0
2.0
10.5
4.2
1.8
Korea
2.7
0.7
1.0
1.9
1.5
0.4
0.5
2.5
5.1
3.5
2.3
2.0
5.0
2.7
2.0
Canada
1.8
1.1
1.4
1.6
2.3
1.9
0.7
3.4
6.8
3.9
2.4
2.0
6.6
3.0
2.1
Taiwan Province of China
1.4
–0.3
1.4
0.6
1.3
0.6
–0.2
2.0
2.9
1.9
1.7
1.1
2.7
1.7
1.4
Australia
2.8
1.5
1.3
2.0
1.9
1.6
0.9
2.8
6.6
5.3
3.2
2.6
7.8
4.0
3.0
Switzerland
0.5
–1.1
–0.4
0.5
0.9
0.4
–0.7
0.6
2.8
2.4
1.6
1.0
2.9
2.2
1.5
Singapore
2.7
–0.5
–0.5
0.6
0.4
0.6
–0.2
2.3
6.1
5.8
3.5
2.0
6.5
5.4
3.5
Sweden
1.4
0.7
1.1
1.9
2.0
1.7
0.7
2.7
8.1
6.8
2.3
2.0
11.6
5.8
2.0
Hong Kong SAR
3.0
3.0
2.4
1.5
2.4
2.9
0.3
1.6
1.9
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.0
2.5
2.4
Czech Republic
2.3
0.3
0.7
2.5
2.1
2.8
3.2
3.8
15.1
11.8
5.8
2.0
15.8
8.8
4.1
Israel
2.2
–0.6
–0.5
0.2
0.8
0.8
–0.6
1.5
4.4
4.3
3.1
2.1
5.3
3.3
2.9
Norway
1.9
2.2
3.6
1.9
2.8
2.2
1.3
3.5
5.8
4.9
2.8
2.0
5.9
2.9
2.8
Denmark
1.8
0.2
0.0
1.1
0.7
0.7
0.3
1.9
8.5
4.8
2.8
2.0
9.6
3.8
2.8
New Zealand
2.5
0.3
0.6
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.7
3.9
7.2
5.5
2.6
2.0
7.2
3.3
2.5
Puerto Rico
2.9
–0.8
–0.3
1.8
1.3
0.1
–0.5
2.4
4.3
3.3
2.2
2.1
4.6
2.1
2.3
Macao SAR
5.1
4.6
2.4
1.2
3.0
2.8
0.8
0.0
1.0
2.5
2.3
2.3
0.8
2.5
2.3
Iceland
6.0
1.6
1.7
1.8
2.7
3.0
2.8
4.5
8.3
8.1
4.2
2.5
9.6
6.7
3.3
Andorra
1.9
–1.1
–0.4
2.6
1.0
0.5
0.1
1.7
6.2
5.6
2.9
1.7
7.2
4.8
1.9
San Marino
2.3
0.1
0.6
1.0
1.8
1.0
0.2
2.1
7.1
4.6
2.7
1.8
7.1
4.6
2.7
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Major Advanced Economies
1.9
0.3
0.8
1.8
2.1
1.5
0.8
3.3
7.3
4.7
2.5
2.0
7.3
3.2
2.2
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
151
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
2022
2023
2024
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.9
2.7
2.9
2.4
2.6
3.3
3.2
2.2
3.8
3.4
3.0
2.9
4.0
3.7
2.4
Bangladesh
7.7
6.4
5.9
5.4
5.8
5.5
5.6
5.6
6.1
8.6
6.5
5.5
7.6
8.1
5.6
Bhutan
6.9
6.7
3.3
4.3
3.7
2.8
3.0
8.2
5.9
5.6
4.4
4.0
6.5
4.6
4.2
Brunei Darussalam
0.6
–0.5
–0.3
–1.3
1.0
–0.4
1.9
1.7
3.7
2.0
1.5
1.0
3.3
2.0
1.5
Cambodia
6.2
1.2
3.0
2.9
2.5
1.9
2.9
2.9
5.3
3.0
3.0
3.0
2.9
3.0
3.0
China
2.9
1.5
2.1
1.5
1.9
2.9
2.5
0.9
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.2
1.8
3.2
1.3
Fiji
3.9
1.4
3.9
3.3
4.1
1.8
–2.6
0.2
4.5
3.5
3.0
2.5
3.6
3.0
3.0
India
8.4
4.9
4.5
3.6
3.4
4.8
6.2
5.5
6.7
4.9
4.4
4.0
6.3
4.5
4.3
Indonesia
7.1
6.4
3.5
3.8
3.3
2.8
2.0
1.6
4.2
4.4
3.0
2.5
5.5
3.2
2.8
Kiribati
2.0
0.6
1.9
0.4
0.6
–1.8
2.6
2.1
5.3
8.6
4.5
1.8
16.2
–2.2
5.0
Lao P.D.R.
5.4
1.3
1.6
0.8
2.0
3.3
5.1
3.8
23.0
15.1
3.5
3.0
39.3
–1.4
7.6
Malaysia
2.6
2.1
2.1
3.8
1.0
0.7
–1.1
2.5
3.4
2.9
3.1
2.4
3.8
2.9
3.1
Maldives
6.4
1.4
0.8
2.3
1.4
1.3
–1.6
0.2
2.6
5.2
2.8
2.0
3.3
5.1
2.5
Marshall Islands
4.0
–2.2
–1.5
0.1
0.8
–0.1
–0.7
2.6
6.2
2.2
2.1
2.0
0.0
2.2
2.1
Micronesia
4.3
0.0
–0.9
0.1
1.0
2.2
1.0
1.8
5.0
4.7
2.1
2.0
5.0
4.7
2.1
Mongolia
11.5
6.8
0.7
4.3
6.8
7.3
3.7
7.4
15.2
11.2
8.8
6.0
13.2
9.5
8.0
Myanmar
10.4
7.3
9.1
4.6
5.9
8.6
5.7
3.6
16.2
14.2
7.8
7.8
20.4
11.1
7.2
Nauru
4.8
9.8
8.2
5.1
1.2
2.1
1.8
2.4
2.6
4.2
4.0
2.0
2.6
5.5
3.5
Nepal
8.4
7.2
9.9
4.5
4.1
4.6
6.1
3.6
6.3
7.8
6.3
5.4
8.1
7.1
5.8
Palau
4.1
2.2
–1.3
1.1
2.0
0.6
0.7
0.4
8.7
7.9
4.2
0.9
7.5
6.2
3.1
Papua New Guinea
4.7
6.0
6.7
5.4
4.4
3.9
4.9
4.5
6.6
5.4
4.9
4.5
6.2
5.2
4.7
Philippines
4.5
0.7
1.2
2.9
5.3
2.4
2.4
3.9
5.8
6.3
3.2
3.0
8.1
4.5
3.0
Samoa
4.3
1.9
0.1
1.3
3.7
2.2
1.5
–3.0
8.7
10.0
5.0
3.0
10.9
5.5
4.5
Solomon Islands
7.5
–0.6
0.5
0.5
3.5
1.6
3.0
–0.1
5.5
4.8
3.7
3.2
8.5
4.2
3.3
Sri Lanka
8.0
2.2
4.0
6.6
4.3
4.3
4.6
6.0
46.4
28.5
8.7
5.0
57.2
15.2
6.7
Thailand
3.0
–0.9
0.2
0.7
1.1
0.7
–0.8
1.2
6.1
2.8
2.0
2.0
5.9
2.3
1.4
Timor-Leste
6.1
0.6
–1.5
0.5
2.3
0.9
0.5
3.8
7.0
4.0
2.5
2.0
6.9
4.0
2.5
Tonga
5.1
0.1
–0.6
7.2
6.8
3.3
0.4
1.4
8.5
9.7
4.8
3.3
11.3
5.9
3.9
Tuvalu
2.3
3.1
3.5
4.1
2.2
3.5
1.9
6.2
11.5
5.9
3.7
3.0
13.6
5.9
3.7
Vanuatu
2.3
2.5
0.8
3.1
2.4
2.7
5.3
2.3
4.6
3.5
3.0
3.1
4.9
3.9
3.1
Vietnam
10.0
0.6
2.7
3.5
3.5
2.8
3.2
1.8
3.2
5.0
4.3
4.0
4.6
4.7
4.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
8.0
10.7
5.6
5.6
6.4
6.7
5.4
9.6
27.9
19.7
13.2
8.0
26.8
16.6
11.3
Albania 
2.6
1.9
1.3
2.0
2.0
1.4
1.6
2.0
6.7
5.0
3.4
3.0
7.4
3.9
3.0
Belarus
19.8
13.5
11.8
6.0
4.9
5.6
5.5
9.5
14.8
7.5
10.1
5.0
12.6
9.5
9.0
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2.5
–1.0
–1.6
0.8
1.4
0.6
–1.1
2.0
14.0
6.0
3.0
2.0
12.6
5.4
3.0
Bulgaria3
4.2
–1.1
–1.3
1.2
2.6
2.5
1.2
2.8
13.0
7.5
2.2
2.0
14.3
3.1
2.1
Hungary
4.1
–0.1
0.4
2.4
2.8
3.4
3.3
5.1
14.5
17.7
5.4
3.1
24.5
6.8
5.2
Kosovo
2.5
–0.5
0.2
1.5
1.1
2.7
0.2
3.3
11.7
5.5
2.6
2.0
12.2
2.3
2.5
Moldova
7.8
9.6
6.4
6.5
3.6
4.8
3.8
5.1
28.6
13.8
5.0
5.0
30.2
8.0
5.0
Montenegro
3.1
1.5
–0.3
2.4
2.6
0.4
–0.2
2.4
13.0
9.7
5.0
1.9
17.2
7.0
3.2
North Macedonia
2.5
–0.3
–0.2
1.4
1.5
0.8
1.2
3.2
14.2
9.2
3.5
2.0
18.7
3.9
2.5
Poland
2.6
–0.9
–0.7
2.0
1.8
2.2
3.4
5.1
14.4
11.9
6.1
2.5
16.6
7.2
5.0
Romania
5.4
–0.6
–1.6
1.3
4.6
3.8
2.6
5.0
13.8
10.5
5.8
2.5
16.4
7.5
4.7
Russia 
9.2
15.5
7.0
3.7
2.9
4.5
3.4
6.7
13.8
7.0
4.6
4.0
12.4
6.2
4.0
Serbia
8.7
1.4
1.1
3.1
2.0
1.9
1.6
4.1
12.0
12.2
5.3
3.0
15.1
8.2
4.0
Türkiye
8.3
7.7
7.8
11.1
16.3
15.2
12.3
19.6
72.3
50.6
35.2
20.0
64.3
45.0
30.0
Ukraine4
10.4
48.7
13.9
14.4
10.9
7.9
2.7
9.4
20.2
21.1
. . .
. . .
26.6
20.0
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean5
4.8
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
14.0
13.3
9.0
5.7
14.7
11.8
7.7
Antigua and Barbuda
2.2
1.0
–0.5
2.4
1.2
1.4
1.1
1.6
7.5
5.1
2.6
2.0
9.2
3.7
2.0
Argentina4
. . .
. . .
. . .
25.7
34.3
53.5
42.0
48.4
72.4
98.6
60.1
32.5
94.8
88.0
50.0
Aruba
2.4
0.5
–0.9
–1.0
3.6
3.9
–1.3
0.7
5.5
3.8
2.4
2.0
5.7
2.4
2.4
The Bahamas
2.0
1.9
–0.3
1.5
2.3
2.5
0.0
2.9
5.6
4.5
3.4
2.0
5.5
3.7
2.8
Barbados
5.2
–1.1
1.5
4.4
3.7
4.1
2.9
3.1
9.4
6.9
4.7
2.4
12.3
3.9
3.4
Belize
2.1
–0.9
0.7
1.1
0.3
0.2
0.1
3.2
6.3
4.1
2.5
1.2
6.7
3.1
2.0
Bolivia
6.2
4.1
3.6
2.8
2.3
1.8
0.9
0.7
1.7
4.0
3.7
3.5
3.1
3.6
3.8
Brazil
5.5
9.0
8.7
3.4
3.7
3.7
3.2
8.3
9.3
5.0
4.8
3.0
5.8
5.4
4.1
Chile
3.5
4.3
3.8
2.2
2.3
2.2
3.0
4.5
11.6
7.9
4.0
3.0
12.8
5.0
3.0
Colombia
4.0
5.0
7.5
4.3
3.2
3.5
2.5
3.5
10.2
10.9
5.4
3.0
13.1
8.4
3.5
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
152	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
2022
2023
2024
Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
(continued)5
4.8
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
14.0
13.3
9.0
5.7
14.7
11.8
7.7
Costa Rica
8.0
0.8
0.0
1.6
2.2
2.1
0.7
1.7
8.3
5.2
3.6
3.0
7.9
3.9
3.0
Dominica
2.0
–0.9
0.1
0.3
1.0
1.5
–0.7
1.6
7.5
6.2
2.4
2.0
7.3
5.0
2.2
Dominican Republic
5.6
0.8
1.6
3.3
3.6
1.8
3.8
8.2
8.8
5.7
4.3
4.0
7.8
4.9
4.0
Ecuador
4.1
4.0
1.7
0.4
–0.2
0.3
–0.3
0.1
3.5
2.5
1.5
1.5
3.7
2.3
1.3
El Salvador
3.1
–0.7
0.6
1.0
1.1
0.1
–0.4
3.5
7.2
4.1
2.1
1.7
7.3
2.5
1.7
Grenada
2.7
–0.6
1.7
0.9
0.8
0.6
–0.7
1.2
2.7
3.2
3.0
2.0
3.5
3.2
3.0
Guatemala
5.7
2.4
4.4
4.4
3.8
3.7
3.2
4.3
6.9
7.4
5.5
4.0
9.2
6.4
5.0
Guyana
5.0
–0.9
0.8
1.9
1.3
2.1
1.2
3.3
6.5
6.6
5.5
5.0
7.2
6.0
5.0
Haiti
7.4
5.3
11.4
10.6
11.4
17.3
22.9
15.9
27.6
44.5
13.7
9.7
38.7
31.2
12.7
Honduras
6.6
3.2
2.7
3.9
4.3
4.4
3.5
4.5
9.1
6.9
5.3
4.0
9.8
6.4
4.2
Jamaica
10.8
3.7
2.3
4.4
3.7
3.9
5.2
5.9
9.5
7.0
5.0
5.0
9.5
5.5
4.5
Mexico
4.1
2.7
2.8
6.0
4.9
3.6
3.4
5.7
7.9
6.3
3.9
3.0
7.8
5.0
3.5
Nicaragua
8.6
4.0
3.5
3.9
4.9
5.4
3.7
4.9
10.4
8.5
5.0
4.0
11.6
6.1
4.8
Panama
4.2
0.1
0.7
0.9
0.8
–0.4
–1.6
1.6
2.9
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.1
3.1
2.0
Paraguay
6.1
3.1
4.1
3.6
4.0
2.8
1.8
4.8
9.8
5.2
4.1
4.0
8.1
4.1
4.0
Peru
2.9
3.5
3.6
2.8
1.3
2.1
1.8
4.0
7.9
5.7
2.4
2.0
8.5
3.0
2.3
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.2
–2.3
–0.7
0.7
–1.0
–0.3
–1.2
1.2
2.7
2.3
2.0
2.0
3.8
2.6
2.0
St. Lucia
3.1
–1.0
–3.1
0.1
2.6
0.5
–1.8
2.4
6.7
4.9
2.1
2.0
7.8
2.5
2.0
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
3.1
–1.7
–0.2
2.2
2.3
0.9
–0.6
1.6
5.7
3.5
2.3
2.0
6.7
2.5
2.0
Suriname
8.0
6.9
55.5
22.0
6.9
4.4
34.9
59.1
52.5
42.7
27.3
5.0
54.6
28.2
15.1
Trinidad and Tobago
7.8
4.7
3.1
1.9
1.0
1.0
0.6
2.1
5.8
5.6
3.4
1.8
8.7
4.5
2.3
Uruguay
7.4
8.7
9.6
6.2
7.6
7.9
9.8
7.7
9.1
7.6
6.1
4.5
8.3
7.0
5.7
Venezuela4
27.7
121.7
254.9
438.1
65,374.1
19,906.0
2,355.1
1,588.5
200.9
400.0
200.0
. . .
310.1
250.0
230.0
Middle East and 
Central Asia
8.4
5.6
5.9
7.1
10.0
7.6
10.4
12.8
14.3
15.9
12.0
6.4
15.6
15.3
9.6
Afghanistan4
7.5
–0.7
4.4
5.0
0.6
2.3
5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
4.1
4.8
6.4
5.6
4.3
2.0
2.4
7.2
9.3
8.1
7.7
5.0
9.3
8.0
7.3
Armenia
4.7
3.7
–1.4
1.2
2.5
1.4
1.2
7.2
8.7
7.1
5.0
4.0
8.3
5.5
4.5
Azerbaijan
7.3
4.0
12.4
12.8
2.3
2.7
2.8
6.7
13.8
11.3
8.0
4.0
13.5
9.0
7.0
Bahrain
2.5
1.8
2.8
1.4
2.1
1.0
–2.3
–0.6
3.6
2.2
2.2
2.0
3.6
2.2
2.2
Djibouti
4.1
–0.8
2.7
0.6
0.1
3.3
1.8
1.2
5.5
3.2
3.2
2.5
5.5
4.0
2.5
Egypt
10.0
11.0
10.2
23.5
20.9
13.9
5.7
4.5
8.5
21.6
18.0
5.3
13.2
26.8
11.5
Georgia
5.5
4.0
2.1
6.0
2.6
4.9
5.2
9.6
11.9
5.9
3.2
3.0
9.8
4.0
3.0
Iran
18.9
11.9
9.1
9.6
30.2
34.6
36.4
40.1
49.0
42.5
30.0
25.0
50.0
35.0
25.0
Iraq
12.7
1.4
0.5
0.2
0.4
–0.2
0.6
6.0
5.0
6.6
1.6
2.0
4.3
6.3
1.6
Jordan
4.7
–1.1
–0.6
3.6
4.5
0.7
0.4
1.3
4.2
3.8
2.9
2.5
4.4
3.8
2.9
Kazakhstan
8.4
6.7
14.6
7.4
6.0
5.2
6.8
8.0
15.0
14.8
8.5
4.7
20.3
11.3
6.9
Kuwait
4.2
3.7
3.5
1.5
0.6
1.1
2.1
3.5
3.9
3.3
2.6
2.0
3.2
2.8
3.7
Kyrgyz Republic
9.1
6.5
0.4
3.2
1.5
1.1
6.3
11.9
13.9
11.3
7.8
4.0
14.7
10.0
6.0
Lebanon4
4.0
–3.8
–0.8
4.5
6.1
2.9
84.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya
5.2
10.0
25.9
25.9
14.0
–2.9
1.5
2.9
4.5
3.4
2.9
2.9
4.1
2.9
2.9
Mauritania
6.0
0.5
1.5
2.3
3.1
2.3
2.4
3.6
9.6
9.5
7.0
4.0
11.0
8.0
6.0
Morocco
1.7
1.4
1.5
0.7
1.6
0.2
0.6
1.4
6.6
4.6
2.8
2.0
8.3
3.7
2.5
Oman
3.9
0.1
1.1
1.6
0.9
0.1
–0.9
1.5
2.8
1.9
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.0
2.0
Pakistan
10.7
4.5
2.9
4.1
3.9
6.7
10.7
8.9
12.1
27.1
21.9
6.5
21.3
27.4
16.4
Qatar
5.1
0.9
2.7
0.6
0.1
–0.9
–2.5
2.3
5.0
3.0
2.7
1.5
5.9
1.7
2.7
Saudi Arabia
3.4
1.2
2.1
–0.8
2.5
–2.1
3.4
3.1
2.5
2.8
2.3
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.3
Somalia
. . .
0.9
0.0
4.0
4.3
4.5
4.3
4.6
6.8
4.2
3.8
3.0
6.1
3.7
3.9
Sudan6
19.1
16.9
17.8
32.4
63.3
51.0
163.3
359.1
138.8
71.6
51.9
18.2
87.3
65.3
48.5
Syria7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
9.2
5.8
5.9
7.3
3.8
7.8
8.6
9.0
6.6
5.4
6.5
6.5
4.2
6.5
6.5
Tunisia
4.0
4.4
3.6
5.3
7.3
6.7
5.6
5.7
8.3
10.9
9.5
4.7
10.1
10.3
8.9
Turkmenistan
6.4
7.4
3.6
8.0
13.3
5.1
6.1
19.5
11.5
6.7
10.7
10.0
4.0
11.3
10.0
United Arab Emirates
3.9
4.1
1.6
2.0
3.1
–1.9
–2.1
–0.1
4.8
3.4
2.0
2.0
4.8
3.4
2.0
Uzbekistan
11.8
8.5
8.8
13.9
17.5
14.5
12.9
10.8
11.4
11.8
9.9
5.0
12.3
11.9
8.0
West Bank and Gaza
3.6
1.4
–0.2
0.2
–0.2
1.6
–0.7
1.2
3.7
3.2
2.7
2.0
3.7
2.8
2.5
Yemen
11.0
22.0
21.3
30.4
33.6
15.4
19.6
26.0
29.1
16.8
17.3
10.0
13.8
20.0
15.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
153
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
2022
2023
2024
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.3
6.7
10.1
10.5
8.3
8.1
10.1
11.0
14.5
14.0
10.5
7.3
16.1
12.3
9.6
Angola
12.8
9.2
30.7
29.8
19.6
17.1
22.3
25.8
21.4
11.7
10.8
8.9
13.8
12.3
9.5
Benin
3.0
0.2
–0.8
1.8
0.8
–0.9
3.0
1.7
1.5
3.0
2.0
2.0
1.5
3.0
2.0
Botswana
8.1
3.1
2.8
3.3
3.2
2.7
1.9
6.7
12.2
6.5
5.2
4.5
12.2
6.0
4.6
Burkina Faso
2.6
1.7
0.4
1.5
2.0
–3.2
1.9
3.9
14.1
1.5
2.3
2.0
9.6
2.7
2.0
Burundi
10.4
5.6
5.5
16.6
–2.8
–0.7
7.3
8.3
18.9
16.0
13.0
7.0
26.6
3.1
21.9
Cabo Verde
2.8
0.1
–1.4
0.8
1.3
1.1
0.6
1.9
7.9
4.5
2.0
2.0
7.6
4.5
2.0
Cameroon
2.7
2.7
0.9
0.6
1.1
2.5
2.5
2.3
5.3
5.9
4.7
2.0
6.0
5.7
3.7
Central African Republic
5.3
1.4
4.9
4.2
1.6
2.8
0.9
4.3
5.8
6.3
2.7
2.5
7.9
4.4
2.5
Chad
3.3
4.8
–1.6
–0.9
4.0
–1.0
4.5
–0.8
5.3
3.4
3.0
3.0
5.8
2.6
3.0
Comoros
3.3
0.9
0.8
0.1
1.7
3.7
0.8
0.0
12.0
8.1
1.4
2.0
17.1
0.5
2.3
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
15.0
0.7
3.2
35.7
29.3
4.7
11.4
9.0
9.0
10.8
7.2
6.0
12.3
8.3
6.9
Republic of Congo
3.3
3.2
3.2
0.4
1.2
0.4
1.4
2.0
3.5
3.3
3.2
3.0
3.5
3.3
3.2
Côte d’Ivoire
2.1
1.2
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.8
2.4
4.2
5.2
3.7
1.8
2.0
5.1
4.6
1.8
Equatorial Guinea
4.4
1.7
1.4
0.7
1.3
1.2
4.8
–0.1
5.0
5.7
5.2
3.0
6.0
5.5
5.0
Eritrea
11.9
28.5
–5.6
–13.3
–14.4
1.3
5.6
6.6
7.4
6.4
4.1
4.4
8.2
4.5
4.1
Eswatini
6.9
5.0
7.8
6.2
4.8
2.6
3.9
3.7
4.8
5.4
4.8
4.4
5.6
5.2
4.6
Ethiopia
17.1
9.6
6.6
10.7
13.8
15.8
20.4
26.8
33.9
31.4
23.5
12.4
33.8
28.8
18.8
Gabon
1.6
–0.1
2.1
2.7
4.8
2.0
1.7
1.1
4.3
3.4
2.6
2.7
5.4
2.5
2.6
The Gambia
4.7
6.8
7.2
8.0
6.5
7.1
5.9
7.4
11.5
11.3
8.7
5.0
13.7
10.4
7.1
Ghana
11.5
17.2
17.5
12.4
9.8
7.1
9.9
10.0
31.9
45.4
22.2
8.0
54.1
29.4
15.0
Guinea
18.2
8.2
8.2
8.9
9.8
9.5
10.6
12.6
10.5
8.1
7.5
7.5
8.6
7.5
7.5
Guinea-Bissau
2.6
1.5
2.7
–0.2
0.4
0.3
1.5
3.3
7.9
5.0
3.0
2.0
9.5
5.0
3.0
Kenya
8.5
6.6
6.3
8.0
4.7
5.2
5.3
6.1
7.6
7.8
5.6
5.0
9.1
6.5
5.2
Lesotho
6.0
3.2
6.6
4.4
4.8
5.2
5.0
6.0
8.2
6.8
5.5
5.5
7.9
5.6
4.9
Liberia
9.2
7.7
8.8
12.4
23.5
27.0
17.0
7.8
7.6
6.9
5.9
5.0
9.2
6.3
6.0
Madagascar
9.3
7.4
6.1
8.6
8.6
5.6
4.2
5.8
8.2
9.5
8.8
6.0
11.2
9.3
8.6
Malawi
14.1
21.9
21.7
11.5
9.2
9.4
8.6
9.3
20.8
24.7
18.3
6.5
25.4
23.3
15.2
Mali
3.0
1.4
–1.8
2.4
1.9
–3.0
0.5
3.8
10.1
5.0
2.8
2.0
8.3
3.0
2.0
Mauritius
5.5
1.3
1.0
3.7
3.2
0.5
2.5
4.0
10.8
9.5
6.9
3.5
12.2
8.7
6.0
Mozambique
8.0
3.6
17.4
15.1
3.9
2.8
3.1
5.7
9.8
7.4
6.5
5.5
10.3
6.7
6.5
Namibia
6.0
3.4
6.7
6.1
4.3
3.7
2.2
3.6
6.1
5.0
4.6
4.6
6.9
5.0
5.0
Niger
2.5
1.0
0.2
0.2
2.8
–2.5
2.9
3.8
4.2
2.8
2.5
2.0
3.1
3.0
2.5
Nigeria
10.8
9.0
15.7
16.5
12.1
11.4
13.2
17.0
18.8
20.1
15.8
14.0
21.3
18.1
15.4
Rwanda
7.2
2.5
5.7
4.8
1.4
2.4
7.7
0.8
13.9
8.2
5.0
5.0
21.7
3.4
5.0
São Tomé and Príncipe
15.9
6.1
5.4
5.7
7.9
7.7
9.8
8.1
18.0
17.9
7.3
5.0
25.1
10.0
5.0
Senegal
1.9
0.9
1.2
1.1
0.5
1.0
2.5
2.2
9.7
5.0
2.0
–10.3
12.8
–0.8
5.0
Seychelles
7.9
4.0
–1.0
2.9
3.7
1.8
1.2
9.8
2.7
3.1
3.7
3.0
2.5
4.5
3.6
Sierra Leone
8.7
6.7
10.9
18.2
16.0
14.8
13.4
11.9
27.2
37.8
25.9
8.9
37.1
30.0
21.7
South Africa
6.0
4.6
6.3
5.3
4.6
4.1
3.3
4.6
6.9
5.8
4.8
4.5
7.4
5.3
4.5
South Sudan
. . .
53.0
346.1
213.0
83.4
49.3
24.0
30.2
17.6
27.8
10.0
7.8
41.4
14.1
5.9
Tanzania
9.0
5.6
5.2
5.3
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.7
4.4
4.9
4.3
3.7
4.9
4.3
4.0
Togo
2.7
1.8
0.9
–0.2
0.9
0.7
1.8
4.5
7.6
5.3
2.9
1.7
7.7
3.7
1.8
Uganda
9.2
3.7
5.2
5.6
2.5
2.1
2.8
2.2
6.8
7.6
6.4
5.0
8.2
7.4
5.7
Zambia
10.2
10.1
17.9
6.6
7.5
9.2
15.7
22.0
11.0
8.9
7.7
7.0
9.9
8.0
7.3
Zimbabwe4
–2.7
–2.4
–1.6
0.9
10.6
255.3
557.2
98.5
193.4
172.2
134.6
20.8
243.8
181.8
120.2
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
4See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Argentina, Lebanon, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
154	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
Average
Projections
2005–14
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.2
–3.0
–3.3
–3.3
–3.3
–3.8
–11.6
–9.1
–5.4
–5.6
–5.3
–5.0
Output Gap2
–2.2
–1.9
–1.6
–0.7
0.2
0.4
–3.1
0.0
0.8
0.2
–0.3
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.0
–2.2
–2.7
–3.0
–3.2
–3.8
–8.1
–7.9
–5.2
–5.5
–5.0
–4.9
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
–6.5
–3.5
–4.4
–4.8
–5.3
–5.7
–14.0
–11.6
–5.5
–6.3
–6.8
–6.8
Output Gap2
–4.0
–2.5
–2.1
–1.3
0.0
0.7
–2.5
1.5
1.4
0.9
–0.1
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.4
–2.5
–3.6
–4.3
–5.1
–6.0
–10.7
–10.7
–5.9
–6.6
–6.7
–6.7
Net Debt 
63.9
80.9
81.8
80.4
81.1
83.1
98.3
98.3
94.2
95.5
99.8
110.5
Gross Debt 
86.1
105.1
107.2
106.2
107.4
108.7
133.5
126.4
121.7
122.2
125.8
136.2
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.3
–1.9
–1.5
–0.9
–0.4
–0.6
–7.1
–5.4
–3.8
–3.7
–2.8
–1.9
Output Gap2
–0.7
–2.4
–1.7
–0.6
–0.1
0.1
–4.6
–2.0
0.2
–0.4
–0.5
0.1
Structural Balance2
–2.7
–0.5
–0.5
–0.4
–0.3
–0.5
–4.0
–3.8
–2.8
–3.1
–2.5
–2.0
Net Debt
64.6
75.1
74.6
72.4
70.6
69.0
79.0
77.8
74.8
74.5
74.3
72.4
Gross Debt
80.2
90.9
90.1
87.6
85.6
83.5
96.6
94.9
90.9
89.8
89.0
85.4
Germany 
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.3
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.9
1.5
–4.3
–3.7
–2.6
–3.7
–1.9
–0.5
Output Gap2
–0.1
–0.4
0.1
1.0
0.8
0.4
–3.0
–1.3
0.4
–0.9
–0.9
0.0
Structural Balance2
–1.0
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.6
1.3
–2.9
–3.0
–2.6
–3.2
–1.4
–0.5
Net Debt
57.5
52.2
49.3
45.0
42.2
40.1
45.4
45.6
45.1
46.7
46.8
42.7
Gross Debt
73.3
71.9
69.0
64.6
61.3
58.9
68.0
68.6
66.5
67.2
66.5
59.6
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.4
–3.6
–3.6
–3.0
–2.3
–3.1
–9.0
–6.5
–4.9
–5.3
–4.8
–4.0
Output Gap2
–0.6
–2.4
–2.7
–1.5
–0.8
0.0
–4.7
–1.9
–0.7
–1.1
–1.2
0.2
Structural Balance2
–4.0
–2.1
–1.9
–1.9
–1.5
–2.1
–5.8
–5.2
–4.4
–4.6
–4.1
–4.1
Net Debt
70.3
86.3
89.2
89.4
89.2
88.9
101.7
100.6
99.0
99.4
100.4
103.0
Gross Debt
78.7
95.4
96.1
98.1
97.8
97.4
114.7
112.6
111.1
111.4
112.4
115.0
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.3
–2.6
–2.4
–2.4
–2.2
–1.5
–9.7
–9.0
–8.0
–3.7
–3.3
–0.7
Output Gap2
–0.9
–3.9
–3.1
–1.8
–1.2
–1.0
–6.2
–3.5
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.5
Structural Balance2
–3.0
–0.4
–1.0
–1.5
–1.6
–0.9
–6.1
–6.7
–2.4
–2.0
–3.0
–1.0
Net Debt
106.7
122.2
121.6
121.3
121.8
121.7
141.4
137.3
133.0
129.3
129.4
122.6
Gross Debt
117.3
135.3
134.8
134.2
134.4
134.1
154.9
149.8
144.7
140.3
140.0
131.9
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.4
–3.7
–3.6
–3.1
–2.5
–3.0
–9.1
–6.2
–7.8
–6.4
–4.0
–3.7
Output Gap2
0.2
–0.2
0.1
1.0
1.9
0.7
–2.9
–1.6
–0.9
–0.1
0.2
0.0
Structural Balance2
–6.2
–4.5
–4.5
–3.7
–3.0
–3.3
–8.1
–6.2
–7.8
–6.4
–4.1
–3.7
Net Debt
120.8
144.5
149.5
148.1
151.1
151.7
162.3
156.9
162.7
161.0
159.3
161.3
Gross Debt4
201.5
228.3
232.4
231.3
232.4
236.4
258.7
255.4
261.3
258.2
256.3
264.0
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.9
–4.5
–3.3
–2.4
–2.2
–2.2
–13.0
–8.3
–6.3
–5.8
–4.4
–3.7
Output Gap2
–2.7
–2.6
–2.2
–1.3
–1.0
–0.8
–3.6
0.5
1.8
–0.5
–0.8
0.0
Structural Balance2
–3.9
–2.5
–1.6
–1.3
–1.4
–1.6
0.8
–3.6
–4.5
–4.3
–2.8
–3.8
Net Debt
57.5
78.2
77.6
76.2
75.4
74.6
94.5
96.7
91.9
95.1
98.2
101.2
Gross Debt
64.1
86.7
86.6
85.6
85.2
84.5
105.6
108.1
102.6
106.2
109.7
113.1
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.0
–0.1
–0.5
–0.1
0.4
0.0
–10.9
–4.4
–0.7
–0.4
–0.4
0.0
Output Gap2
0.1
–0.1
–0.9
0.4
0.6
0.4
–3.4
–1.4
0.8
0.1
–0.4
0.0
Structural Balance2
–1.1
0.0
0.0
–0.3
0.0
–0.2
–8.1
–3.3
–1.2
–0.5
–0.1
0.0
Net Debt5
25.9
18.5
18.0
12.5
11.6
8.5
15.7
15.4
13.9
14.1
13.9
12.0
Gross Debt
78.9
92.0
92.4
90.9
90.8
90.2
118.9
115.1
106.6
105.1
102.2
91.1
Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the 
relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the System 
of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Nonconsolidated basis.
5Includes equity shares.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
155
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2005–14
2015–24
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
4.7
2.9
2.9
2.2
5.6
4.0
1.0
–7.8
10.6
5.1
2.4
3.5
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
2.9
0.5
–13.3
–4.0
4.3
5.5
–2.4
–2.2
12.5
6.7
–0.6
1.2
In SDRs
2.7
1.9
–5.9
–3.4
4.6
3.3
–0.1
–2.9
10.1
13.7
–0.3
1.2
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.0
2.7
3.8
2.0
5.0
3.5
1.4
–8.9
9.5
5.2
3.0
3.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.2
3.2
1.9
2.8
6.5
4.2
0.5
–4.9
12.5
4.1
1.6
4.3
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.2
3.0
4.7
2.5
4.8
3.9
2.1
–8.3
10.0
6.6
1.8
2.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8.0
2.7
–0.7
1.5
7.4
5.1
–1.1
–7.9
11.7
3.5
3.3
5.1
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.3
0.3
1.8
1.1
–0.2
–0.4
0.2
0.9
0.7
–2.1
0.3
0.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.3
–0.6
–4.4
–1.6
1.5
1.1
–1.5
–1.0
1.1
1.3
–2.6
0.1
Trade in Goods 
World Trade1
Volume
4.5
2.8
2.4
2.1
5.6
3.8
0.2
–5.0
11.1
3.3
1.5
3.2
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
3.0
0.5
–14.6
–4.8
4.9
5.8
–3.0
–2.6
14.1
8.2
–1.2
1.1
In SDRs
2.7
1.8
–7.3
–4.2
5.1
3.6
–0.7
–3.4
11.6
15.2
–0.9
1.2
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
1.9
1.1
–3.0
–5.2
0.1
2.0
0.5
–3.2
6.6
10.1
1.1
2.9
Oil
9.8
–3.3
–47.1
–15.0
22.5
29.4
–10.4
–32.0
65.8
39.2
–24.1
–5.8
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
6.2
2.3
–17.0
–0.3
6.4
1.3
0.7
6.5
26.4
7.4
–2.8
–1.0
Food
4.6
1.2
–16.9
1.5
3.8
–1.2
–3.1
1.7
26.1
14.1
–5.6
–2.8
Beverages
8.4
–0.2
–7.4
–3.0
–3.8
–9.2
–5.7
2.4
22.4
14.1
–5.5
–2.2
Agricultural Raw Materials
3.1
–0.7
–11.3
–0.2
5.4
2.0
–5.4
–3.4
15.5
5.7
–11.6
–0.2
Metal
8.0
3.0
–27.3
–5.3
22.2
6.6
3.9
3.5
46.7
–5.6
3.5
–2.6
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
1.6
2.4
5.3
–4.6
0.3
–0.1
2.9
–3.9
4.3
17.3
1.4
3.0
Oil
9.5
–2.0
–42.6
–14.5
22.8
26.7
–8.2
–32.6
62.2
48.2
–23.9
–5.7
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
5.9
3.6
–10.0
0.4
6.7
–0.8
3.1
5.7
23.6
14.4
–2.5
–0.9
Food
4.4
2.5
–9.8
2.2
4.1
–3.3
–0.7
0.9
23.4
21.5
–5.3
–2.8
Beverages
8.2
1.1
0.5
–2.3
–3.5
–11.1
–3.4
1.6
19.8
21.6
–5.2
–2.2
Agricultural Raw Materials
2.8
0.7
–3.7
0.5
5.7
–0.1
–3.2
–4.2
12.9
12.6
–11.3
–0.2
Metal
7.7
4.4
–21.1
–4.7
22.5
4.4
6.4
2.6
43.5
0.6
3.8
–2.6
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
1.2
3.5
16.2
–5.0
–1.9
–2.5
6.0
–5.0
2.8
23.7
0.3
3.7
Oil
9.1
–1.0
–36.7
–14.8
20.0
23.6
–5.4
–33.3
59.9
56.3
–24.7
–5.0
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
5.5
4.6
–0.7
0.0
4.3
–3.2
6.2
4.5
21.9
20.6
–3.6
–0.2
Food
3.9
3.5
–0.5
1.8
1.7
–5.6
2.3
–0.3
21.6
28.1
–6.4
–2.1
Beverages
7.7
2.1
10.9
–2.7
–5.7
–13.2
–0.5
0.5
18.1
28.2
–6.3
–1.4
Agricultural Raw Materials
2.4
1.7
6.3
0.1
3.3
–2.5
–0.2
–5.2
11.3
18.8
–12.3
0.6
Metal
7.3
5.4
–12.9
–5.0
19.7
1.9
9.6
1.5
41.5
6.0
2.6
–1.8
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
156	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2005–14
2015–24
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Trade in Goods (continued)
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.7
2.5
3.1
1.6
4.9
3.0
0.5
–6.3
9.9
3.4
2.4
2.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.0
3.0
1.5
2.6
6.6
3.9
–0.6
–1.2
11.8
1.5
0.4
3.7
Fuel Exporters
3.6
0.5
2.4
0.8
1.0
–0.4
–3.8
–6.5
1.3
6.2
1.4
2.8
Nonfuel Exporters
6.7
3.4
1.2
3.0
7.5
4.7
0.0
–0.2
13.2
0.8
0.2
3.8
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.1
2.8
3.7
2.2
4.8
3.8
0.6
–5.7
11.0
5.2
1.1
2.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.7
2.9
–0.2
2.1
7.5
5.2
–0.1
–5.7
12.3
2.2
2.3
4.1
Fuel Exporters
8.6
–0.7
0.2
–7.0
–0.8
–3.1
2.5
–11.9
1.5
11.1
1.2
1.4
Nonfuel Exporters
7.5
3.3
–0.3
3.6
8.7
6.3
–0.4
–4.9
13.6
1.2
2.4
4.4
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
1.7
1.7
–6.4
–2.2
4.3
2.8
–1.4
–2.2
10.0
12.2
–0.2
1.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.2
1.9
–9.2
–7.0
7.0
4.9
0.3
–5.6
15.2
18.8
–2.6
1.1
Fuel Exporters
8.0
–0.1
–30.3
–10.6
15.6
14.8
–4.0
–21.2
38.6
38.2
–13.8
–3.6
Nonfuel Exporters
4.4
2.4
–3.7
–6.3
5.4
3.1
1.1
–2.8
12.0
16.0
–0.5
1.9
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.1
1.4
–8.1
–3.5
4.5
3.4
–1.5
–3.3
9.4
14.7
–0.3
0.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.7
2.5
–5.2
–5.5
5.7
3.7
0.6
–2.9
13.9
16.7
–0.9
1.5
Fuel Exporters
3.7
3.0
–2.5
–3.4
3.4
1.4
2.7
–0.7
10.6
16.7
0.7
2.7
Nonfuel Exporters
3.7
2.4
–5.6
–5.9
6.0
4.0
0.3
–3.1
14.3
16.7
–1.1
1.3
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.2
1.8
1.3
–0.2
–0.6
0.1
1.1
0.5
–2.2
0.1
0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.4
–0.6
–4.2
–1.5
1.2
1.2
–0.3
–2.8
1.2
1.8
–1.7
–0.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
–0.3
0.1
8.1
0.2
–3.4
–2.4
1.1
0.6
–6.8
0.1
2.8
1.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.1
–0.7
–9.3
–5.5
3.4
4.3
0.4
–4.2
8.6
1.9
–6.2
0.7
Latin America and the Caribbean
1.9
–0.2
–9.0
0.8
4.4
–0.2
–0.7
1.4
4.9
–2.7
0.6
–0.7
Middle East and Central Asia
3.1
–2.5
–24.1
–5.4
9.8
10.7
–5.1
–17.7
21.0
14.3
–13.1
–5.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
3.6
–0.2
–14.6
–1.5
9.4
4.7
–1.9
0.0
11.0
0.1
–4.8
–1.6
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
4.1
–3.0
–28.5
–7.4
11.8
13.2
–6.5
–20.6
25.3
18.3
–14.5
–6.1
Nonfuel
0.7
0.0
2.1
–0.5
–0.6
–0.8
0.8
0.4
–2.0
–0.6
0.6
0.6
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
19,137
26,029
21,141
20,763
22,903
25,098
24,699
22,327
27,861
31,028
31,461 33,009
Goods
15,166
19,935
16,197
15,739
17,448
19,099
18,529
17,205
21,770
24,119
24,092 25,151
Average Oil Price3
9.8
–3.3
–47.1
–15.0
22.5
29.4
–10.4
–32.0
65.8
39.2
–24.1
–5.8
In US Dollars a Barrel
83.62
62.65
50.91
43.26
52.98
68.53
61.43
41.77
69.25
96.36
73.13
68.90
Export Unit Value of Manufactures4
1.9
1.1
–3.0
–5.2
0.1
2.0
0.5
–3.2
6.6
10.1
1.1
2.9
1Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
2As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 82 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) 
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16 
shares in world commodity imports.
3Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 
4Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. 
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
157
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Advanced Economies
269.1
362.4
477.2
384.7
383.6
125.5
435.2
–258.4
13.3
179.5
273.3
United States
–408.5
–396.2
–361.0
–439.8
–446.0
–619.7
–846.4
–925.6
–728.8
–689.9
–746.6
Euro Area
317.0
360.1
394.9
382.6
302.6
209.5
337.6
–102.3
83.0
144.1
306.9
Germany
288.3
299.0
289.1
316.2
317.8
274.2
329.8
171.0
201.2
227.9
290.6
France
–9.0
–12.0
–19.9
–23.2
14.0
–47.4
10.6
–47.7
–35.8
–21.0
–10.8
Italy
26.6
49.7
52.1
54.5
66.6
73.1
64.4
–14.8
16.0
22.0
53.5
Spain
24.2
39.1
36.4
26.7
29.4
7.7
13.6
14.8
13.4
12.7
29.7
Japan
136.4
197.8
203.5
177.8
176.3
147.9
197.3
90.0
131.8
180.3
210.4
United Kingdom
–148.8
–148.7
–96.9
–117.3
–80.9
–86.6
–46.9
–170.4
–164.7
–149.0
–150.5
Canada
–54.4
–47.2
–46.2
–41.0
–34.1
–35.5
–5.4
–8.3
–23.6
–24.2
–59.6
Other Advanced Economies1
349.6
328.0
332.1
333.2
343.4
379.8
582.9
597.6
538.0
536.8
537.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–88.9
–108.8
–30.9
–57.7
–6.7
156.2
325.7
582.7
146.8
19.4
–260.8
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
296.1
212.1
166.3
–51.2
93.1
319.2
252.0
288.9
182.6
132.0
–21.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
31.4
–10.3
–25.0
62.7
49.4
1.9
66.1
114.5
–37.7
–38.1
–47.1
Latin America and the Caribbean
–182.0
–109.3
–99.1
–146.0
–112.2
–15.5
–102.8
–141.6
–111.8
–112.2
–125.4
Middle East and Central Asia
–141.5
–146.7
–39.5
114.4
16.9
–102.9
130.3
360.9
167.5
99.1
–4.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
–92.9
–54.6
–33.7
–37.6
–53.8
–46.5
–19.9
–40.0
–53.9
–61.3
–62.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
–136.2
–86.5
49.1
194.6
72.5
–63.0
171.9
417.0
217.2
165.8
72.9
Nonfuel
49.2
–20.1
–77.8
–250.2
–77.4
221.1
155.3
168.0
–68.1
–144.1
–331.1
Of which, Primary Products
–65.2
–44.7
–58.3
–71.6
–45.0
–2.1
–16.3
–52.3
–35.4
–35.6
–27.8
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–365.0
–279.6
–315.1
–390.1
–304.8
–122.0
–327.8
–479.4
–442.3
–466.9
–534.4
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
–77.6
–71.3
–63.2
–54.4
–53.4
–36.7
–41.3
–32.6
–44.3
–54.2
–51.2
Memorandum
World
180.2
253.6
446.3
327.0
376.9
281.7
760.9
324.2
160.1
198.9
12.5
European Union
432.0
467.6
482.8
491.0
469.7
405.3
589.4
163.0
268.2
339.5
508.3
Middle East and North Africa
–122.2
–121.1
–19.3
130.8
37.2
–89.5
135.8
348.2
169.2
104.9
26.3
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
–13.8
–68.1
1.5
–5.6
47.7
207.3
402.2
671.5
223.9
107.7
–176.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
–75.1
–40.7
–32.4
–52.1
–54.4
–51.1
–76.4
–88.8
–77.1
–88.3
–84.2
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
158	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Advanced Economies
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.3
0.4
United States
–2.2
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–2.9
–3.6
–3.6
–2.7
–2.5
–2.3
Euro Area
2.7
3.0
3.1
2.8
2.2
1.6
2.3
–0.7
0.6
0.9
1.7
Germany
8.6
8.6
7.8
8.0
8.2
7.1
7.7
4.2
4.7
5.1
5.8
France
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
0.5
–1.8
0.4
–1.7
–1.2
–0.7
–0.3
Italy
1.4
2.6
2.7
2.6
3.3
3.9
3.0
–0.7
0.7
1.0
2.2
Spain
2.0
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.6
1.0
1.1
0.9
0.8
1.7
Japan
3.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
3.9
2.1
3.0
4.0
3.9
United Kingdom
–5.1
–5.5
–3.6
–4.1
–2.8
–3.2
–1.5
–5.6
–5.2
–4.4
–3.5
Canada
–3.5
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–2.2
–0.3
–0.4
–1.1
–1.1
–2.3
Other Advanced Economies1
5.4
5.0
4.7
4.5
4.7
5.2
6.9
7.1
6.2
5.9
5.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–0.3
–0.4
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.5
0.8
1.4
0.3
0.0
–0.4
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
1.9
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
1.1
0.7
0.5
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.0
–0.3
–0.7
1.6
1.3
0.1
1.5
2.4
–0.8
–0.7
–0.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
–3.6
–2.2
–1.8
–2.7
–2.2
–0.4
–2.0
–2.5
–1.8
–1.7
–1.6
Middle East and Central Asia
–3.8
–4.0
–1.1
3.0
0.4
–3.0
3.3
7.5
3.6
2.1
–0.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
–5.7
–3.6
–2.1
–2.1
–3.0
–2.8
–1.1
–2.0
–2.6
–2.7
–2.0
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
–4.1
–2.8
1.5
5.9
2.2
–2.2
5.2
10.2
5.3
3.9
1.4
Nonfuel
0.2
–0.1
–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
0.7
0.4
0.4
–0.2
–0.3
–0.6
Of which, Primary Products
–3.3
–2.4
–2.8
–3.5
–2.3
–0.1
–0.8
–2.3
–1.5
–1.5
–0.9
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–2.9
–2.2
–2.3
–2.7
–2.1
–0.9
–2.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.4
–2.1
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
–5.7
–5.4
–4.9
–4.0
–3.8
–2.6
–2.6
–1.9
–2.7
–3.2
–2.3
Memorandum
World
0.2
0.3
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.0
European Union
3.2
3.4
3.3
3.1
3.0
2.6
3.4
1.0
1.5
1.8
2.4
Middle East and North Africa
–4.1
–4.1
–0.6
4.3
1.2
–3.3
4.2
9.0
4.5
2.7
0.6
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.7
1.1
1.7
0.5
0.2
–0.3
Low-Income Developing Countries
–3.7
–2.1
–1.6
–2.4
–2.4
–2.2
–3.0
–3.3
–2.7
–2.8
–1.9
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
159
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Advanced Economies
2.0
2.7
3.3
2.4
2.5
0.9
2.5
–1.4
0.1
0.9
1.1
United States
–17.9
–17.7
–15.1
–17.3
–17.5
–28.7
–33.1
–30.6
–23.6
–21.7
–20.7
Euro Area
9.8
11.1
11.1
9.9
7.9
6.0
8.1
–2.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
18.3
18.7
16.6
16.8
17.3
16.2
16.3
8.3
9.4
10.3
11.8
France
–1.2
–1.5
–2.4
–2.5
1.6
–6.3
1.1
–4.7
–3.4
–1.9
–0.8
Italy
4.9
9.0
8.6
8.3
10.5
13.1
9.4
–2.0
2.1
2.7
5.9
Spain
6.0
9.4
7.9
5.3
6.0
2.0
2.7
2.5
2.1
1.8
3.6
Japan
17.4
24.4
23.2
19.1
19.5
18.6
21.5
9.8
13.8
18.0
19.1
United Kingdom
–18.3
–19.1
–11.8
–13.0
–9.1
–10.9
–5.2
–16.9
–15.5
–13.1
–10.6
Canada
–11.0
–9.8
–8.9
–7.4
–6.0
–7.3
–0.9
–1.2
–3.5
–3.5
–7.3
Other Advanced Economies1
9.4
9.0
8.3
7.7
8.2
9.7
11.8
11.1
9.8
9.3
7.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–1.0
–1.4
–0.4
–0.7
–0.1
1.9
3.0
4.7
1.2
0.1
–1.7
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.8
5.8
4.1
–1.1
2.1
7.3
4.5
4.7
3.0
2.0
–0.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.7
–0.9
–1.9
4.2
3.3
0.1
3.8
5.9
–2.0
–1.9
–1.9
Latin America and the Caribbean
–16.7
–10.3
–8.4
–11.4
–8.9
–1.4
–7.4
–8.6
–6.6
–6.3
–6.0
Middle East and Central Asia
–10.5
–12.1
–3.3
6.6
0.8
–8.9
8.4
17.3
8.6
4.9
–0.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
–27.0
–17.1
–9.1
–8.9
–13.0
–13.8
–4.5
–7.8
–10.4
–11.4
–9.7
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
–10.9
–7.6
3.6
12.7
5.1
–6.0
12.3
22.3
12.8
9.6
4.1
Nonfuel
0.8
–0.3
–1.1
–3.2
–1.0
3.1
1.7
1.6
–0.7
–1.3
–2.4
Of which, Primary Products
–15.8
–10.9
–12.7
–14.6
–9.4
–0.5
–2.8
–8.2
–5.4
–5.1
–3.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–11.5
–8.8
–8.8
–9.8
–7.6
–3.4
–7.2
–9.0
–8.1
–8.0
–7.3
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
–23.7
–23.7
–18.3
–14.0
–13.5
–11.0
–9.9
–6.9
–9.4
–10.9
–8.1
Memorandum
World
0.9
1.2
1.9
1.3
1.5
1.3
2.7
1.0
0.5
0.6
0.0
European Union
6.7
7.2
6.7
6.2
6.0
5.7
6.8
1.7
2.7
3.3
4.2
Middle East and North Africa
–10.1
–11.0
–2.0
8.6
2.5
–8.7
9.8
18.8
9.9
5.9
1.5
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
–0.1
–0.9
0.0
–0.2
0.5
2.8
4.0
5.9
2.0
0.9
–1.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
–15.6
–8.4
–5.8
–8.1
–7.9
–8.1
–10.2
–10.2
–8.5
–9.0
–6.1
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
160	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Advanced Economies
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.3
0.4
United States
–2.2
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–2.9
–3.6
–3.6
–2.7
–2.5
–2.3
Euro Area1
2.7
3.0
3.1
2.8
2.2
1.6
2.3
–0.7
0.6
0.9
1.7
Germany
8.6
8.6
7.8
8.0
8.2
7.1
7.7
4.2
4.7
5.1
5.8
France
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
0.5
–1.8
0.4
–1.7
–1.2
–0.7
–0.3
Italy
1.4
2.6
2.7
2.6
3.3
3.9
3.0
–0.7
0.7
1.0
2.2
Spain
2.0
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.6
1.0
1.1
0.9
0.8
1.7
The Netherlands
5.2
7.1
8.9
9.3
6.9
5.1
7.2
5.5
6.3
6.3
5.9
Belgium
1.4
0.6
0.7
–0.9
0.1
1.1
0.4
–3.4
–2.7
–1.4
0.0
Ireland
4.4
–4.2
0.5
4.9
–19.8
–6.8
14.2
8.8
8.2
7.5
7.0
Austria
1.7
2.7
1.4
0.9
2.4
3.0
0.4
0.3
1.2
0.6
0.3
Portugal
0.2
1.2
1.3
0.6
0.4
–1.0
–0.8
–1.3
–0.8
–0.7
0.0
Greece
–1.5
–2.4
–2.6
–3.6
–2.2
–7.3
–7.1
–9.7
–8.0
–6.0
–3.0
Finland
–0.9
–2.0
–0.8
–1.8
–0.3
0.6
0.4
–4.2
–3.4
–2.2
–1.3
Slovak Republic
–2.1
–2.7
–1.9
–2.2
–3.3
0.6
–2.5
–4.3
–3.5
–2.6
–1.4
Croatia
3.3
2.2
3.5
1.8
2.9
–0.5
1.8
–1.2
–1.8
–1.8
0.2
Lithuania
–2.8
–0.8
0.6
0.3
3.5
7.3
1.4
–4.5
–3.0
–2.0
0.0
Slovenia
3.8
4.8
6.2
6.0
5.9
7.6
3.8
–0.4
0.3
0.8
0.5
Luxembourg
4.8
4.8
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.1
4.8
4.0
4.3
4.3
4.5
Latvia
–0.6
1.6
1.3
–0.2
–0.6
2.6
–4.2
–6.3
–3.1
–2.2
–1.8
Estonia
1.8
1.2
2.3
0.9
2.4
–1.0
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–0.9
0.3
Cyprus
–0.4
–4.2
–5.0
–4.0
–5.6
–10.1
–6.8
–8.8
–7.8
–7.2
–6.6
Malta
2.7
–0.6
5.9
6.4
4.9
4.6
4.3
0.7
1.8
1.7
4.4
Japan
3.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
3.9
2.1
3.0
4.0
3.9
United Kingdom
–5.1
–5.5
–3.6
–4.1
–2.8
–3.2
–1.5
–5.6
–5.2
–4.4
–3.5
Korea
7.2
6.5
4.6
4.5
3.6
4.6
4.7
1.8
2.2
2.8
3.5
Canada
–3.5
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–2.2
–0.3
–0.4
–1.1
–1.1
–2.3
Taiwan Province of China
13.6
13.1
14.1
11.6
10.6
14.2
14.8
13.4
11.9
11.3
10.9
Australia
–4.6
–3.3
–2.6
–2.2
0.4
2.2
3.0
1.2
1.4
0.2
–0.4
Switzerland
8.9
7.3
5.3
5.6
3.9
0.4
7.9
9.8
7.8
8.0
8.0
Singapore
18.7
17.8
18.1
15.7
16.2
16.5
18.0
19.3
15.5
15.0
11.5
Sweden
3.2
2.2
2.8
2.5
5.3
5.9
6.5
4.3
3.9
3.9
4.1
Hong Kong SAR
3.3
4.0
4.6
3.7
5.9
7.0
11.8
10.7
8.0
6.5
4.5
Czech Republic
0.4
1.8
1.5
0.4
0.3
2.0
–0.8
–2.2
0.3
2.4
2.3
Israel
5.2
3.7
3.6
3.0
3.5
5.5
4.3
3.7
3.5
3.3
2.9
Norway
9.0
5.2
6.3
9.0
3.8
1.1
13.6
30.4
25.4
23.2
14.7
Denmark
8.2
7.8
8.0
7.3
8.5
7.9
9.0
12.8
9.5
7.7
7.5
New Zealand
–2.8
–2.0
–2.8
–4.2
–2.9
–1.0
–6.0
–8.9
–8.6
–7.2
–5.3
Puerto Rico
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
23.3
26.5
30.8
33.0
33.7
14.9
5.8
–23.5
13.1
23.1
21.9
Iceland
5.6
8.1
4.2
4.3
6.5
0.9
–2.4
–1.5
–1.7
–1.5
1.4
Andorra
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
18.0
14.6
16.0
17.1
17.6
18.1
19.0
San Marino
. . .
. . .
–0.4
–1.9
2.0
2.8
6.3
4.3
2.4
2.0
1.3
Memorandum
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Major Advanced Economies
–0.5
–0.2
0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.8
–0.7
–2.1
–1.3
–1.0
–0.7
Euro Area2
3.4
3.6
3.5
3.4
3.2
2.6
3.8
1.1
1.7
2.1
2.7
1Data corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
2Data calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
161
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Emerging and Developing Asia
1.9
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
1.1
0.7
0.5
–0.1
Bangladesh
1.2
1.6
–0.5
–3.0
–1.3
–1.5
–1.1
–4.1
–2.1
–4.2
–3.0
Bhutan
–27.9
–31.6
–23.6
–18.4
–20.5
–15.8
–12.0
–32.1
–29.0
–15.0
–6.6
Brunei Darussalam
16.7
12.9
16.4
6.9
6.6
4.3
11.2
26.5
16.5
17.7
19.8
Cambodia
–8.7
–8.5
–7.9
–11.8
–15.0
–8.5
–47.5
–26.9
–12.2
–9.3
–7.0
China
2.6
1.7
1.5
0.2
0.7
1.7
1.8
2.3
1.4
1.1
0.4
Fiji
–4.3
–3.5
–6.6
–8.4
–12.6
–12.7
–13.7
–12.1
–11.7
–10.6
–8.3
India
–1.0
–0.6
–1.8
–2.1
–0.9
0.9
–1.2
–2.6
–2.2
–2.2
–2.5
Indonesia
–2.0
–1.8
–1.6
–2.9
–2.7
–0.4
0.3
1.0
–0.3
–0.7
–1.5
Kiribati
33.0
10.8
37.4
38.8
49.5
40.0
8.9
–4.0
8.4
10.3
6.4
Lao P.D.R.
–22.3
–11.0
–11.2
–13.0
–9.1
–5.1
–0.6
–6.0
–2.6
–6.2
–5.8
Malaysia
3.0
2.4
2.8
2.2
3.5
4.2
3.8
2.6
2.6
2.7
3.0
Maldives
–7.5
–23.6
–21.6
–28.4
–26.6
–35.5
–7.9
–18.1
–16.0
–14.2
–8.5
Marshall Islands
15.6
13.5
5.0
5.0
–24.5
22.2
7.6
–7.6
–2.9
–1.5
–3.6
Micronesia
4.5
7.2
10.3
21.0
14.5
3.7
1.1
1.1
–0.5
–6.3
–6.5
Mongolia
–8.2
–6.3
–10.1
–16.7
–15.2
–5.1
–12.8
–15.8
–14.0
–16.3
–10.3
Myanmar
–3.5
–4.2
–6.8
–4.7
–2.8
–3.4
–0.2
–1.4
–1.0
–1.2
–1.0
Nauru
–19.6
4.2
12.4
7.6
4.6
2.5
4.6
–0.6
5.8
–0.2
–1.1
Nepal
4.4
5.5
–0.3
–7.1
–6.9
–1.0
–7.8
–12.9
–5.2
–5.0
–4.1
Palau
–12.9
–16.2
–23.2
–18.5
–31.3
–45.1
–57.6
–69.6
–55.7
–47.0
–23.7
Papua New Guinea
24.6
28.4
28.5
24.5
20.0
19.7
21.3
34.0
24.6
22.7
22.5
Philippines
2.4
–0.4
–0.7
–2.6
–0.8
3.2
–1.5
–4.4
–2.5
–2.4
–0.7
Samoa
–2.6
–4.2
–1.8
0.8
2.8
0.2
–14.6
–11.6
–3.3
–4.0
–1.2
Solomon Islands
–2.7
–3.5
–4.3
–3.0
–9.5
–1.6
–5.1
–13.3
–12.6
–10.2
–6.8
Sri Lanka
–2.2
–2.0
–2.4
–3.0
–2.1
–1.4
–3.8
–1.9
–1.6
–1.4
–1.3
Thailand
6.9
10.5
9.6
5.6
7.0
4.2
–2.1
–3.3
1.2
3.0
3.4
Timor-Leste
12.8
–33.0
–17.8
–12.2
6.6
–14.3
1.3
–4.7
–42.4
–49.0
–51.2
Tonga
–10.1
–6.5
–6.4
–6.3
–0.8
–5.3
–5.2
–6.3
–10.9
–12.6
–12.6
Tuvalu
–46.4
–39.9
8.4
66.2
–11.2
17.4
34.6
4.1
–5.6
0.7
–4.6
Vanuatu
–7.4
–2.4
–6.4
8.7
27.8
7.9
0.8
–2.2
–3.6
–1.2
2.3
Vietnam
–0.9
0.2
–0.6
1.9
3.7
4.3
–2.1
–0.9
0.2
0.6
1.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.0
–0.3
–0.7
1.6
1.3
0.1
1.5
2.4
–0.8
–0.7
–0.8
Albania
–8.6
–7.6
–7.5
–6.8
–7.6
–8.7
–7.7
–7.8
–7.7
–7.6
–7.3
Belarus
–3.3
–3.4
–1.7
0.0
–1.9
–0.4
2.7
4.2
1.3
1.6
0.5
Bosnia and Herzegovina
–5.0
–4.7
–4.8
–3.2
–2.6
–3.3
–2.4
–3.8
–4.3
–3.6
–3.3
Bulgaria
0.0
3.1
3.3
0.9
1.9
0.0
–1.9
–0.7
–0.5
–1.0
–0.5
Hungary
2.3
4.5
2.0
0.2
–0.8
–1.1
–4.2
–8.1
–4.6
–1.9
0.1
Kosovo
–8.8
–8.0
–5.5
–7.6
–5.7
–7.0
–8.7
–10.8
–8.4
–7.4
–6.0
Moldova
–6.0
–3.6
–5.8
–10.8
–9.4
–7.7
–12.4
–13.1
–12.8
–11.6
–8.3
Montenegro
–11.0
–16.2
–16.1
–17.0
–14.3
–26.1
–9.2
–13.3
–11.2
–11.3
–12.5
North Macedonia
–1.8
–2.6
–0.8
0.2
–3.0
–2.9
–3.1
–6.0
–4.6
–3.7
–3.5
Poland
–1.3
–1.0
–1.2
–1.9
–0.2
2.5
–1.4
–3.2
–2.4
–2.1
–2.0
Romania
–0.8
–1.6
–3.1
–4.6
–4.9
–4.9
–7.2
–9.3
–7.9
–7.7
–6.2
Russia 
5.0
1.9
2.0
7.0
3.9
2.4
6.7
10.3
3.6
3.2
2.2
Serbia
–3.5
–2.9
–5.2
–4.8
–6.9
–4.1
–4.3
–6.9
–6.1
–5.7
–4.5
Türkiye
–3.1
–3.1
–4.7
–2.6
1.4
–4.4
–0.9
–5.4
–4.0
–3.2
–2.1
Ukraine1
1.7
–1.5
–2.2
–3.3
–2.7
3.3
–1.6
5.7
–4.4
. . .
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean
–3.6
–2.2
–1.8
–2.7
–2.2
–0.4
–2.0
–2.5
–1.8
–1.7
–1.6
Antigua and Barbuda
2.2
–2.5
–8.0
–14.5
–7.1
–16.9
–16.6
–13.4
–13.2
–12.5
–10.0
Argentina
–2.7
–2.7
–4.8
–5.2
–0.8
0.8
1.4
–0.7
1.0
0.8
1.0
Aruba
3.9
4.6
1.0
–0.5
2.6
–12.1
2.7
11.1
10.7
9.7
6.8
The Bahamas
–12.5
–12.4
–13.4
–9.4
–2.6
–23.6
–22.6
–14.2
–8.8
–8.1
–5.6
Barbados
–6.1
–4.3
–3.8
–4.0
–2.8
–5.9
–10.9
–10.8
–7.5
–6.8
–4.6
Belize
–7.9
–7.2
–6.9
–6.5
–7.6
–6.1
–6.5
–8.5
–8.0
–7.8
–7.1
Bolivia
–5.8
–5.6
–5.0
–4.3
–3.3
–0.1
2.1
–1.5
–2.5
–2.6
–3.5
Brazil
–3.5
–1.7
–1.2
–2.9
–3.6
–1.9
–2.8
–2.9
–2.7
–2.7
–2.4
Chile
–2.7
–2.6
–2.8
–4.5
–5.2
–1.9
–7.3
–9.0
–4.2
–3.8
–3.0
Colombia
–6.4
–4.5
–3.2
–4.2
–4.6
–3.5
–5.6
–6.2
–5.1
–4.6
–4.0
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
162	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
–3.6
–2.2
–1.8
–2.7
–2.2
–0.4
–2.0
–2.5
–1.8
–1.7
–1.6
Costa Rica
–3.4
–2.1
–3.6
–3.0
–1.3
–1.0
–3.3
–4.3
–4.1
–3.4
–2.8
Dominica
–4.7
–7.7
–8.9
–43.7
–35.6
–35.4
–28.5
–26.7
–27.6
–19.9
–12.7
Dominican Republic
–1.8
–1.1
–0.2
–1.5
–1.3
–1.7
–2.8
–5.8
–4.2
–3.9
–3.3
Ecuador
–2.2
1.1
–0.2
–1.2
–0.1
2.7
2.9
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.0
El Salvador
–3.2
–2.3
–1.9
–3.3
–0.4
0.8
–5.1
–8.3
–5.4
–5.3
–5.6
Grenada
–10.7
–8.9
–11.6
–12.9
–10.1
–16.4
–13.2
–17.7
–15.0
–13.1
–10.8
Guatemala
–1.2
1.0
1.2
0.9
2.4
4.9
2.5
1.8
1.9
1.6
0.4
Guyana
–3.4
1.5
–4.9
–29.0
–63.0
–16.3
–25.6
27.3
27.9
27.3
21.4
Haiti
–5.1
–1.8
–2.2
–2.9
–1.1
1.1
0.5
–2.3
–0.8
–0.5
–1.2
Honduras
–4.7
–3.1
–1.2
–6.6
–2.6
2.9
–5.3
–3.4
–4.2
–4.0
–3.5
Jamaica
–3.0
–0.3
–2.7
–1.6
–2.2
–0.4
0.7
–3.2
–2.9
–2.7
–2.0
Mexico
–2.8
–2.4
–1.9
–2.1
–0.4
2.1
–0.6
–0.9
–1.0
–1.0
–1.0
Nicaragua
–9.9
–8.5
–7.2
–1.8
6.0
3.9
–2.9
–2.2
–2.1
–2.8
–2.2
Panama
–9.0
–7.8
–6.0
–7.6
–5.0
–0.4
–3.2
–4.1
–4.3
–4.0
–2.6
Paraguay
–0.2
4.3
3.0
–0.2
–0.5
2.7
0.9
–5.2
–2.5
–3.1
–1.1
Peru
–4.6
–2.2
–0.9
–1.3
–0.7
1.2
–2.3
–4.5
–2.1
–2.3
–1.5
St. Kitts and Nevis
–8.3
–12.3
–10.5
–7.2
–5.8
–10.9
–5.8
–5.0
–3.6
–2.8
–1.2
St. Lucia
–0.7
–6.5
–2.0
1.4
5.5
–15.3
–7.8
–6.0
–1.3
0.4
0.1
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
–14.7
–12.9
–11.7
–10.3
–2.3
–15.7
–22.9
–22.9
–18.9
–22.1
–8.9
Suriname
–15.3
–4.8
1.9
–3.0
–11.3
9.0
5.9
–1.7
0.0
–2.7
–2.2
Trinidad and Tobago
7.7
–3.3
5.9
6.7
4.3
–6.4
11.9
18.9
6.6
7.1
6.1
Uruguay
–0.3
0.8
0.0
–0.5
1.5
–0.9
–2.7
–2.5
–2.5
–2.2
–1.8
Venezuela
–12.8
–3.4
7.5
8.4
5.9
–3.5
–1.1
3.5
5.0
5.5
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
–3.8
–4.0
–1.1
3.0
0.4
–3.0
3.3
7.5
3.6
2.1
–0.1
Afghanistan1
3.7
9.0
7.6
12.2
11.7
11.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
–16.4
–16.5
–13.3
–9.7
–9.9
–12.8
–2.8
7.2
0.8
–2.7
–5.8
Armenia
–2.7
–1.0
–1.5
–7.4
–7.3
–3.8
–3.7
0.1
–1.7
–3.3
–4.5
Azerbaijan
–0.4
–3.6
4.1
12.8
9.1
–0.5
15.2
30.5
19.2
17.4
8.0
Bahrain
–2.4
–4.6
–4.1
–6.4
–2.1
–9.4
6.6
9.1
5.2
3.7
0.0
Djibouti
29.5
–1.0
–4.8
14.7
18.3
11.3
–0.7
–5.0
–3.8
–2.3
1.3
Egypt
–3.5
–5.6
–5.8
–2.3
–3.4
–2.9
–4.4
–3.5
–2.8
–3.1
–2.4
Georgia
–11.8
–12.5
–8.1
–6.8
–5.9
–12.5
–10.4
–3.1
–4.1
–4.2
–4.7
Iran
0.3
2.9
3.1
10.7
–0.7
–0.4
3.9
4.7
1.8
1.9
2.2
Iraq
–6.4
–7.4
–4.7
4.4
0.5
–10.9
7.8
11.6
4.4
–2.5
–4.6
Jordan
–9.0
–9.7
–10.6
–6.8
–1.7
–5.7
–8.2
–7.4
–6.0
–5.2
–2.0
Kazakhstan
–3.7
–6.2
–3.3
–0.5
–4.6
–4.4
–4.0
2.8
–1.9
–2.0
–3.1
Kuwait
3.5
–4.6
8.0
14.4
12.5
4.0
23.7
28.5
19.7
16.8
12.5
Kyrgyz Republic
–15.9
–11.6
–6.2
–12.1
–12.1
4.8
–8.4
–26.8
–9.7
–9.0
–7.2
Lebanon1
–19.9
–23.5
–26.4
–28.6
–27.6
–15.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya
–18.9
–9.4
6.6
14.7
6.7
–8.5
7.3
2.7
12.0
13.8
–4.2
Mauritania
–15.5
–11.0
–10.0
–13.1
–10.3
–6.7
–7.8
–14.3
–7.2
–8.6
–4.2
Morocco
–2.0
–3.8
–3.2
–4.9
–3.4
–1.2
–2.3
–4.3
–3.7
–3.5
–3.0
Oman
–13.9
–16.7
–13.4
–4.4
–4.6
–16.6
–4.9
3.2
2.1
1.4
0.4
Pakistan
–0.9
–1.6
–3.6
–5.4
–4.2
–1.5
–0.8
–4.6
–2.3
–2.4
–2.5
Qatar
8.5
–5.5
4.0
9.1
2.4
–2.0
14.7
26.0
19.2
14.9
10.9
Saudi Arabia
–8.5
–3.6
1.5
8.5
4.6
–3.1
5.1
13.8
6.2
3.6
–1.0
Somalia
–6.3
–7.1
–7.8
–6.2
–10.4
–10.5
–16.8
–16.8
–16.4
–14.7
–14.0
Sudan 
–8.5
–6.5
–9.4
–14.0
–15.6
–17.4
–7.3
–6.2
–7.2
–8.3
–7.5
Syria2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
–6.1
–4.2
2.1
–4.9
–2.2
4.1
8.2
6.2
–1.9
–2.4
–2.9
Tunisia
–9.1
–8.8
–9.7
–10.4
–7.8
–5.9
–6.0
–8.5
–7.1
–5.7
–4.5
Turkmenistan
–17.3
–23.1
–11.1
4.9
2.8
2.6
6.5
5.7
4.6
2.8
–1.5
United Arab Emirates
4.7
3.6
7.0
9.7
8.9
6.0
11.6
11.7
7.1
7.0
6.5
Uzbekistan
1.0
0.2
2.4
–6.8
–5.6
–5.0
–6.9
1.4
–3.5
–3.7
–5.0
West Bank and Gaza
–13.9
–13.9
–13.2
–13.2
–10.4
–12.3
–8.2
–12.4
–11.8
–11.5
–11.4
Yemen
–6.2
–4.4
–1.4
–0.2
–3.1
–8.9
–8.8
–9.6
–18.7
–13.1
–1.5
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
163
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2028
Sub-Saharan Africa
–5.7
–3.6
–2.1
–2.1
–3.0
–2.8
–1.1
–2.0
–2.6
–2.7
–2.0
Angola
–8.8
–3.1
–0.5
7.3
6.1
1.5
11.2
11.0
6.2
3.1
0.8
Benin
–6.0
–3.0
–4.2
–4.6
–4.0
–1.7
–4.2
–5.7
–5.8
–5.0
–4.2
Botswana
2.2
8.0
5.6
0.4
–6.9
–8.7
–0.5
3.1
3.3
5.4
4.5
Burkina Faso
–7.6
–6.1
–5.0
–4.2
–3.2
4.1
–0.4
–5.2
–3.6
–2.7
–2.8
Burundi
–11.5
–11.1
–11.7
–11.4
–11.6
–10.3
–12.4
–15.7
–15.6
–13.2
–8.7
Cabo Verde
–3.2
–3.8
–7.8
–4.9
0.2
–15.0
–11.3
–7.5
–5.0
–4.0
–3.8
Cameroon
–3.6
–3.1
–2.6
–3.5
–4.3
–3.7
–4.0
–1.6
–2.8
–3.0
–2.5
Central African Republic
–9.1
–5.4
–7.8
–8.0
–4.9
–8.2
–11.0
–13.3
–8.8
–7.4
–6.6
Chad
–13.8
–10.4
–7.1
–1.1
–4.3
–7.3
–4.5
2.8
–1.4
–4.9
–5.4
Comoros
–0.3
–4.4
–2.3
–2.9
–3.5
–1.7
0.8
–4.6
–7.3
–6.4
–4.5
Democratic Republic of the Congo
–3.7
–3.9
–3.1
–3.5
–3.2
–2.2
–0.9
–2.2
–3.9
–3.0
–1.6
Republic of Congo
–39.0
–48.4
–5.9
8.9
16.9
13.5
14.6
21.2
4.8
0.1
0.7
Côte d'Ivoire 
–0.4
–0.9
–2.0
–3.9
–2.3
–3.1
–4.0
–6.5
–5.7
–5.3
–3.8
Equatorial Guinea
–17.7
–26.0
–7.8
–2.1
–0.9
–4.2
–3.6
0.0
–2.1
–5.8
–7.3
Eritrea
22.4
13.4
24.8
15.5
12.9
14.2
14.1
12.9
14.1
12.4
9.7
Eswatini
13.0
7.9
6.2
1.3
3.9
7.1
2.7
–1.7
3.4
3.5
2.8
Ethiopia
–11.5
–10.9
–8.5
–6.5
–5.3
–4.6
–3.2
–4.3
–3.4
–2.6
–1.7
Gabon
–5.6
–11.1
–8.7
–4.8
–5.0
–6.9
–4.5
1.2
–0.1
–1.1
–3.4
The Gambia
–9.9
–9.2
–7.4
–9.5
–6.2
–3.0
–3.8
–15.0
–13.8
–10.5
–9.1
Ghana
–5.7
–5.1
–3.3
–3.0
–0.9
–3.8
–3.7
–2.3
–2.9
–2.0
–3.3
Guinea
–12.5
–30.7
–6.7
–18.5
–15.5
–16.1
–2.1
–6.2
–5.2
–4.6
–2.7
Guinea-Bissau
1.8
1.4
0.3
–3.5
–8.5
–2.6
–0.8
–5.9
–4.9
–4.7
–4.0
Kenya
–6.3
–5.4
–7.0
–5.4
–5.2
–4.8
–5.2
–4.7
–5.3
–5.3
–4.9
Lesotho
–4.2
–7.8
–4.0
–3.3
–1.5
–1.0
–4.4
–4.4
0.6
1.0
–2.7
Liberia
–28.5
–23.0
–22.3
–21.3
–19.6
–16.4
–17.9
–15.7
–17.0
–18.3
–14.6
Madagascar
–1.6
0.5
–0.4
0.7
–2.3
–5.4
–5.0
–5.6
–5.7
–5.1
–3.5
Malawi
–12.2
–13.1
–15.5
–12.0
–12.6
–13.8
–12.6
–3.6
–12.2
–13.3
–9.2
Mali
–5.3
–7.2
–7.3
–4.9
–7.5
–2.2
–8.2
–6.9
–6.2
–5.5
–4.5
Mauritius
–3.5
–3.9
–4.5
–3.8
–5.0
–8.8
–13.3
–13.5
–8.2
–6.8
–4.6
Mozambique
–37.4
–32.2
–19.6
–30.3
–19.1
–27.3
–22.8
–36.0
–13.3
–34.6
–15.2
Namibia
–13.6
–16.5
–4.4
–3.6
–1.8
2.6
–9.8
–13.5
–5.3
–3.7
–3.0
Niger
–15.3
–11.4
–11.4
–12.7
–12.3
–13.2
–14.1
–15.5
–12.8
–8.1
–9.0
Nigeria
–3.1
1.3
3.6
1.7
–3.1
–3.7
–0.4
–0.7
–0.6
–0.5
–0.2
Rwanda
–12.7
–15.3
–9.5
–10.1
–11.9
–12.1
–10.9
–11.6
–13.2
–12.0
–8.3
São Tomé and Príncipe
–12.0
–6.1
–13.2
–12.3
–12.1
–11.0
–11.2
–13.8
–11.8
–11.3
–6.9
Senegal
–5.7
–4.2
–7.3
–8.8
–7.9
–10.9
–13.6
–16.0
–10.4
–4.6
–4.6
Seychelles
–18.1
–19.7
–19.1
–2.6
–3.1
–13.5
–10.4
–7.3
–9.2
–10.0
–11.3
Sierra Leone
–23.6
–7.6
–18.3
–12.4
–14.3
–7.1
–8.7
–10.3
–6.1
–5.1
–3.8
South Africa
–4.3
–2.7
–2.4
–2.9
–2.6
2.0
3.7
–0.5
–2.3
–2.6
–2.0
South Sudan
1.7
19.6
9.6
11.0
2.1
–19.2
–9.5
6.7
6.3
5.7
0.5
Tanzania
–7.7
–4.2
–2.6
–3.0
–2.6
–1.9
–3.4
–4.6
–4.0
–3.3
–2.5
Togo
–7.6
–7.2
–1.5
–2.6
–0.8
–0.3
–0.9
–2.8
–4.0
–3.7
–2.7
Uganda
–6.0
–2.8
–4.8
–6.1
–6.6
–9.5
–8.3
–8.1
–10.9
–11.9
–9.9
Zambia
–2.7
–3.3
–1.7
–1.3
0.4
10.6
9.2
2.4
3.8
4.5
7.3
Zimbabwe1
–8.0
–3.4
–1.3
–3.7
3.5
2.5
1.0
0.8
0.4
0.8
0.5
1See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Lebanon, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
2Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
164	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
284.8
420.2
399.6
453.6
141.5
–66.4
558.2
–220.4
72.6
229.5
Direct Investment, Net
–6.0
–252.4
339.0
–59.0
16.5
–17.2
672.5
364.9
73.3
129.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
206.3
527.4
13.6
513.0
54.6
194.1
301.4
–425.4
–153.8
–86.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
–90.3
18.7
27.1
50.8
11.3
78.8
45.1
67.6
101.9
91.9
Other Investment, Net
–52.4
–51.8
–227.7
–180.9
–8.2
–680.4
–1,099.1
–44.8
–53.7
–33.2
Change in Reserves
227.4
178.2
247.7
129.7
67.3
357.2
633.2
–183.3
104.3
126.3
United States
Financial Account Balance 
–386.4
–362.4
–373.2
–302.9
–565.5
–697.0
–740.6
–869.7
–730.7
–691.9
Direct Investment, Net
–209.4
–174.6
28.6
–345.4
–209.1
122.9
–26.6
–31.3
–97.5
–100.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–106.8
–193.8
–250.1
78.8
–244.9
–540.2
43.0
–308.1
–142.1
–69.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
–27.0
7.8
24.0
–20.4
–41.7
–5.1
–41.9
–81.2
–29.3
–30.3
Other Investment, Net
–37.0
–4.0
–174.1
–20.8
–74.5
–283.5
–829.1
–452.0
–461.8
–491.9
Change in Reserves
–6.3
2.1
–1.7
5.0
4.7
9.0
114.0
2.9
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Financial Account Balance 
331.0
310.4
387.4
345.6
224.7
205.9
370.7
22.7
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
240.0
141.7
68.9
137.0
71.0
–224.8
352.4
145.6
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
131.7
540.6
403.7
275.9
–150.4
602.2
375.7
–249.9
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
126.4
11.3
12.4
46.6
8.0
21.2
80.9
72.7
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–178.7
–400.5
–96.4
–143.7
289.3
–207.7
–592.2
35.6
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
11.6
17.3
–1.2
29.8
6.7
15.0
153.9
18.7
. . .
. . .
Germany
Financial Account Balance
263.8
286.5
303.0
287.0
224.3
218.5
294.2
231.7
201.2
227.9
Direct Investment, Net
68.4
48.1
37.7
25.1
98.4
–5.6
118.8
132.0
84.5
118.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
213.8
217.9
220.7
177.4
82.9
18.7
240.9
25.6
74.5
103.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
33.7
31.7
12.6
26.8
23.0
107.9
71.2
45.0
44.2
46.9
Other Investment, Net
–49.7
–13.0
33.5
57.2
20.6
97.5
–174.5
24.4
–2.0
–40.6
Change in Reserves
–2.5
1.9
–1.4
0.5
–0.6
–0.1
37.7
4.7
0.0
0.0
France
Financial Account Balance
–0.8
–18.6
–36.1
–28.4
–0.1
–61.9
3.6
–45.5
–33.6
–18.9
Direct Investment, Net
7.9
41.8
11.1
60.2
30.7
6.3
–11.5
10.5
22.3
28.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
43.2
0.2
30.3
19.3
–70.4
–37.8
–6.3
–38.3
–17.4
2.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
14.5
–17.6
–1.4
–30.5
4.1
–27.2
21.0
6.8
0.3
–3.2
Other Investment, Net
–74.2
–45.4
–72.7
–89.7
32.3
–7.8
–26.7
–26.7
–42.4
–51.2
Change in Reserves
8.0
2.5
–3.4
12.3
3.2
4.6
27.0
2.1
3.6
4.4
Italy
Financial Account Balance
42.9
37.4
61.2
38.7
60.2
72.5
65.6
–16.8
34.5
40.3
Direct Investment, Net
2.0
–12.3
0.5
–6.1
1.6
21.7
37.3
–13.3
–5.5
–5.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
111.7
157.1
102.0
156.5
–58.6
124.7
147.1
177.9
3.2
–17.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
1.3
–3.6
–8.4
–3.3
2.9
–3.3
0.0
10.0
5.3
2.8
Other Investment, Net
–72.7
–102.5
–35.9
–111.5
110.6
–75.2
–143.4
–193.5
31.6
60.2
Change in Reserves
0.6
–1.3
3.0
3.1
3.6
4.6
24.5
2.1
0.0
0.0
Spain
Financial Account Balance
31.8
39.2
40.0
38.3
28.9
10.8
27.4
31.5
37.1
32.2
Direct Investment, Net
33.4
12.4
14.1
–19.9
8.9
20.2
–20.0
2.8
3.1
3.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
12.0
64.9
37.1
28.1
–55.7
85.1
42.3
11.3
11.0
12.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
4.2
2.8
8.7
–1.2
–7.9
–7.9
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Investment, Net
–23.3
–50.1
–24.0
28.7
82.9
–86.2
–10.7
17.4
23.0
16.6
Change in Reserves
5.5
9.1
4.1
2.6
0.8
–0.4
12.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
165
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Japan
Financial Account Balance
180.9
266.5
168.3
183.9
228.3
130.1
154.5
63.8
129.1
177.6
Direct Investment, Net
133.3
137.5
155.0
134.6
218.9
85.4
177.8
134.1
135.4
142.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
131.5
276.3
–50.6
92.2
87.4
38.5
–199.2
–143.2
–32.4
–36.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
17.7
–16.1
30.4
0.9
3.2
7.8
22.1
39.3
39.3
39.3
Other Investment, Net
–106.7
–125.6
10.0
–67.9
–106.7
–12.4
91.0
80.9
–24.7
20.1
Change in Reserves
5.1
–5.7
23.6
24.0
25.5
10.9
62.8
–47.4
11.5
11.5
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
–160.4
–167.0
–95.8
–123.2
–101.9
–107.4
–24.5
–173.2
–167.7
–151.9
Direct Investment, Net
–106.0
–297.4
46.1
–4.9
–42.2
–136.5
156.1
24.6
6.3
6.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–192.5
–159.0
–88.3
–352.2
29.8
32.4
–264.3
–166.6
–171.4
–183.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–133.2
15.6
19.3
10.3
2.5
33.1
–37.4
5.3
5.5
5.9
Other Investment, Net
239.2
265.0
–81.7
198.7
–90.8
–33.2
96.8
–36.5
–8.1
18.6
Change in Reserves
32.2
8.8
8.8
24.8
–1.1
–3.3
24.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
Canada
Financial Account Balance
–51.8
–45.4
–44.2
–35.8
–37.9
–36.5
–1.8
–8.4
–23.7
–24.3
Direct Investment, Net
23.6
33.5
53.4
20.4
26.9
15.6
31.3
27.2
–29.7
–0.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–36.2
–103.6
–74.9
3.4
–1.6
–67.7
–41.9
–35.5
–28.8
–50.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–47.8
19.1
–23.5
–58.2
–63.3
14.3
–11.4
–0.2
34.8
26.5
Change in Reserves
8.6
5.6
0.8
–1.5
0.1
1.3
20.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
294.6
327.5
309.8
365.3
340.1
393.0
632.8
542.0
548.9
547.7
Direct Investment, Net
–103.1
–76.1
–157.4
43.0
–28.1
69.8
–39.4
–19.5
–160.7
–180.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
324.7
247.6
151.7
371.6
308.1
275.8
462.5
335.3
288.1
293.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–12.0
3.3
–5.6
31.8
20.0
–10.6
–24.9
28.3
8.0
0.6
Other Investment, Net
–90.9
2.4
108.1
–130.5
10.5
–264.6
–25.1
356.9
328.3
327.3
Change in Reserves
176.0
150.2
213.1
49.5
29.6
321.5
254.5
–159.6
84.5
106.3
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Financial Account Balance
–322.3
–431.0
–289.6
–264.7
–151.2
36.2
154.9
607.6
159.2
29.7
Direct Investment, Net
–345.7
–259.0
–310.2
–377.9
–363.7
–329.9
–524.0
–353.7
–357.5
–409.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
125.4
–58.6
–209.7
–103.6
–63.9
–3.6
116.6
526.0
–14.3
–37.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
470.9
376.7
58.4
102.3
113.9
264.6
32.6
404.8
375.6
314.4
Change in Reserves
–583.8
–480.8
187.4
125.5
167.5
85.4
533.7
28.9
159.4
165.4
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
166	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
60.9
–37.8
–69.1
–272.3
–64.0
145.7
86.7
274.9
171.3
121.7
Direct Investment, Net
–139.7
–26.2
–108.5
–171.3
–145.7
–165.1
–300.3
–111.1
–116.2
–134.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
81.6
31.1
–70.1
–100.4
–72.9
–107.4
–21.0
356.8
–45.6
–65.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.7
–4.6
2.3
4.7
–2.5
15.8
18.8
17.6
18.2
19.0
Other Investment, Net
460.3
356.9
–80.3
–17.4
70.3
242.5
121.7
7.5
189.4
198.2
Change in Reserves
–333.0
–384.6
199.2
22.1
97.0
167.5
278.7
20.6
139.5
117.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
68.1
10.9
–25.4
106.2
59.8
8.4
83.3
162.0
–20.0
–19.3
Direct Investment, Net
–22.3
–42.8
–27.8
–25.8
–50.4
–38.4
–41.2
–49.9
–51.5
–57.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
54.9
–10.8
–34.9
9.8
–2.8
21.1
38.7
16.0
5.8
8.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
5.1
0.5
–2.2
–3.0
1.4
0.3
–5.9
–1.3
–4.7
–4.2
Other Investment, Net
39.1
28.3
26.0
79.6
19.7
29.5
–36.3
208.7
48.7
28.7
Change in Reserves
–8.7
35.7
13.5
45.6
92.1
–4.0
128.0
–11.1
–18.1
5.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
–197.6
–112.9
–112.0
–163.3
–123.0
–6.7
–106.4
–155.6
–113.5
–115.0
Direct Investment, Net
–133.3
–124.8
–121.1
–148.6
–114.9
–93.8
–101.7
–145.9
–127.9
–135.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–50.8
–50.5
–39.3
–14.2
1.5
1.7
–7.8
11.1
1.8
–9.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
1.4
–2.9
3.9
4.0
4.9
5.7
2.0
2.4
0.7
0.5
Other Investment, Net
13.8
44.2
27.3
–18.5
18.3
63.5
–48.7
–1.7
4.4
11.6
Change in Reserves
–28.8
21.0
17.1
13.8
–32.7
16.1
49.8
–21.5
7.6
17.5
Middle East and Central Asia
Financial Account Balance
–185.3
–226.0
–38.3
105.0
28.6
–89.3
110.1
360.9
165.8
93.7
Direct Investment, Net
–12.4
–31.0
–15.4
–11.3
–23.4
–22.6
–10.8
–20.9
–25.2
–39.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
61.7
–11.9
–41.5
5.7
29.1
78.8
61.4
136.3
19.9
26.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–51.6
–43.6
85.0
77.7
16.6
–67.1
11.8
196.4
141.5
93.3
Change in Reserves
–196.8
–148.1
–58.3
39.0
4.7
–84.9
54.6
49.4
32.9
16.3
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
–68.4
–65.0
–44.9
–40.3
–52.6
–21.8
–18.8
–34.7
–44.3
–51.4
Direct Investment, Net
–37.9
–34.2
–37.3
–20.9
–29.2
–9.9
–69.9
–25.9
–36.7
–43.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–22.0
–16.6
–24.0
–4.5
–18.8
2.2
45.1
5.8
3.7
2.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
–0.4
1.0
0.2
–0.5
0.3
0.7
–0.2
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
Other Investment, Net
9.2
–9.0
0.4
–19.1
–11.0
–3.7
–15.9
–5.9
–8.4
–17.5
Change in Reserves
–16.4
–4.8
16.0
4.9
6.3
–9.3
22.5
–8.5
–2.5
8.2
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
167
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
–158.7
–174.8
19.4
161.6
73.0
–41.9
145.4
413.0
204.3
150.1
Direct Investment, Net
–8.6
–17.7
15.8
14.2
0.6
–3.2
2.0
5.0
–4.3
–16.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
67.0
–8.4
–36.3
6.7
26.3
79.6
76.5
107.4
22.4
29.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–11.3
–3.2
116.6
110.7
40.4
–51.1
31.5
260.2
174.5
127.9
Change in Reserves
–219.9
–154.2
–68.6
35.9
4.1
–73.8
41.9
41.4
15.7
12.6
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
–163.6
–256.1
–309.0
–426.3
–224.1
78.1
9.4
194.6
–45.1
–120.4
Direct Investment, Net
–337.1
–241.3
–326.1
–392.2
–364.3
–326.6
–526.0
–358.8
–353.2
–393.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
58.4
–50.2
–173.5
–110.2
–90.3
–83.2
40.1
418.6
–36.8
–67.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
6.9
–6.0
4.3
5.2
4.0
22.5
14.7
18.4
13.9
15.1
Other Investment, Net
482.1
379.8
–58.2
–8.4
73.5
315.7
1.2
144.7
201.1
186.4
Change in Reserves
–363.9
–326.6
256.0
89.6
163.4
159.1
491.8
–12.5
143.8
152.8
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
–326.8
–284.4
–346.3
–375.0
–305.3
–110.6
–324.0
–437.7
–422.1
–446.6
Direct Investment, Net
–281.8
–289.5
–271.1
–313.8
–297.3
–252.0
–299.7
–325.0
–324.6
–363.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–51.3
–64.7
–124.2
–37.3
–34.3
–46.0
–23.2
49.2
–27.4
–49.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
28.6
18.3
–33.3
–17.5
–66.6
39.2
–218.5
–98.4
–110.6
–131.6
Change in Reserves
–11.1
75.9
89.8
3.1
104.1
149.0
226.2
–58.2
50.9
106.9
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears  
and/or Rescheduling  
during 2017–21
Financial Account Balance
–71.7
–73.8
–56.3
–48.8
–45.9
–24.3
–41.7
–27.5
–37.4
–45.1
Direct Investment, Net
–40.1
–32.3
–26.6
–30.6
–34.5
–23.1
–33.4
–22.9
–29.4
–35.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–1.4
–12.3
–36.6
–19.2
–17.8
5.4
–22.4
23.1
–4.7
–7.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–26.0
–32.6
–8.8
–2.9
6.3
12.5
5.5
–6.4
–12.2
–26.9
Change in Reserves
–3.6
3.9
15.8
4.1
0.1
–18.7
9.4
–22.3
8.2
24.1
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance
–37.5
–10.8
110.0
188.8
–9.7
–30.2
713.0
387.2
231.8
259.2
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available 
because of data constraints.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
168	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2005–14
2009–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025–28
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.4
0.3
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.8
–0.5
0.1
0.4
0.4
Current Account Balance
–0.4
0.3
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.3
0.4
Savings
21.8
21.7
23.3
23.4
23.6
23.1
23.7
23.2
22.9
23.1
23.3
Investment
22.1
21.3
22.1
22.4
22.6
22.3
22.6
23.2
22.5
22.5
22.5
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.7
–2.5
–1.8
–2.2
–2.1
–3.0
–3.6
–3.6
–2.7
–2.5
–2.3
Current Account Balance
–3.7
–2.4
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–2.9
–3.6
–3.6
–2.7
–2.5
–2.3
Savings
17.2
17.7
19.5
19.6
19.7
19.3
18.0
18.7
19.0
19.2
19.2
Investment
20.7
19.8
20.8
21.2
21.3
21.1
21.1
21.6
21.0
21.0
20.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.4
1.4
2.9
2.5
2.0
1.6
2.7
0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
0.3
1.3
3.1
2.8
2.2
1.6
2.3
–0.7
0.6
0.9
1.6
Savings
22.7
22.6
24.8
25.3
26.0
24.9
26.8
25.3
25.1
25.5
26.3
Investment
21.6
20.4
21.3
21.9
22.9
22.3
23.0
24.4
23.7
23.6
23.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
0.4
1.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
6.2
7.0
7.8
8.0
8.1
6.8
7.7
3.7
4.7
5.1
5.9
Current Account Balance
6.2
7.0
7.8
8.0
8.2
7.1
7.7
4.2
4.7
5.1
5.9
Savings
26.5
27.0
28.8
29.9
30.3
29.1
31.0
29.0
28.4
28.8
29.8
Investment
20.3
20.0
21.0
21.9
22.1
22.1
23.3
24.8
23.8
23.7
23.8
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.3
0.0
–0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.5
–0.7
–0.8
–0.7
0.6
–1.7
0.8
–1.6
–1.2
–0.6
–0.5
Current Account Balance
–0.5
–0.7
–0.8
–0.8
0.5
–1.8
0.4
–1.7
–1.2
–0.7
–0.5
Savings
22.3
21.8
22.7
23.0
24.9
21.9
25.4
24.0
23.2
23.6
23.8
Investment
22.8
22.4
23.4
23.9
24.4
23.7
25.0
25.8
24.7
23.9
23.6
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.1
–0.1
2.7
2.6
3.2
3.9
2.9
–0.7
1.6
1.8
2.0
Current Account Balance
–1.2
–0.1
2.7
2.6
3.3
3.9
3.0
–0.7
0.7
1.0
1.7
Savings
18.8
18.2
20.7
21.1
21.6
21.6
23.7
21.0
22.5
22.9
24.3
Investment
19.9
18.4
18.1
18.5
18.2
17.7
20.7
21.8
21.8
21.9
22.6
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.9
0.8
0.3
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.7
0.3
3.0
2.4
2.4
1.1
1.9
2.2
2.5
2.1
1.7
Current Account Balance
–4.1
–0.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.6
1.0
1.1
0.9
0.8
1.3
Savings
19.7
19.5
22.2
22.3
22.9
21.0
21.8
22.0
21.9
22.4
22.7
Investment
23.9
19.7
19.4
20.5
20.8
20.4
20.8
20.9
21.0
21.6
21.4
Capital Account Balance
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.9
1.2
1.6
1.2
0.4
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.5
2.2
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
3.9
2.1
2.9
3.9
3.8
Current Account Balance
2.6
2.3
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
3.9
2.1
3.0
4.0
3.9
Savings
27.2
26.3
29.3
29.2
29.2
28.2
29.5
28.8
28.9
29.5
29.4
Investment
24.6
24.0
25.2
25.6
25.8
25.3
25.6
26.6
25.9
25.5
25.6
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.5
–4.0
–3.7
–4.2
–2.9
–3.3
–1.6
–5.6
–5.3
–4.5
–3.7
Current Account Balance
–3.4
–4.0
–3.6
–4.1
–2.8
–3.2
–1.5
–5.6
–5.2
–4.4
–3.7
Savings
13.4
12.5
14.7
13.9
15.3
14.0
16.4
13.7
12.1
12.4
13.5
Investment
16.8
16.5
18.3
18.0
18.1
17.2
17.9
19.3
17.3
16.8
17.1
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
169
Projections
Averages
Average
2005–14
2009–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025–28
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.4
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–2.2
–0.3
–0.4
–1.1
–1.1
–1.8
Current Account Balance
–1.4
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–2.2
–0.3
–0.4
–1.1
–1.1
–1.8
Savings
22.5
20.8
20.7
21.0
21.1
20.1
23.5
24.2
22.1
22.1
21.6
Investment
23.8
23.9
23.6
23.4
23.0
22.3
23.8
24.5
23.3
23.2
23.4
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.0
4.5
4.7
4.7
4.6
5.3
6.9
7.1
6.2
6.0
5.4
Current Account Balance
4.1
4.6
4.7
4.5
4.7
5.2
6.9
7.1
6.2
5.9
5.4
Savings
30.6
30.5
30.9
30.5
30.3
31.5
33.2
33.6
32.2
32.0
31.8
Investment
26.3
25.7
25.9
25.9
25.5
26.0
26.0
26.1
25.9
26.0
26.3
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.2
0.8
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.6
0.9
1.4
0.4
0.1
–0.2
Current Account Balance
2.2
0.7
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.5
0.8
1.4
0.3
0.0
–0.3
Savings
32.3
32.3
31.7
32.4
32.1
32.8
34.1
34.5
33.6
33.6
33.2
Investment
30.3
31.7
31.9
32.7
32.2
32.4
33.4
33.4
33.5
33.7
33.6
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.2
1.7
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
1.1
0.7
0.5
0.1
Current Account Balance
3.1
1.6
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
1.1
0.7
0.5
0.1
Savings
42.4
42.4
40.1
40.0
39.5
40.2
40.7
41.1
40.8
40.6
39.8
Investment
39.5
40.8
39.2
40.2
39.1
38.7
39.7
40.0
40.1
40.2
39.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.5
–0.2
–0.4
2.1
1.7
0.5
1.9
2.8
–0.4
–0.4
–0.3
Current Account Balance
–0.6
–0.5
–0.7
1.6
1.3
0.1
1.5
2.4
–0.8
–0.7
–0.7
Savings
23.4
23.2
24.0
25.6
24.2
24.0
26.2
28.1
24.0
23.8
23.0
Investment
23.8
23.6
24.7
23.7
23.0
23.9
24.7
25.8
25.1
24.8
24.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.1
–2.4
–1.8
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–2.0
–2.4
–1.7
–1.7
–1.6
Current Account Balance
–1.2
–2.5
–1.8
–2.7
–2.2
–0.4
–2.0
–2.5
–1.8
–1.7
–1.6
Savings
20.5
18.9
16.9
16.3
16.5
17.4
18.4
17.8
18.3
18.4
18.5
Investment
21.7
21.4
18.7
19.0
18.7
17.8
20.6
20.4
20.1
20.1
20.2
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Middle East and Central Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
8.9
4.5
–1.3
2.6
0.4
–3.0
3.0
7.6
3.5
1.9
0.5
Current Account Balance
9.0
4.3
–1.1
3.0
0.4
–3.0
3.3
7.5
3.6
2.1
0.5
Savings
36.2
32.1
26.4
28.7
26.5
22.3
27.3
32.2
28.9
27.8
26.7
Investment
27.4
27.5
27.3
26.0
26.4
25.4
24.3
24.9
25.4
25.8
26.3
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.0
–1.9
–1.6
–1.7
–2.6
–2.4
–0.7
–1.6
–2.1
–2.3
–2.0
Current Account Balance
–0.2
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–3.0
–2.8
–1.1
–2.0
–2.6
–2.7
–2.4
Savings
20.6
19.0
18.5
19.3
19.8
20.0
21.6
20.1
20.1
20.4
20.8
Investment
21.0
21.5
20.4
21.2
23.0
22.4
22.4
21.8
22.5
23.0
23.1
Capital Account Balance
1.2
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A ROCKY RECOVERY
170	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Projections
Averages
Average
2005–14
2009–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025–28
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
11.9
6.0
1.2
5.3
2.1
–2.3
4.7
10.2
5.2
3.7
2.0
Current Account Balance
12.1
6.0
1.5
5.9
2.2
–2.2
5.2
10.2
5.3
3.9
2.1
Savings
39.2
34.1
29.5
32.2
30.2
26.2
31.7
36.2
31.8
30.8
29.1
Investment
27.1
27.6
27.0
25.5
27.3
27.8
26.0
25.7
26.1
26.4
26.6
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
0.0
–0.1
–0.5
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.7
0.0
–0.2
–0.7
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.5
–0.1
–0.3
–0.4
Current Account Balance
0.6
–0.2
–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
0.7
0.4
0.4
–0.2
–0.3
–0.5
Savings
31.3
32.0
32.0
32.5
32.2
33.4
34.3
34.4
33.8
33.8
33.5
Investment
30.8
32.3
32.4
33.4
32.7
32.8
34.0
34.1
34.2
34.3
34.2
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.9
–2.4
–2.1
–2.5
–1.9
–0.6
–1.9
–2.6
–2.2
–2.2
–2.0
Current Account Balance
–2.3
–2.7
–2.3
–2.7
–2.1
–0.9
–2.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.4
–2.2
Savings
23.3
22.9
22.4
22.8
22.7
23.1
23.4
22.9
23.1
23.3
23.9
Investment
25.6
25.5
24.7
25.4
24.8
24.0
25.6
25.8
25.7
25.8
26.2
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.5
–4.1
–4.4
–3.6
–3.4
–2.0
–2.2
–1.6
–2.3
–2.8
–2.3
Current Account Balance
–3.3
–4.8
–4.9
–4.0
–3.8
–2.6
–2.6
–1.9
–2.7
–3.2
–2.7
Savings
20.9
19.1
18.4
19.7
18.5
17.2
17.8
18.8
18.7
19.8
20.6
Investment
24.5
23.9
23.8
23.6
23.2
19.9
20.6
20.9
21.2
22.3
23.0
Capital Account Balance
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.3
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
Current Account Balance
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
Savings
25.3
25.6
26.7
27.0
27.0
27.0
27.9
28.0
27.5
27.6
27.7
Investment
24.9
25.1
26.0
26.5
26.5
26.3
27.0
27.5
27.2
27.3
27.5
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted by 
GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’ 
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of 
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to 
the current account balance (CAB) (S − I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In 
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2023	
171
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
Averages
2005–14
2015–24
2021
2022
2023
2024
2021–24
2025–28
World Real GDP
3.9
2.9
6.3
3.4
2.8
3.0
3.9
3.1
Advanced Economies
1.5
1.7
5.4
2.7
1.3
1.4
2.7
1.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.1
3.9
6.9
4.0
3.9
4.2
4.7
3.9
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
1.4
1.2
2.0
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.6
World Trade, Volume1
4.7
2.9
10.6
5.1
2.4
3.5
5.4
3.5
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.2
3.0
10.0
6.6
1.8
2.7
5.2
3.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8.0
2.7
11.7
3.5
3.3
5.1
5.8
4.4
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.0
2.7
9.5
5.2
3.0
3.1
5.2
2.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.2
3.2
12.5
4.1
1.6
4.3
5.5
4.2
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.3
0.3
0.7
–2.1
0.3
0.6
–0.1
0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.3
–0.6
1.1
1.3
–2.6
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
1.9
1.1
6.6
10.1
1.1
2.9
5.1
1.7
Oil
9.8
–3.3
65.8
39.2
–24.1
–5.8
13.3
–2.3
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
6.2
2.3
26.4
7.4
–2.8
–1.0
6.9
0.0
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.9
2.4
3.1
7.3
4.7
2.6
4.4
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.2
5.9
5.9
9.8
8.6
6.5
7.7
4.7
Interest Rates 
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate2
1.2
–0.7
–2.5
–5.0
–1.4
0.8
–2.0
1.1
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.5
0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.3
0.2
0.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.2
0.2
0.8
1.4
0.3
0.0
0.6
–0.3
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
27.1
30.2
31.5
29.1
28.1
27.4
29.0
26.2
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.5
10.7
10.6
10.6
10.0
9.6
10.2
9.4
1Data refer to trade in goods and services.
2GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States.
Annual Percent Change
Percent
Percent of GDP
173
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks	
April 2013
World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions	
October 2013
World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven	
April 2014
World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties	
October 2014
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors	
April 2015
World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices	
October 2015
World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long	
April 2016
World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies	
October 2016
World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?	
April 2017 
World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery,  
Long-Term Challenges	
October 2017
World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change	
April 2018
World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth	
October 2018
World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery	
April 2019
World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers	
October 2019
World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown	
April 2020
World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent	
October 2020
World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries	
April 2021
World Economic Outlook: Uncharted Territory: Recovery during a Pandemic	
October 2021
World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery	
April 2022
World Economic Outlook: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis	
October 2022
World Economic Outlook: A Rocky Recovery	
April 2023
I.  Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement	
October 2014, Box 3.3
Tariff Scenarios	
October 2016, Scenario Box
World Growth Projections over the Medium Term	
October 2016, Box 1.1
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices	
April 2019, Box 1.2
On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis	
April 2019, Box 3.3
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices	
October 2019, Box 1.3
Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19	
April 2020, Scenario Box
Alternative Scenarios	
October 2020, Scenario Box
Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights	
October 2020, Box 1.1
Scenario Box	
April 2021
Downside Scenarios	
October 2021, Scenario Box
Scenario Box	
April 2022, Scenario Box
Risk Assessment around the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection	
October 2022, Box 1.3
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projections	
April 2023, Box 1.3
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS
174
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
II.  Historical Surveys
What Is the Effect of Recessions?	
October 2015, Box 1.1
III.  Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe	
April 2013, Chapter 2,  
	
	 Spillover Feature
Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?	
April 2013, Chapter 4
What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?	
October 2013, Box 1.2
Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages	
October 2013, Chapter 3
Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the 
Caucasus and Central Asia	
October 2013, Box 3.1
Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy	
October 2013, Box 3.2
Saving and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 3.1
On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,  
and after the Global Financial Crisis	
April 2014, Chapter 4
The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies	
April 2014, Box 4.1
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011	
October 2014, Box 1.2
Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	
October 2014, Chapter 2, 	
	
	 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output	
April 2015, Chapter 3
Steady as She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output	
April 2015, Box 3.1
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries— 
The Role of External Factors	
April 2016, Box 1.2
Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market 
Reforms in Advanced Economies	
April 2016, Chapter 3
Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated 
External Environment	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2017, Box 2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence 
over the Forecast Horizon	
October 2017, Box 1.3
Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality	
April 2018, Chapter 3
Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?	
April 2018, Chapter 4
Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth	
April 2018, Box 1.3
Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.2
Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.3
The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown	
October 2018, Chapter 2
The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle	
October 2019, Box 1.4
Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can 
Structural Reforms Play?	
October 2019, Chapter 3
Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an 
Era of Low Rates and High Debt	
April 2020, Chapter 2
The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects	
October 2020, Chapter 2
An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns	
October 2020, Box 2.1
Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook	
April 2021, Box 1.1
SELECTED TOPICS
175
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage	
April 2021, Chapter 2
A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector	
April 2021, Box 2.1
Research and Innovation: Fighting the Pandemic and Boosting Long-Term Growth	
October 2021, Chapter 3
IV.  Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
Commodity Market Review	
April 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?	
April 2013, Chapter 3
Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?	
April 2013, Box 3.1
Commodity Market Review	
October 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.1
Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.2
Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting	
April 2014, Box 1.3
Commodity Prices and Forecasts	
April 2014, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas	
October 2014, Chapter 1, 
in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment	
April 2015, Chapter 1, 
in an Era of Low Oil Prices	
	 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?	
April 2015, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy	
October 2015, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift	
October 2015, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath 
of the Commodity Boom	
October 2015, Chapter 2
The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon	
October 2015, Box 2.1
Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?	
October 2015, Box 2.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the	
April 2016, Chapter 1, 
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	
	 Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and	
October 2016, Chapter 1, 
Markets in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?	
October 2016, Box 3.3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and	
April 2017, Chapter 1, 
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2017, Chapter 1, 	
	
Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?	
April 2018, Box 1.2
The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles	
April 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
October 2018, Box 1.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand	
October 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
October 2018, Box 1.SF.1
176
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
October 2018, Chapter 3
Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 3.1
Commodity Special Feature	
April 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2020, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Is Happening with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?	
October 2020, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
House Prices and Consumer Price Inflation	
October 2021, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Inflation Scares	
October 2021, Chapter 2
Core Inflation in the COVID-19 Crisis	
October 2021, Box 2.2
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment	
April 2022, Special Feature
Dissecting Recent WEO Inflation Forecast Errors	
October 2022, Box 1.1
Market Power and Inflation during COVID-19	
October 2022, Box 1.2
Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers	
October 2022, Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and the Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in	
April 2023, Chapter 1,  
Fossil Fuel Extraction	
	 Special Feature
V.  Fiscal Policy
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance	
April 2013, Box 1.2
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.5
Commodity Booms and Public Investment	
October 2015, Box 2.2
Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant	
October 2017, Chapter 4
The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions	
October 2017, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes	
April 2018, Box 1.5
Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries	
October 2019, Box 2.4
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt	
April 2023, Chapter 3
Market Reforms to Promote Growth and Debt Sustainability	
April 2023, Box 3.1
VI.  Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening	
October 2013, Box 1.1
Credit Supply and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 1.1
SELECTED TOPICS
177
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	
April 2014, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates	
April 2014, Chapter 3
Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update	
October 2014, Box 1.1
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Box 2.2
A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Box 3.5
Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?	
October 2017, Box 1.2
The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
October 2018, Box 2.3
Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
October 2018, Box 3.2
Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy?	
April 2020, Box 2.1
Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help?	
April 2020, Chapter 3
Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings	
April 2020, Box 3.1
Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks?	
April 2020, Box 3.2
Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks: 
Assessment and Policy Options	
April 2020, Box 1.3
Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19	
April 2021, Chapter 4
Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness	
April 2021, Box 4.1
Monetary Expansions and Inflationary Risks	
October 2021, Box 1.3
Policy Responses and Expectations in Inflation Acceleration Episodes	
October 2021, Box 2.3
Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects	
April 2022, Box 1.2
Private Sector Debt and the Global Recovery	
April 2022, Chapter 2
Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich, and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2022, Box 2.2
House Prices: Coming Off the Boil	
April 2023, Box 1.1
Monetary Policy: Speed of Transmission, Heterogeneity, and Asymmetries	
April 2023, Box 1.2
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy 	
April 2023, Chapter 2
Spillovers to Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
April 2023, Box 2.3
Monetary and Fiscal Interactions	
April 2023, Box 3.2
VII.  Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment	
April 2016, Box 3.2
Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects	
April 2018, Chapter 2
Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus 
Advanced Economies	
April 2018, Box 2.1
Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates	
April 2018, Box 2.4
Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil	
April 2018, Box 3.3
The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
October 2018, Box 2.1
The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis: 
The Case of Industrial Robots	
October 2018, Box 2.2
Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies	
April 2019, Box 1.1
178
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities	
April 2019, Box 1.3
Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in 
Advanced Economies	
October 2019, Chapter 2
Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities	
October 2019, Box 2.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration	
April 2020, Chapter 4
Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation	
April 2020, Box 4.1
Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.2
Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the 
COVID-19 Shock	
April 2021, Chapter 3
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples	
April 2022, Box 1.1
Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability	
April 2022, Box 2.1
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Wage Dynamics Post–COVID-19 and Wage Price Spiral Risks	
October 2022, Chapter 2
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States	
October 2022, Box 2.1
VIII.  Exchange Rate Issues
Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets	
April 2014, Box 1.4
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?	
October 2015, Chapter 3
The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade	
October 2015, Box 3.1
Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains	
October 2015, Box 3.2
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
IX.  External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
External Rebalancing in the Euro Area	
October 2013, Box 1.3
The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows	
October 2013, Chapter 4
Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions	
October 2013, Box 4.1
The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom	
October 2014, Box 1.SF.1
Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?	
October 2014, Chapter 4
Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment	
October 2014, Box 4.1
A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area	
October 2014, Box 4.2
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2015, Box 1.2
Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits	
October 2015, Box 1.2
Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies	
October 2015, Box 1.3
Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2016, Box 1.1
Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Chapter 2
Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2016, Box 2.1
The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization	
April 2016, Box 3.3
SELECTED TOPICS
179
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?	
October 2016, Chapter 2
The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with 
China’s Final Demand	
April 2017, Box 2.3
Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies	
April 2017, Box 2.4
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters	
October 2017, Box 1.4
Remittances and Consumption Smoothing	
October 2017, Box 1.5
A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators	
April 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Services Trade	
April 2018, Box 3.2
Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2018, Box 4.3
Global Trade Tensions	
October 2018, Scenario Box
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?	
April 2019, Chapter 3
Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries	
April 2019, Box 3.2
Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia	
April 2019, Box 3.4
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs	
April 2019, Chapter 4
Gross versus Value-Added Trade	
April 2019, Box 4.1
Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
April 2019, Box 4.2
Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?	
April 2019, Box 4.3
The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S.–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models	
April 2019, Box 4.4
A No-Deal Brexit	
April 2019, Scenario Box
Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production	
October 2019,  
	
	 Scenario Box 1.1
Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario	
October 2019, 
	
	 Scenario Box 1.2
The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018	
October 2019, Box 1.2
Global Trade and Value Chains during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Chapter 4
Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Box 4.1
The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data	
April 2022, Box 4.2
Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France	
April 2022, Box 4.3
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2023, Box 2.2
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment	
April 2023, Chapter 4
Rising Trade Tensions	
April 2023, Box 4.1
Balance Sheet Exposure to Fragmentation Risk	
April 2023, Box 4.2
Geopolitical Tensions, Supply Chains, and Trade	
April 2023, Box 4.3
X.  Regional Issues
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions	
April 2018, Box 2.3
XI.  Country-Specific Analyses
Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?	
October 2013, Box 1.4
Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?	
April 2014, Box 1.2
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade	
October 2014, Box 3.1
Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?	
October 2015, Box 3.3
The Japanese Experience with Deflation	
October 2016, Box 3.2
180
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas	
April 2018, Box 2.2
Immigration and Wages in Germany	
April 2020, Box 4.2
The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean	
April 2020, Box 4.3
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States	
October 2022, Box 2.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
XII.  Climate Change Issues
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?	
October 2017, Chapter 3
The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones	
October 2017, Box 3.1
The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis	
October 2017, Box 3.2
Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies	
October 2017, Box 3.3
Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets	
October 2017, Box 3.4
Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution	
October 2017, Box 3.5
Mitigating Climate Change	
October 2017, Box 3.6
The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies	
April 2019, Box 3.1
What’s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions?	
October 2019, Box 1.SF.1
Mitigating Climate Change—Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies	
October 2020, Chapter 3
Glossary	
October 2020, Box 3.1
Zooming in on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization	
October 2020, Box 3.2
Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters	
April 2021, Box 1.2
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
Clean Tech and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1 
	
	 Special Feature
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Near-Term Macroeconomic Impact of Decarbonization Policies	
October 2022, Chapter 3
Near-Term Implications of Carbon Pricing: A Review of the Literature	
October 2022, Box 3.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
Decarbonizing the Power Sector While Managing Renewables’ Intermittence	
October 2022, Box 3.3
The Natural Rate of Interest and the Green Transition	
April 2023, Box 2.1
XIII.  Special Topics
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up 
Human Development?	
October 2015, Box 2.3
Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms	
April 2016, Box 3.1
Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method	
April 2016, Box 3.4
A Global Rush for Land	
October 2016, Box 1.SF.1
Conflict, Growth, and Migration	
April 2017, Box 1.1
Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity	
April 2017, Box 1.2
Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Cases of Brazil, Russia, India, 
China, and South Africa	
April 2017, Box 2.1
Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview	
April 2017, Box 3.1
The Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation	
April 2017, Box 3.2
SELECTED TOPICS
181
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World	
April 2017, Box 3.3
Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income	
April 2017, Box 3.4
Smartphones and Global Trade	
April 2018, Box 1.1
Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?	
April 2018, Box 1.4
The Changing Service Content of Manufactures	
April 2018, Box 3.1
Patent Data and Concepts	
April 2018, Box 4.1
International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers	
April 2018, Box 4.2
Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation	
April 2018, Box 4.4
Increasing Market Power	
October 2018, Box 1.1
Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
October 2018, Box 1.5
Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
October 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects	
April 2019, Chapter 2
The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving	
April 2019, Box 2.1
Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power	
April 2019, Box 2.2
The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments, and Implications for the Global Outlook	
October 2019, Box 1.1
Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare	
October 2019, Box 2.1
The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures	
October 2019, Box 2.3
The Political Effects of Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.1
The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.2
The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate–Growth Differentials in 
Advanced Economies	
April 2020, Box 2.2
Social Unrest during COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.4
The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the 
United States	
October 2020, Box 2.2
Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure	
April 2021, Box 2.2
Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle	
April 2021, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Annex 1.SF.1
Food Insecurity and Prices during COVID-19	
October 2021, Box 2.1
mRNA Vaccines and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.1
Intellectual Property, Competition, and Innovation	
October 2021, Box 3.3
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
183
IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,  
MARCH 2023
E
xecutive Directors broadly agreed with staff’s 
assessment of the global economic outlook, 
risks, and policy priorities. They considered 
that the persistence of high inflation in many 
countries and recent financial sector stresses increase 
the challenges to global economic prospects and leave 
policymakers with a narrow path to restore price 
stability, while avoiding a recession and maintaining 
broad financial stability. In addition, Directors gen-
erally concurred that many of the forces that shaped 
the world economy in 2022—including Russia’s 
war in Ukraine and geopolitical tensions, high debt 
levels constraining fiscal responses, and tighter global 
financial ­conditions—appear likely to continue into 
this year. In this context, they expressed concern that 
the medium-term growth projections for the global 
economy remain the lowest in decades. 
Directors agreed that risks to the outlook have 
increased and are tilted to the downside. They noted 
that core inflation could turn out more persistent than 
anticipated, which would call for even tighter mone-
tary policies. They also emphasized that recent stresses 
in the banking sector could amplify with contagion 
effects, pockets of sovereign debt distress could become 
more widespread as a result of wider exchange rate 
movements and higher borrowing costs, and the war in 
Ukraine and geopolitical conflicts could intensify and 
lead to more food and energy price spikes as well as 
further geoeconomic fragmentation. 
Directors reiterated their strong call for multilat-
eral cooperation to help defuse geopolitical tensions 
and respond to the challenges of an interconnected 
world. They emphasized the criticality of multilateral 
actions to safeguard the functioning of global finan-
cial markets, manage debt distress, foster global trade 
and reinforce the multilateral trading system, ensure 
food and energy security, advance with the green and 
digital transitions, and improve resilience to future 
­pandemics. Most Directors also agreed that fragmen-
tation into geopolitical blocs could generate large 
output losses, including through effects on foreign 
direct investment, and especially affecting emerging 
market and developing economies; a few Directors 
emphasized the need to build resilience and diversifi-
cation in supply chains. Noting that many countries 
are contending with tighter financial conditions, high 
debt levels, and pressures to protect the most vulner-
able segments from high inflation, Directors stressed 
the need for multilateral institutions to stand ready to 
provide timely support to safeguard essential spending 
and ensure that any crises remain contained. They also 
stressed the importance of improving debt transpar-
ency and of better mechanisms to produce orderly debt 
­restructurings—including a more effective Common 
Framework—in cases where insolvency issues prevail. 
In this context, Directors encouraged the newly estab-
lished Global Sovereign Debt Roundtable to become 
an effective venue for solving coordination impedi-
ments in debt restructuring operations.
Directors agreed that policy responses—monetary, 
fiscal, and financial—differ across countries, reflecting 
their own circumstances and exposures. For most econ-
omies, they generally considered that policy tightening 
is necessary to durably reduce inflation, while standing 
ready to take appropriate actions to mitigate financial 
sector risks as needed. Directors also emphasized that 
structural reforms remain essential to improve produc-
tivity, expand economic capacity, and ease supply-side 
constraints. They acknowledged that many emerging 
market and developing economies face tougher policy 
choices, as rising costs of market financing, higher food 
and fuel prices, and the need to support the recovery 
and vulnerable populations can pull in different direc-
tions, necessitating a difficult balancing act.
Directors agreed that central banks should main-
tain a sufficiently tight, data-dependent monetary 
The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the  
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on March 30, 2023.
184
International Monetary Fund | April 2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: A Rocky Recovery
policy stance to durably reduce inflation and avoid a 
de-anchoring of inflation expectations. At the same 
time, they called on policymakers to stand ready to 
take strong actions to restore financial stability and 
reinvigorate confidence as developments demand. With 
respect to the future path of monetary policy, Direc-
tors stressed that clear communication about policy 
reaction functions and objectives and the need to fur-
ther normalize policy would help avoid unwarranted 
market volatility. 
Directors stressed that fiscal and monetary policies 
need to be closely aligned to help deliver price and 
financial stability. They emphasized that tighter fiscal 
policy is needed to help contain inflationary pressures, 
making it possible for central banks to increase interest 
rates by less than otherwise, help contain govern-
ments’ borrowing costs, and ease potential tradeoffs 
between price and financial stability. At the same time, 
Directors agreed that fiscal restraint should be accom-
panied by temporary and carefully targeted measures 
to protect the most vulnerable segments. Given the 
heightened uncertainty, they generally concurred that 
fiscal policy should remain flexible to respond if risks 
materialized. To tackle the elevated debt vulnerabilities 
and rebuild fiscal buffers to cope with future crises, 
Directors called for credible medium-term fiscal frame-
works, while also cautioning against relying on high 
inflation for public debt reduction. In low-income 
developing countries, they stressed the need for further 
efforts to increase tax capacity, given the importance of 
addressing heightened debt vulnerabilities, protecting 
the poorest, and advancing the Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals.
Directors commended the decisive responses by 
policymakers to stem recent financial instability. They 
noted that the recent stress in the banking sector 
has highlighted failures in internal risk-management 
practices with respect to interest rate and liquidity risks 
in some banks, as well as supervisory lapses. Against 
this backdrop, Directors stressed the importance of 
closely monitoring financial sector developments, 
including in nonbank financial intermediaries (NBFIs); 
improving banking regulation, supervision, and reso-
lution frameworks; and a swift and appropriate use of 
available policies, including macroprudential policies, 
if further vulnerabilities materialize, while mitigating 
moral hazard. Directors noted that NBFIs play an 
important role in financial markets and are increas-
ingly interconnected with banks and other financial 
institutions. In this context, many Directors considered 
that the provision of central bank liquidity to NBFIs 
could lead to unintended consequences. In the event 
that liquidity provision to NBFIs should be needed 
to address systemic risks threatening the health of the 
financial system, Directors emphasized that appropriate 
guardrails, including robust regulation and supervision, 
should be in place and that progress in closing regula-
tory data gaps in this sector remains vital. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK	
APRIL 2023
IN THIS ISSUE:
CHAPTER 1
Global Prospects and Policies
CHAPTER 2
The Natural Rate of Interest: 
Drivers and Implications for Policy
CHAPTER 3
Coming Down to Earth: 
How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt
CHAPTER 4
Geoeconomic Fragmentation 
and Foreign Direct Investment
