WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
2026
APR
Global Economy  
in the Shadow of War
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
Global Economy  
in the Shadow of War
2026
APR
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
©2026 International Monetary Fund
 
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
 
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
IMF Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and 
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some 
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional 
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial 
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. | 
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80	
ISBN 979-8-22904-275-8 (English Paper)
	
979-8-22904-283-3 (English ePub)
	
979-8-22904-278-9 (English Web PDF)
Disclaimer: The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff pub-
lished twice a year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and 
has benefited from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their 
discussion of the report on April 6, 2026. The views expressed in this publication are 
those of the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive 
Directors or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2026. World Economic Outlook: 
Global Economy in the Shadow of War. Washington, DC. April.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail:
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@IMF.org
bookstore.IMF.org
elibrary.IMF.org
Errata
April 22, 2026
This web version of the WEO has been updated to reflect the following changes to the version published online on April 8, 2026 
(Chapter 2): 
- Chapter 2, Figure 2.1, page 48: The data have been updated.
- Chapter 2, page 56, last paragraph: The third sentence was replaced by “Given the average size and length of booms in peacetime, 
this pattern is consistent with a multiplier of defense spending above 1.”
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
iii
Assumptions and Conventions	
vii
Further Information	
ix
Data	
x
Preface	
xi
Foreword	
xii
Executive Summary	
xv
Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies	
1
Global Economy Tested Again	
1
Recent Developments: Continued Resilience and Rising Fragility	
1
Growth and Disinflation, Interrupted	
4
Risks to the Outlook: Downside Dominates	
14
Policies: Addressing the Current Shock, Preparing for the Next	
17
Box 1.1. Explaining the Resilience of Global Growth in 2025	
21
Box 1.2. Services Trade: An Emerging Engine for Global Growth	
23
Box 1.3. Risk Assessment Surrounding the Reference Forecast	
25
Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and the Economics of Rare Earths	
31
References	
45
Chapter 2. Defense Spending: Macroeconomic Consequences and Trade-Offs	
47
Introduction	
47
The Macroeconomics of Defense Spending: A Primer	
50
Defense Spending Booms	
53
Macroeconomic Consequences of Defense Spending: Empirical Evidence	
55
Macroeconomic Consequences of Defense Spending: Model Simulations	
60
Conclusions and Policy Recommendations	
63
Box 2.1. Scaling Up Defense Spending: The Case of Poland	
65
Box 2.2. Spillovers from Defense Spending	
66
References	
67
Chapter 3. The Macroeconomics of Conflicts and Recovery	
69
Introduction	
69
Macroeconomics of Conflict and Recovery: A Primer	
72
Macroeconomic Dynamics during Conflicts	
73
Macroeconomic Dynamics after Conflicts	
77
Summary and Policy Recommendations	
85
Box 3.1. Wartime Economic Management in Ukraine	
86
Box 3.2. Dealing with Postconflict Stabilization: Lessons from African Experiences	
87
Box 3.3. Policies for Refugees’ Return and Integration	
88
References	
89
CONTENTS
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
iv
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Statistical Appendix	
91
Assumptions	
91
What’s New	
92
Data and Conventions	
92
Country Notes	
93
Classification of Economies	
96
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook  
Classification	
96
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in  
Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2025	
98
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup	
99
Table C. European Union	
99
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source  
of Export Earnings	
100
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position,  
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification	
101
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods	
103
Table G. Key Data Documentation	
104
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for Selected Economies	
114
List of Tables	
118
Output (Tables A1–A4)	
119
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)	
126
Financial Policies (Table A8)	
131
Foreign Trade (Table A9)	
132
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)	
134
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)	
141
Flow of Funds (Table A14)	
145
Medium-Term Reference Forecast (Table A15)	
148
World Economic Outlook Selected Topics	
149
IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, April 2026	
159
Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Reference Forecast	
7
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Reference Forecast at  
Market Exchange Rate Weights	
9
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
39
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
40
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
41
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
42
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
43
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output	
44
contents
v
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
contents
Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing  
and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of  
Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings:  
Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria:  
External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Reference Forecast:  
Selected Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. Regional Geopolitical Risk	
2
Figure 1.2. US Effective Statutory Tariff Rate	
2
Figure 1.3. Global Uncertainty	
2
Figure 1.4. Continued Brisk Growth in Tech-Related Trade Flows	
3
Figure 1.5. Reorientation of Global Trade	
3
Figure 1.6. Global Geopolitical Risk	
4
Figure 1.7. Global Assumptions	
5
Figure 1.8. Global Growth and Inflation Forecasts	
6
Figure 1.9. GDP Growth Revisions in the Reference Forecast	
6
Figure 1.10. Global Inflation	
13
Figure 1.11. Current Account and International Investment Positions	
13
Figure 1.12. Estimated Impact of Geopolitical Risks	
15
Figure 1.13. International Flows to LIDCs	
16
Figure 1.14. Use of Artificial Intelligence by US Firms by Sector	
16
Figure 1.1.1. News in 2025 and World GDP Growth	
21
Figure 1.1.2. Correlation between US Dollar and Emerging Market Growth	
22
Figure 1.2.1. World Exports	
23
Figure 1.2.2. Impact of Geographic Distance on Bilateral Trade	
24
Figure 1.2.3. Impact of Geopolitical Distance on Bilateral Trade	
24
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
vi
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Figure 1.3.1. Forecast Uncertainty around Global Growth and Inflation Projections	
25
Figure 1.3.2. Impact of Scenario A on GDP	
27
Figure 1.3.3. Impact of Scenario B on GDP	
28
Figure 1.3.4. Impact of Scenario C on GDP	
28
Figure 1.3.5. Impact of Scenarios on Current Accounts and Exchange Rates in the  
United States, China, and the Euro Area	
30
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments	
32
Figure 1.SF.2. Rare Earth Mining by Country 1998–2024	
33
Figure 1.SF.3. Average Import Dependence on China by Rare Earth Supply Chain Segment	
34
Figure 1.SF.4. China’s Exports of Rare Earth Permanent Magnets and Rare Earth Magnet  
Components Intended for Permanent Magnet Production	
35
Figure 1.SF.5. Value Added and Gross Output at Risk	
35
Figure 1.SF.6. Output Losses by Country from a Major REE Disruption	
36
Figure 1.SF.7. Aggregate Stock Market Value of Publicly Listed Firms in the  
Rare Earth Industry	
37
Figure 1.SF.8. Effectiveness and Fiscal Cost of Alternative Industrial Policies to  
Achieve 25 Percent REE Self-Sufficiency in the US	
38
Figure 2.1. Defense Spending on the Rise	
48
Figure 2.2. Defense Spending: Transmission Channels	
51
Figure 2.3. Defense Spending Booms	
53
Figure 2.4. Financing Defense Spending Booms	
54
Figure 2.5. Strengthening Defense Capabilities	
55
Figure 2.6. Output and Prices after Peacetime Booms	
56
Figure 2.7. Transmission Channels of Defense Spending Booms	
57
Figure 2.8. Firm Investment after Booms	
58
Figure 2.9. Fiscal Consequences of Defense Spending Booms	
59
Figure 2.10. Defense Spending Multipliers	
60
Figure 2.11. Differences in Defense Spending Multipliers	
60
Figure 2.12. Defense Spending: Baseline and Alternative Scenarios	
61
Figure 2.13. Higher Investment Spending and Coordinated Defense Spending	
63
Figure 2.1.1. Scaling Up Defense Spending: The Case of Poland	
65
Figure 2.2.1. Spillovers from Defense Spending	
66
Figure 3.1. Conflicts and Geopolitical Threats	
70
Figure 3.2. Global Post–World War II Conflicts	
73
Figure 3.3. Characteristics of Post–World War II Conflicts	
74
Figure 3.4. Economic Costs of Conflicts	
75
Figure 3.5. Output Cost Spillovers from Major Conflicts	
75
Figure 3.6. Macroeconomic Trade-Offs of Major Conflicts	
76
Figure 3.7. Scarring Effects of Major Conflicts	
77
Figure 3.8. Peace Duration and Macroeconomic Correlates of Fragile Peace	
78
Figure 3.9. Macroeconomic Dynamics after Conflicts	
79
Figure 3.10. Correlates of Postconflict Recovery	
80
Figure 3.11. Role of Aid and Local Governance	
81
Figure 3.12. Firm Dynamics after Conflicts	
82
Figure 3.13. Contribution to Changes in Output after Conflict Shock	
83
Figure 3.14. Output Dividends from Recovery Policies	
85
Figure 3.1.1. Real GDP Growth and Inflation	
86
Figure 3.3.1. Refugee Flows during and after Conflict, and Return Intentions	
88
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
vii
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook 
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during 
February 10, 2026–March 10, 2026, except for those for the currencies participating in the European Exchange 
Rate Mechanism II, which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that 
established policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and mon-
etary policies for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will 
be $82.22 a barrel in 2026 and $75.97 a barrel in 2027; that the three-month government bond yield for the 
United States will average 3.5 percent in 2026 and 3.3 percent in 2027, that for the euro area will average 
2.0 percent in 2026 and in 2027, and that for Japan will average 0.9 percent in 2026 and 1.4 percent in 
2027; and that the 10-year government bond yield for the United States will average 4.0 percent in 2026 and 
3.8 percent in 2027, that for the euro area will average 2.8 percent in 2026 and 3.0 percent in 2027, and that for 
Japan will average 2.3 percent in 2026 and 2.4 percent in 2027. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather 
than forecasts, and the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would, in any event, be 
involved in the projections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through 
April 1, 2026, but may not reflect the latest published data in all cases. For the date of the last data update for 
each economy, please refer to the notes provided in the online WEO database.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
	• . . .  to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
	• –  between years or months (for example, 2024–25 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered, 
including the beginning and ending years or months; and
	• /  between years or months (for example, 2024/25) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
	• “Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
	• “Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 
1 percentage point).
	• Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in 
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and 
government finance data.
	• For some countries, the figures for 2025 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please 
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments for each country.
What is new in this publication:
	• On January 1, 2026, Bulgaria became the 21st country to join the euro area. Data for Bulgaria are now included 
in aggregates for the euro area and for advanced economies and relevant subgroups.
	• For Yemen, the revised data reflect the territory under control of the Internationally Recognized Government 
(IRG).
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
	• Tables and figures in this report that list their source as “IMF staff calculations” or “IMF staff estimates” draw 
on data from the WEO database.
	• When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
	• Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
viii
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
	• Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or 
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of 
the weighted group data.
	• The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on maps do not imply, on the part of 
the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is 
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities 
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
ix
Corrections and Revisions
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the 
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are 
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and 
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.
Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/574802.
Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the  
IMF eLibrary at eLibrary.IMF.org/WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at  
www.IMF.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly:
Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.
FURTHER INFORMATION
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
x
This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger com-
pilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series 
most frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histor-
ical data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context 
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each 
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural 
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF staff 
estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a result, 
WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International Financial 
Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their 
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a 
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are 
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF 
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and 
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail or email (telephone 
inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Email: DataHelp@IMF.org
DATA
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
xi
The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s 
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international 
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a 
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information 
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out 
in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, 
European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—
together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and 
the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of 
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Petya 
Koeva Brooks, Deputy Director, Research Department, and Deniz Igan, Division Chief, Research Department.
The primary contributors to this report are Hippolyte Balima, Christian Bogmans, Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, 
Chris Jackson, Toh Kuan, Jorge Miranda Pinto, Jean-Marc Natal, Andrea Paloschi, Andrea Presbitero, and 
Zhao Zhang.
Other contributors include Maryam Abdou, Gavin Asdorian, Jared Bebee, Francis Cuadros Bloch, Benjamin 
Carton, Wenbo Chen, Owen Desberg, Angela Espiritu, Patrick-Nelson Essaine, Pedro de Barros Gagliardi, 
Sarah Garcia, Maria Gelrud, Bertrand Gruss, Kez Hou, Kareem Ismail, Pedro Juarros, Gene Kindberg-Hanlon, 
Krzysztof Krogulski, Colombe Ladreit, Andresa Lagerborg, Jungjin Lee, Nan Li, Weili Lin, Barry Liu, Moheb 
Malak, Andrea Manera, Flavien Moreau, Joseph Moussa, Dirk Muir, Anh Dinh Minh Nguyen, Emory Oakes, 
Maximiliano Jerez Osses, Clarita Phillips, Rafael Portillo, Sidra Rehman, Pedro Rodriguez, Isabela Rozario, Yu Shi, 
Robert Sierhej, Ilgim Simnick, Nicholas Tong, Can Ugur, Riya Varghese, Evgenia Weaver, Sebastian Wende, 
Philippe Wingender, Yarou Xu, Rachel Zhang, Dian Zhi, and Robert Zymek.
Gemma Rose Diaz from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with 
production and editorial support from Bonner Publishing, Michael Harrup, Lucy Scott Morales, James Unwin, 
MPS Limited, and Absolute Service, Inc.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, 
as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on April 6, 2026. However, estimates, 
projections, and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive 
Directors or to their national authorities.
PREFACE
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
xii
The global outlook has abruptly darkened following 
the outbreak of war in the Middle East on February 
28, 2026. The closure of the Strait of Hormuz and 
serious damage to critical production facilities in a 
region central to global hydrocarbon supply could 
cause an energy crisis on an unprecedented scale.
The war interrupted what had been a steady growth 
trajectory. Prior to the war, we were poised to upgrade 
our global growth forecast, reflecting continued 
momentum in the global economy supported by a tech 
investment boom, some moderation in trade policy 
tensions, fiscal support in some countries, and accom-
modating financial conditions. War in the Middle East 
will overwhelm these underlying forces. 
The War’s Impact on the Global Economy 
 The duration and scale of the conflict and the 
time it will take for energy production and transit to 
normalize after the end of hostilities will determine the 
ultimate size of the shock to the global economy. 
The overall impact of the shock depends on 
three channels. First, the direct effect of commodity 
price increases represents a textbook negative supply 
shock, raising the cost of all energy-intensive goods 
and services—including fertilizers, chemicals, food, 
transportation, and heating—disrupting supply 
chains, feeding into headline inflation, and reducing 
purchasing power. This direct shock can be amplified 
via second-round effects as workers and firms try to 
recoup expected income losses through higher wages 
and prices. The risk of such wage and price spirals will 
be higher for countries where inflation expectations 
are already poorly anchored, requiring a more forceful 
tightening of monetary policy, at greater cost to the 
economy. The reaction of financial markets is the third 
channel. A classic risk-off episode triggered by the 
prospects of macroeconomic instability could ensue, 
impairing asset valuations, increasing risk premiums, 
causing capital flight and the dollar to appreciate with 
a flight to safety, and dampening aggregate demand.  
As in past commodity price surges, energy import-
ers are highly exposed, with low-income developing 
countries—particularly those with preexisting macro-
economic vulnerabilities and limited buffers—likely 
to be hit hardest. Gulf region energy exporters are 
also likely to suffer, reflecting conflict-related damage 
and production closures, export constraints, and 
weaker tourism and business activity, while coun-
tries supplying migrant workers may face remittance 
losses. Reduced fiscal resources amid higher spending 
needs may force many of these countries to lower 
net savings, possibly through drawdowns of their 
substantial external wealth, pushing up global real 
interest rates and further tightening global financial 
conditions. 
As the environment remains very fluid, this report 
presents a reference forecast based on a bottom-up 
assessment assuming a relatively short-lived conflict, as 
reflected initially by financial markets in early March, 
together with two complementary model-based scenar-
ios that assume a longer-lasting or even expanding con-
flict. As always, the hard work, dedication, and agility 
of the staff in the IMF research and area departments 
are what made all of this possible. 
Our reference forecast, assuming a short-lived 
conflict, projects global growth of 3.1 percent for this 
year, a downward revision of 0.2 percentage point 
from our January projections, while headline infla-
tion is expected to rise from 4.1 percent in 2025 to 
4.4 percent in 2026. However, more attacks on critical 
energy facilities and the prospect of a longer shutdown 
of the Strait of Hormuz are raising the specter of a 
more significant and persistent conflagration for the 
global economy. Under an adverse scenario, broadly 
anchored to market conditions prevailing toward 
the end of March, global output would be expected 
to decline to 2.5 percent, with inflation rising to 
5.4 percent. Under our severe scenario—assuming 
dislocations in energy markets that extend to next year, 
together with a de-anchoring of inflation expectations 
and a tightening of financial conditions, the global 
economy would come close to experiencing a recession, 
with growth around 2 percent this year and next and 
global headline inflation near 6 percent. Clearly, the 
downside risks are tremendous. 
FOREWORD
FOREWORD
xiii
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Lessons from the 2022 Energy Crisis 
It is instructive to compare today’s shock with the 
2022 commodity-price surge in the wake of Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. Then, global inflation rose to 
levels not seen since the 1970s, triggering a broad and 
synchronized monetary policy tightening. The subse-
quent disinflation without a recession is widely viewed 
as a major policy success.  
Should we expect a similar scenario this time? There 
are reasons to doubt it, both good and bad. On the 
positive side, inflation pressures in 2022 predated 
the energy shock from the war in Ukraine, driven 
by postpandemic supply-demand imbalances, tight 
labor markets, and abundant household and corporate 
liquidity. Today, labor markets are significantly softer, 
private sector balance sheets have normalized, and pre-
shock inflation pressures are more subdued—though 
still above target in some countries, including notably 
the United States. As long as the shock itself remains 
modest, this suggests a possibly more subdued inflation 
impact, consistent with our reference scenario. 
But the previous episode left scars. With price levels 
permanently higher, cost-of-living concerns remain 
fresh in people’s minds, heightening the sensitivity of 
inflation expectations to price developments, especially 
where central bank credibility is seen as having eroded. 
The 2022 inflation episode was also the result of an 
unusually steep aggregate supply curve as a result of 
supply bottlenecks. For central banks trying to contain 
inflation, a steep supply curve means it is possible 
to bring price inflation down significantly without a 
large slowdown. Unfortunately, the supply curve now 
appears much flatter: The disinflation this time around 
could prove more costly.  
Policies 
How should policymakers react? The first—and 
obvious—observation is that an early and orderly end 
to the war is the best way to limit the damage to the 
global economy. Beyond that, the standard policy 
response to a surge in energy prices is for central 
banks to look through, as long as inflation expectations 
remain well anchored. The logic is sound: There is 
no trade-off for central banks since the supply shock 
is already reducing activity while increasing price 
pressures. Moreover, there is little any central bank 
can do in isolation about the price of energy. The 
argument breaks down, however, as soon as inflation 
expectations start drifting up. With an unchanged pol-
icy rate, monetary policy would become overly stim-
ulative as higher inflation expectations lower the real 
interest rate. In this case, central banks need to take 
firm action to reanchor expectations, and this must 
take precedence over near-term growth concerns. This 
suggests a graduated and state-contingent monetary 
policy response: Look through if and as long as infla-
tion expectations remain stable while communicating 
clearly and forcefully that any sign of de-anchoring 
will be met with a strong policy response. Exchange 
rate flexibility plays an important role, not only as a 
buffer but by allowing monetary policy to concentrate 
on price stability. If the energy shock proves more 
permanent, a coordinated tightening across countries 
to curb global demand can also help reduce energy 
prices. 
What should we avoid? First and foremost, waste-
ful fiscal measures, especially as fiscal buffers are now 
much thinner. Energy price surges are often accompa-
nied by a host of untargeted fiscal measures, such as 
energy caps or subsidies, designed to protect house-
holds and firms. This time is no exception. While such 
measures are popular, evidence suggests they are often 
both poorly designed and very costly for the public 
purse. Instead, it is critical that fiscal support be well 
targeted, temporary, with clear sunset clauses, and 
consistent with medium-term fiscal plans. Moreover, 
avoiding fiscal stimulus at a time of rising inflation is 
another critical component so as not to complicate the 
task of central banks.  
Preserving price signals is key, as they transmit a 
critical market signal of scarcity and of the need to 
reduce demand and expand supply. Price controls or 
export restrictions simply cannot change that fact. 
Worse, they may simply push up the price of energy 
ex-subsidy—or create rationing in the case of price 
caps—providing limited relief for households and firms 
and generating negative spillovers to other countries, 
since protecting energy demand in one part of the 
world implies less net energy supply elsewhere. In 
many cases, the same amount of fiscal support could 
have been deployed more effectively through other 
channels, such as direct and targeted transfers focusing 
on the most vulnerable. Too often, these lessons were 
not heeded in the 2022 episode. Countries should 
strive to do better this time around. 
 Finally, should financial conditions deteriorate 
markedly, with an associated weakening of global 
demand, monetary and fiscal policies will need to 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
xiv
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
pivot toward supporting the economy and the financial 
system, together with appropriate financial and 
liquidity policies.  
Fragmentation and Multipolarity 
The latest war illustrates how the international order 
remains under siege. Old alliances continue to fray, 
new conflicts are emerging, national security concerns 
take precedence in policymaking. Our analytical chap-
ters explore the consequences of defense buildups on 
aggregate economic activity and the specific challenges 
and policy advice for economies experiencing conflict 
or facing reconstruction needs. The analysis is sober-
ing. War, beyond its human toll, imposes extremely 
high and persistent economic costs and creates acute 
trade-offs. 
Beyond outright conflicts, long-standing geopolit-
ical tensions have already made the global economic 
environment more complex, with signs that we are 
transitioning to a more multipolar world. Countries 
are looking for alternative trading partners, deviating 
from well-established geopolitical alignments, as illus-
trated by the recent rise in new regional trade agree-
ments. One major concern is that these geopolitical 
trends will further encourage countries to turn toward 
more inward-looking policies. Few areas manifest 
such tensions more clearly than the market for critical 
minerals. Extraction and refining activities of critical 
minerals are geographically highly concentrated, while 
they are indispensable for the green and digital transi-
tion. Our report conducts a deep-dive analysis into the 
economics of rare earths and implications of licensing 
requirements. Output losses associated with the supply 
disruption of rare earths are sizable, while the case for 
multilateral coordination, rather than unilateral indus-
trial policy, is self-evident.  
Medium Term 
The war and its direct implications are capturing 
everyone’s immediate attention, but we should not 
lose sight of the need to invest in durable sources of 
growth. Recent developments in artificial intelligence, 
most recently with the arrival of agentic AI, raise the 
prospect of very meaningful productivity gains—the 
ultimate driver of standards of living. Yet the transition 
could be challenging. Financial markets’ enthusiasm 
for these technologies may well have run ahead of 
fundamentals, raising concerns about potential price 
correction. Moreover, a rapid technological transfor-
mation could render many jobs obsolete, potentially 
slowing aggregate demand. Policymakers should adopt 
policies that encourage diffusion and adoption of these 
new technologies while ensuring adequate investments 
in skills to help facilitate a smoother labor market 
transition. Faster adoption of renewable energy can 
strengthen resilience to energy shocks, improve energy 
security, and support the climate transition. 
The world economy faces yet another difficult chal-
lenge. And while it may well become more multipolar, 
it need not become more fragmented. Beyond actions 
that countries can take on their own, we should 
continue to seek ways to improve global cooperation. 
With the right policies, including a swift cessation of 
hostilities and the reopening of the Strait of Hor-
muz, the damage could remain limited. International 
financial organizations such as the IMF were born 
out of a vision, forged in the aftermath of war and 
great destruction, to promote economic and financial 
cooperation and integration, to the benefit of all. More 
than ever, these principles are needed to preserve global 
prosperity.
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas 
Economic Counsellor
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
xv
Once again, the global economy is threatened with 
being thrown off course—this time by the outbreak 
of war in the Middle East at the end of February 
2026. Over the past year, headwinds from higher trade 
barriers and elevated uncertainty have been offset by 
tailwinds from technology-related investment; accom-
modative financial conditions, including a weaker US 
dollar; and fiscal and monetary policy support. The 
Middle East conflict presents a significant counter-
force to these tailwinds through its impact on com-
modity markets, inflation expectations, and financial 
conditions.
Given the difficulty of underpinning in real time 
a consistent set of assumptions for projections, this 
World Economic Outlook (WEO) report presents 
a “reference forecast”—in lieu of the traditional 
baseline—predicated on the assumption that the war 
will have limited duration, intensity, and scope, such 
that the disruptions will fade by mid-2026, consis-
tent with commodity futures prices as of March 10. 
However, given the fluidity of the situation, the 
report complements the global reference forecast with 
scenarios in which the conflict lasts longer or expands. 
The likelihood of these scenarios materializing rises 
progressively as hostilities and associated disruptions 
continue. 
Under the reference forecast, global growth is 
projected to be 3.1 percent in 2026 and 3.2 percent in 
2027, slower than its recent pace of about 3.4 percent 
in 2024–25, and to settle at about that rate in the 
medium term, slower than its historical (2000–19) 
average of 3.7 percent. The forecast for 2026 is revised 
downward by 0.2 percentage point and that for 2027 
is unchanged, compared with those in the January 
2026 WEO Update. Global headline inflation is 
expected to increase to 4.4 percent in 2026 and decline 
to 3.7 percent in 2027, marking upward revisions for 
both years.
Absent the war, global growth would have been 
revised upward. Indeed, forecasts based on precon-
flict assumptions would have shown a slight upward 
revision of 2026 growth relative to that forecasted in 
the January WEO Update, by 0.1 percentage point to 
3.4 percent. Hence, the downward revision for 2026 
largely reflects the disruptions from the conflict in the 
Middle East, partly offset by carryover from recent 
strong data and reduced tariff rates. 
Crucially, there is a high degree of cross-country 
dispersion in the reference forecast. While the growth 
and inflation revisions seem relatively modest at 
the global level, the toll on the conflict region and 
more vulnerable economies elsewhere—in particular, 
commodity-importing emerging market and develop-
ing economies with preexisting fragilities—is much 
more pronounced. The downward revision to growth 
in emerging market and developing economies is 
0.3 percentage point for 2026, relative to that in the 
January WEO Update, while the forecast is broadly 
unchanged for advanced economies.  
Under an adverse scenario with larger and more per-
sistent increases in energy prices, global growth would 
slow further to 2.5 percent in 2026, and inflation 
would reach 5.4 percent. Under a more severe scenario 
in which there is more damage to energy infrastructure 
in the conflict region, the impact would be even larger: 
Global growth would be cut to only about 2 percent 
in 2026, while headline inflation would be just above 
6 percent by 2027. The impact on emerging market 
and developing economies would be almost twice that 
on advanced economies. 
Downside risks dominate, even after the realization 
of a risk event—namely, an escalation of geopolitical 
tensions—frequently underscored in previous WEO 
reports. Geopolitical tensions could worsen even more 
than they already have—turning the situation into the 
largest energy crisis in modern times—or domestic 
political strains could erupt. Political stress factors can 
get entangled with shifts in trade and other interna-
tional policies. Independently of geopolitical devel-
opments, trade-related disputes could flare up. As the 
Commodity Special Feature highlights, the critical role 
of rare earth elements in global supply chains consti-
tutes a particular point of friction. A reevaluation of 
profit expectations regarding artificial intelligence (AI) 
or lowered expectations of viable markups stemming 
from more intense competition—even if productivity 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
xvi
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
gains are realized—could lead to a decline in 
investment and trigger an abrupt correction in finan-
cial markets. Larger fiscal deficits and increasing public 
debt, starting from a position where fiscal buffers are 
already eroded, could put pressure on long-term inter-
est rates and, in turn, on broader financial conditions. 
An erosion of institutions, including central bank 
independence and monetary policy credibility, could 
raise inflation expectations—especially at a time when 
headline inflation is increasing because of a shock in 
salient prices. On the upside, activity could be further 
lifted by AI-related investment and eventually trans-
form into sustainable growth if faster AI adoption 
translates into strong productivity gains and increased 
business dynamism. Activity could also be supported 
by renewed momentum for structural reforms and by a 
sustained easing in trade tensions. 
Navigating a profoundly changing economic and 
geopolitical landscape requires policies that are robust 
to alternative states of the world. As Chapter 2 shows, 
scaling up of defense spending prompted by a rise in 
geopolitical tensions could boost economic activity 
in the short term but also bring about inflationary 
pressures, weaken fiscal and external sustainability, 
and risk crowding out social spending, which could in 
turn ignite discontent and social unrest. As Chapter 3 
demonstrates, where conflict erupts, acute macro-
economic trade-offs and scarring follow and last well 
beyond the immediate wartime shock. 
A comprehensive policy package would combine 
measures that countries should take on their own and 
measures that countries should pragmatically work 
together to implement to enhance resilience and 
foster agility and adaptability. This first and fore-
most involves preserving price and financial stability, 
safeguarding fiscal sustainability, and implementing 
structural reforms without further delay. Central banks 
should remain vigilant and be prepared to act clearly 
and decisively in line with their mandates. They must 
guard against prolonged supply shocks destabilizing 
inflation expectations. Monetary policymakers should 
reserve the option to look through negative supply 
shocks—such as the current one—as long as inflation 
expectations remain well anchored and the monetary 
policy stance is already properly calibrated. Transparent 
communication and strong central bank independence 
are critical for credibility. Where an imminent risk 
of excessive or disorderly exchange rate movements 
emerges, temporary foreign exchange intervention and 
capital flow management measures may be warranted, 
provided they support appropriate monetary and fiscal 
policy stances. Financial supervisors should be prepared 
by ensuring robust prudential oversight, conducting 
scenario analysis, and maintaining adequate capital, 
liquidity, and reserve buffers. Where fiscal support is 
deemed to be necessary to protect the most vulnerable 
against extreme external shocks, it should be targeted, 
timely, temporary, and funded within current budget 
envelopes by reprioritizing spending, and if that is 
not possible, with the path to restoring fiscal balances 
clearly communicated. To replenish buffers for future 
shocks, governments should—as appropriate for their 
country-specific circumstances—mobilize revenues, 
reprioritize expenditures, make spending more 
efficient, and manage windfalls prudently. A second 
priority is addressing domestic imbalances, especially 
when doing so also helps reduce excessive external 
imbalances. Actions aimed at removing domestic 
distortions—through fiscal, structural, and industrial 
policies—can simultaneously narrow external imbal-
ances while enhancing global output. Trade restrictions 
play a limited role in correcting imbalances but can 
worsen output. Instead, countries should cooperate 
and take coordinated actions to restore stability in 
international economic relations. They should seek 
opportunities to enhance trade integration, supported 
by predictable, transparent, and well-communicated 
trade policy frameworks.
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
1
Global Economy Tested Again
The global economy has, to date, withstood a series 
of shocks, yet another one—this time a military conflict 
engulfing the Middle East since the end of February—
is testing this resilience. This is the latest culmination in 
a series of events that have been reshaping international 
relations and raising geopolitical tensions markedly 
across all regions in recent years (Figure 1.1). The con-
flict has already inflicted humanitarian costs, damaged 
critical infrastructure, and severely disrupted maritime 
and air traffic in the affected region. Economies around 
the world face repercussions through the direct impact 
of higher commodity prices, indirect second-order 
effects on inflation expectations—which tend to be 
especially sensitive to energy and food prices—and 
amplification effects coming from risk-off sentiment 
in financial markets. Commodity-importing emerging 
market and developing economies are at risk of being 
hit harder, with a depreciation of their currencies exac-
erbating the impact of higher energy and food prices. 
The global economic impact will crucially depend on 
the conflict’s duration, intensity, and scope, which are 
inherently unpredictable.
This latest shock comes less than a year since the 
shift in US trade policies, and the transition to a new 
international trade system is still ongoing. Following 
recent court rulings and executive actions, the overall 
US effective statutory tariff rate is about 5.3 percentage 
points below the level assumed in the October 2025 
World Economic Outlook (WEO) (Figure 1.2), and 
changes in the cases of a few countries are more sub-
stantial. The current environment has incentivized a 
growing number of countries to finalize long-standing 
trade negotiations or start new partnerships to foster 
economic ties among themselves, such as the one 
between the European Union (EU) and MERCOSUR 
(the Southern Common Market).
Amid these developments, uncertainty, although 
lower than the peaks it reached in 2025, is still his-
torically high (Figure 1.3). Several inflection points 
in the coming months may trigger spikes. First and 
foremost, the situation in the Middle East remains 
fluid. Odds of a range of outcomes—from ceasefire 
to serious escalation of hostilities—shift by the day. 
On the trade front, an extension, beyond their initial 
150 days, of the Section 122 tariffs recently enacted by 
the US administration requires congressional approval, 
or similar tariffs would need to be imposed using other 
legal authorities. The United States–Mexico–Canada 
Agreement (USMCA) is set for a mandatory joint 
review at about the same time the extension comes 
due, in July 2026. Many of the US agreements with 
other trading partners so far provide only temporary 
relief and are set to expire by the end of 2026.
The global economy is facing this next test of resil-
ience as signs of unevenness lie beneath the surface. 
Activity in the two largest economies, China and the 
United States, has been stronger than was expected in 
the October 2025 WEO. But this strength has been 
uneven. In the case of China, domestic activity—
especially in the housing sector—lags behind exports. 
In the case of the United States, strong activity has 
been accompanied by low employment growth, amid 
declining labor force growth.
The unevenness raises downside risks to the outlook, 
adding to the risks posed by intensifying geopolitical 
tensions. Medium-term growth prospects remain lack-
luster, weighed down by geoeconomic fragmentation 
and structural challenges. That said, it may very well 
be that current tailwinds, including those from contin-
ued fiscal policy support, will last long enough to carry 
the global economy through the disruptions from the 
war and to a higher growth path paved by productivity 
gains from artificial intelligence (AI). Even if they do, 
however, it will still be crucial to have the right policies 
in place to make sure that technological transformation 
leads to broadly balanced growth within and across 
countries.
Recent Developments: Continued 
Resilience and Rising Fragility
Before the war, the global economy was perform-
ing better than expected, laying the groundwork for 
upward revisions to forecasts. In aggregate, global 
growth in the fourth quarter of 2025 increased to 
CHAPTER
1
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
2
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
3.9 percent on an annualized basis. In China, sequen-
tial growth accelerated (per IMF staff seasonal adjust-
ment) to 6.1 percent as strong exports offset weak 
domestic demand. An increase in fiscal spending fueled 
stronger activity in Germany, helping growth in the 
euro area, excluding Ireland, accelerate to 1.5 percent. 
Growth in the United States slowed to 0.5 percent, 
lower than expected in the January 2026 WEO 
Update, as the government shutdown temporarily led 
to a sharp contraction in public expenditure. Expan-
sion in US technology-related spending remained 
strong in the fourth quarter, but its effect on GDP 
was offset by its high import share. Growth in Japan 
rebounded to 1.3 percent owing to stronger consump-
tion and investment.
Global trade remained robust. Brisk expansion in 
technology-related exports offset slowing momentum 
in exports in other product categories (Figure 1.4). 
This benefited Asian economies in particular, as 
the main exporters of semiconductors and other 
equipment sought after by firms raced to invest in 
digital and AI-related technologies. The rewiring of 
global supply chains and trading relations continued 
(Figure 1.5). US imports from China dropped sharply; 
those from Canada also declined. These dips were 
offset by increases in imports from Taiwan Province 
of China, Vietnam, and, to a lesser extent, Mexico. 
On the other side of the equation, Chinese exports 
were reoriented from the United States to other Asian 
economies and, temporarily, to Europe. China’s mer-
chandise goods trade surplus hit a record $1.2 trillion 
(6 percent of GDP) in 2025.
2000s
2010s
2020s
Figure 1.1.  Regional Geopolitical Risk
(Index, 1990s = 100)
0
250
50
100
150
200
Asia-Pacific
Europe
Middle East-
Africa
North
America
South
America
Sources: Caldara and Iacoviello 2026; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: This figure presents the country-specific geopolitical risk index of Caldara and 
Iacoviello (2026), a news-based measure of adverse geopolitical events that covers 
10 major newspapers in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The 
country-level data were downloaded from https://www.matteoiacoviello.com/gpr.htm 
and averaged at the regional and decadal levels and normalized to 100 for the 1990s.
April 2026 WEO
October 2025 WEO
Figure 1.2.  US Effective Statutory Tariff Rate
(Percent)
0
28
4
8
12
16
20
24
Mar. 1
26
Jan. 1
2025
Mar. 1
25
May 1
25
Jul. 1
25
Sep. 1
25
Nov. 1
25
Jan. 1
25
Sources: WTO-IMF Tariff Tracker; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Effective statutory tariff rate” is a weighted average of announced statutory rates 
using pretariff (hence, presubstitution) import weights. Calculations include only tariffs 
that are in effect at the time noted on the x-axis; measures that are not specified and 
implemented are not included. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
World Uncertainty Index (WUI)
Economic Policy Uncertainty Index
Trade Policy Uncertainty Index
Figure 1.3.  Global Uncertainty
(Index)
Sources: Ahir, Bloom, and Furceri 2022 (worlduncertaintyindex.com); Baker, 
Bloom, and Davis 2016 (policyuncertainty.com); and Caldara and others 2020 
(matteoiacoviello.com/tpu.htm).
Note: The uncertainty measures are news- and media-outlets-based indices that 
quantify media attention to global news related to overall uncertainty (WUI), economic 
policy uncertainty, and trade policy uncertainty. WUI is divided by 100.
Jan.
2015
Jan.
17
Jan.
19
Jan.
21
Jan.
23
Jan.
25
Feb.
26
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
3
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Global inflation has been largely steady. This sta-
bility masks some divergence, however. In the United 
States, above-target inflation persists, with core infla-
tion for personal consumption expenditure maintain-
ing a high year-over-year rate of 3.1 percent in January 
2026. To date, evidence indicates that the direct 
incidence of tariffs has largely fallen on US importers 
and consumers (Amiti and others 2026; Gimbel 2026; 
Gopinath and Neiman 2026). In contrast, inflation 
fell sharply in Japan in January 2026 to below the 
2 percent target for the first time since the second 
quarter of 2022, with the decline largely reflecting the 
provisional gasoline tax abolition.
Risk-off sentiment following the outbreak of the 
Middle East conflict has led to a moderate tightening 
of global financial conditions, but they remain accom-
modative from a historical point of view (see the April 
2026 Global Financial Stability Report). Concerns 
about a resurgence of inflation have raised bond yields 
and driven equity prices down. Emerging markets—
especially commodity importers and those with pre-
existing vulnerabilities—have been affected the most. 
The US dollar has strengthened somewhat, reaffirming 
its safe haven status. Even so, market volatility has 
been relatively subdued (Figure 1.6). At the same time, 
geopolitical tensions and other factors have contributed 
to sharp swings in the gold price (see the Commodity 
Special Feature).
Fiscal policy remains too loose in many of the larg-
est advanced economies and emerging markets (see the 
April 2026 Fiscal Monitor). The Middle East conflict 
is putting additional pressure on public finances, both 
via the direct effects of the conflict and as governments 
seek ways to protect the most vulnerable from the 
fallout in commodity markets and may be tempted 
Canada
China
Mexico
Taiwan Province of China
Vietnam
United States
European Union
Asia
Figure 1.5.  Reorientation of Global Trade
(Index, 2024 = 100)
1. United States’ Imports
50
200
75
100
125
150
175
Oct.
25
Jun.
2023
Sep.
23
Dec.
23
Mar.
24
Jun.
24
Sep.
24
Dec.
24
Mar.
25
Jun.
25
2. China’s Exports
60
130
70
80
90
100
110
120
Nov.
25
Jun.
2023
Sep.
23
Dec.
23
Mar.
24
Jun.
24
Sep.
24
Dec.
24
Mar.
25
Jun.
25
Sep.
25
Sources: Antràs and Presbitero 2026; Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Three-month moving average of non–seasonally adjusted US dollar values, based 
on cross-border shipments data sourced from Trade Data Monitor. These data can differ 
from balance of payments data.
Technology exports to ROW
Other exports
Technology exports to US
Total exports
Figure 1.4.  Continued Brisk Growth in Tech-Related Trade 
Flows
(Percent, year over year)
1. Asia Excluding China
−18
−12
−6
0
6
12
18
Jan.
2023
Jul.
23
Jan.
24
Jul.
24
Jan.
25
Jul.
25
Dec.
25
2. China
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
Jan.
2023
Jul.
23
Jan.
24
Jul.
24
Jan.
25
Jul.
25
Dec.
25
Sources: Haver Analytics; International Trade Center, Trade Map; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: “Technology” exports include those classified under Harmonized System codes 
8419, 8470–8473, and 85. “Asia” includes Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, 
Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, Thailand, and Vietnam. Data for Vietnam 
include computers, electronic products, and parts; telephones, mobile phones, and 
parts; and insulated wires and cables. ROW = rest of the world.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
4
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
to offer broad-based fiscal packages, while higher 
financing costs and weaker activity weigh on revenues. 
Countries with preexisting fuel subsidies face different 
fiscal dynamics than those with liberalized energy pric-
ing, while those with links to the Middle East region 
through remittances confront additional pressure on 
household incomes and external balances. Monetary 
policy was becoming more divergent as common 
global drivers of inflation became less prominent, until 
the conflict delivered a global negative supply shock. 
Growth and Disinflation, Interrupted 
Absent the war, sources of recent resilience (Box 1.1) 
would have been expected to continue to hold global 
economic activity on a steady path in 2026. Near-term 
prospects have, however, worsened given the disrup-
tions caused by the closure of the Strait of Hormuz 
and the attacks on production facilities. Medium-term 
prospects remain constrained by structural challenges. 
The bottom-up reference forecasts presented in this 
report are predicated on a relatively short-lived con-
flict. While more benign scenarios are highly desirable, 
given the extraordinarily high level of uncertainty, the 
reference forecasts are complemented with top-down 
model-based global growth projections under the 
assumption of a more prolonged and intense conflict. 
These scenarios become more likely over time as hostil-
ities and related disruptions continue.
Global Assumptions
The reference forecasts incorporate the impact of 
the war, based on the assumption that the conflict 
will last for a few more weeks and a recovery will then 
gradually take hold, such that the disruptions fade and 
production and exports from the region normalize by 
mid-2026. This timeline is broadly captured in the 
projections for global commodity prices—consistent 
with futures pricing as of March 10—and interest rates 
(Figure 1.7). Fiscal and trade policies as they currently 
stand are assumed to remain in place through the fore-
cast horizon. Uncertainty—encompassing trade and 
other economic policies as well as geopolitical develop-
ments—is assumed to remain elevated through 2027. 
	• Commodity price projections: Prices for energy 
commodities are expected to rise by 19 percent in 
2026, as opposed to the small decline projected in 
the October 2025 WEO. Oil prices are expected to 
increase by 21.4 percent on account of disruptions 
to production and transportation in the Middle 
East, corresponding to the average petroleum spot 
price index averaging $82 per barrel. Natural gas 
prices are expected to be affected more than oil 
prices because of the technical complexity of restart-
ing production and the comparatively lower level 
of reserves to fall back on. Food prices are expected 
to increase as well, more than projected in October 
2025, on account of higher energy and fertilizer 
prices, disrupted shipping routes, and increased 
transport costs. Base and precious metal prices are 
projected to maintain the gains experienced in 2025. 
	• Monetary policy projections: Differentiation of 
monetary policies in major jurisdictions is expected 
to continue. In the United States, the federal funds 
rate is projected to be reduced gradually, reaching 
its terminal rate of about 3.1 percent by the end of 
2027. The policy rate in the euro area is expected 
to increase by 50 basis points over the course of 
2026. In Japan, the policy rate is projected to 
gradually rise, at a slightly steeper clip than thought 
in October 2025, toward a neutral setting of about 
1.5 percent. 
	• Fiscal policy projections: Fiscal policy in advanced 
economies, on average, is expected to be neutral in 
2026 and tighten in the latter years of the forecast 
Geopolitical Risk Index
VIX (Jan. 2016 = 100)
Spot gold price (right scale)
Figure 1.6.  Global Geopolitical Risk
(Index; US dollars per ounce)
50
0
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
6,000
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
Jan.
2016
Jan.
18
Jan.
20
Jan.
22
Jan.
24
Mar.
26
Sources: Caldara and Iacoviello 2022; Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE); London 
Stock Exchange Group, Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: This figure plots the monthly global geopolitical risk index of Caldara and 
Iacoviello (2022), a news-based measure of adverse geopolitical events that covers 
10 major newspapers in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Data 
were downloaded from https://www.matteoiacoviello.com/gpr.htm on April 02, 2026.
VIX = CBOE Volatility Index.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
5
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
horizon, despite a widening of deficits in major 
jurisdictions. In the United States, the general 
government fiscal-balance-to-GDP ratio is expected 
to deteriorate by 0.7 percentage point in 2026 to 
7½ percent, reflecting the impact of the One Big 
Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA), partly offset by addi-
tional tariff revenues. The fiscal balance is projected 
to decline in the euro area, with Germany’s deficit 
registering a widening of over 1 percentage point to 
3.8 percent as infrastructure and defense spending 
ramp up. Japan is also projected to see its deficit 
widen by 1 percentage point of GDP in 2026, and 
its fiscal policy is expected to remain moderately 
expansionary through 2030. Under current policies, 
US public debt is projected to continue to climb, 
from 124 percent of GDP in 2025 to 142 percent 
in 2031. In the euro area, the debt-to-GDP ratio 
also rises, but by less, from 87 percent in 2025 
to 90 percent in 2031. Fiscal policy in emerging 
market and developing economies, on average, is 
projected to gradually tighten over the forecast 
horizon. In China, the deficit is expected to widen 
by 0.3 percentage point in 2026, before starting to 
narrow in the medium term. Still, public debt in 
emerging market and developing economies is pro-
jected to rise further, reaching 86 percent of GDP in 
2031, from 74 percent in 2025. 
	• Trade policy assumptions: IMF staff projections 
remain based on real-time current trade policy; that 
is, they assume that policies as they stood at the end 
of March are permanent. This is so, even in regard 
to measures framed as temporary or pending—
meaning that US Section 122 tariffs are assumed to 
be extended or reimposed under different statutes. 
The US effective statutory tariff rate underlying 
the projections is 13.5 percent, compared with 
18.7 percent in the October 2025 forecast. The 
corresponding effective tariff rate imposed by the 
rest of the world on imports from the United States 
is unchanged at 3.5 percent. 
Global Growth Forecast: Fragile with Large 
Dispersion
	• Before the outbreak of the conflict, the bottom-up 
forecasts would have indicated a stable growth path 
(“Preconflict WEO forecast” in Figure 1.8). Global 
growth would have been 3.4 percent in 2026 
and 3.2 percent in 2027, an upward revision of 
0.1 percentage point for 2026 and unchanged for 
2027 compared with the forecast in the January 
2026 WEO Update. 
	• Under the assumption in the reference forecast that 
the war turns out to be relatively short-lived, global 
growth is expected to slow down modestly. At 
3.1 percent for 2026 and 3.2 percent for 2027, the 
forecasts mark a deceleration from the estimated 
Energy
Food
Base metals
Precious metals (right scale)
United States
Euro area
Japan
Figure 1.7.  Global Assumptions
1. Commodity Prices
(Index, 2024:Q4 = 100)
2. Monetary Policy Projections
(Percent, quarterly average)
3. Fiscal Policy Projections
(Percentage points, change in fiscal balance)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panels 1 and 2, solid lines denote projections from the April 2026 World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) and dashed lines those from the October 2025 WEO. In 
panel 3, the fiscal balance used is the general government structural primary balance 
in percent of potential GDP. The structural primary balance is the cyclically adjusted 
primary balance excluding net interest payments and corrected for a broader range of 
noncyclical factors such as changes in asset and commodity prices.
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
2024:
Q4
25:
Q2
25:
Q4
26:
Q2
26:
Q4
27:
Q2
27:
Q4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2024:
Q4
25:
Q4
26:
Q4
27:
Q4
28:
Q4
29:
Q4
−0.8
−0.4
0
0.4
0.8
2025
26
27
28
29
30
25
26
27
28
29
30
Advanced economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
6
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
3.4 percent achieved in 2025 (Table 1.1). At market 
exchange rates, world output is projected to grow 
by 2.6 percent in both 2026 and 2027 (Table 1.2). 
The relatively modest downward revision to global 
growth in the reference forecast relative to the 
January 2026 WEO Update owes to continued 
tailwinds partially offsetting the negative shocks 
from the conflict, including lower tariffs, preexisting 
policy support, and carryover from stronger-than-­
expected outturns at the end of 2025 and the first 
quarter of 2026 in some cases. Compared with 
the preconflict WEO forecasts, growth in the near 
term is revised downward by 0.2 percentage point. 
This masks significant variation across countries, 
with lower-­income commodity-importing econ-
omies being hit particularly hard through higher 
energy and food prices as well as foreign exchange 
depreciation (Figure 1.9). Cumulative growth over 
2026–27 is revised downward by 0.5 percentage 
point for low-income net energy-importing econ-
omies relative to the January 2026 WEO Update, 
compared with a downward revision of 0.2 percent-
age point in energy-importing advanced economies 
and positive or neutral revisions for net energy-­
exporting economies.
	• Should the conflict become more protracted than 
assumed in the reference forecast or the resumption 
of production and transport activities take longer 
than assumed because of possible scarring from 
closing of or damage to energy infrastructure, the 
impact on growth would be larger. To illustrate the 
potential range of magnitudes, the report considers 
two top-down model-based downside scenarios: an 
adverse one and a severe one.
	• In the adverse scenario, (1) Oil prices are assumed to 
increase by 80 percent starting in the second quarter 
of 2026 relative to the January 2026 WEO Update 
baseline, before falling back to about 20 percent 
above baseline in 2027, with the increase dissipating 
in 2028 (corresponding to an average petroleum 
spot price index of about $100 per barrel in 2026 
and about $75 in 2027). Gas prices increase for 
Preconflict WEO forecast
April 2026 WEO reference forecast
Adverse scenario
Severe scenario
January 2026 WEO Update forecast
Figure 1.8.  Global Growth and Inflation Forecasts
(Percent)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Headline inﬂation
GDP growth
2026
2027
2026
2027
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The three WEO forecasts are constructed bottom-up from individual country 
projections before and after the outbreak of the Middle East conflict. The two scenarios 
are model-based top-down estimates. The adverse scenario assumes that oil (gas) 
prices increase by 80 (160) percent starting in 2026:Q2, relative to the January 2026 
WEO Update, with the increase mostly unwinding in 2027, one-year-ahead inflation 
expectations increase by 50 (90) basis points in advanced economies (emerging 
markets excluding China), and corporate premiums rise by 50 (100) basis points in 
advanced economies plus China (emerging markets excluding China), while sovereign 
spreads in emerging markets excluding China increase by 50 basis points, with the 
tightening in financial conditions fading in 2027. The severe scenario is calibrated to 
larger and more persistent shocks. First, oil (gas) prices are assumed to be 100 (200) 
percent higher than the January 2026 WEO Update, starting in 2026:Q2 and staying 
at that level in 2027, while food commodity prices increase by 5 (10) percent in 2026 
(2027). Second, one-year-ahead inflation expectations increase by 100 (130) basis 
points in advanced economies (emerging markets excluding China) by 2027. Third, 
corporate risk premiums rise by 100 (200) basis points in advanced economies plus 
China (emerging markets excluding China) in 2026–27, while sovereign spreads 
increase by 100 basis points in emerging markets excluding China over the same 
period. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
Figure 1.9.  GDP Growth Revisions in the Reference Forecast
(Percentage points)
Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents cumulative GDP growth revisions for 2026–27 relative to the 
January 2026 World Economic Outlook Update. Energy exporters and importers are 
defined using 2022 net energy imports as a share of energy use. Groups are aggregated 
using purchasing-power-parity weights. EMs and LIDCs exclude MENA. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income developing countries; 
MENA = Middle East and North Africa.
−2.5
0.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
EMs
LIDCs
AEs
EMs
AEs
LIDCs
MENA
Energy exporters
Energy importers
Conflict
affected
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
7
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Reference Forecast
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Projections
Difference from January  
2026 WEO Update1
Difference from October  
2025 WEO1
2025
2026
2027
2026
2027
2026
2027
World Output
3.4
3.1
3.2
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
Advanced Economies
1.9
1.8
1.7
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
United States 
2.1
2.3
2.1
–0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
Euro Area
1.4
1.1
1.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
Germany
0.2
0.8
1.2
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
–0.3
France
0.9
0.9
0.9
–0.1
–0.3
0.0
–0.3
Italy
0.5
0.5
0.5
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
Spain
2.8
2.1
1.8
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
0.1
Japan 
1.2
0.7
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
United Kingdom
1.3
0.8
1.3
–0.5
–0.2
–0.5
–0.2
Canada
1.7
1.5
1.9
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies2
3.0
2.6
2.2
0.6
0.1
0.6
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
3.9
4.2
–0.3
0.1
–0.1
0.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.5
4.9
4.8
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
China
5.0
4.4
4.0
–0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.2
India3
7.6
6.5
6.5
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.0
2.0
2.1
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
–0.3
Russia
1.0
1.1
1.1
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.0
Latin America and the Caribbean 
2.4
2.3
2.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
Brazil
2.3
1.9
2.0
0.3
–0.3
0.0
–0.2
Mexico
0.6
1.6
2.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
Middle East and Central Asia
3.6
1.9
4.6
–2.0
0.6
–1.9
0.8
Saudi Arabia
4.5
3.1
4.5
–1.4
0.9
–0.9
1.3
Sub-Saharan Africa 
4.5
4.3
4.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
Nigeria
4.0
4.1
4.3
–0.3
0.2
–0.1
0.3
South Africa
1.1
1.0
1.3
–0.4
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
2.9
2.6
2.6
–0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.1
European Union
1.6
1.3
1.4
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
ASEAN-54
4.5
4.1
4.4
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
Middle East and North Africa
3.2
1.1
4.8
–2.8
0.8
–2.6
1.1
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.4
3.8
4.1
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.8
4.8
4.9
–0.3
–0.2
–0.2
–0.4
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
5.1
2.8
3.8
0.2
0.7
0.5
0.7
Imports
Advanced Economies
4.7
2.6
3.1
0.8
0.8
1.3
0.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.7
2.7
4.9
–0.9
0.4
–1.3
0.2
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.7
2.5
2.7
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.4
3.5
5.4
–0.1
1.2
0.2
1.3
Commodity Prices
Oil5
–14.4
21.4
–7.6
29.9
–7.7
25.9
–7.4
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity  
import weights) 
9.6
21.7
1.9
14.2
1.0
17.6
1.3
World Consumer Prices6
4.1
4.4
3.7
0.6
0.3
0.7
0.3
Advanced Economies7
2.5
2.8
2.2
0.6
0.1
0.6
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
5.2
5.5
4.6
0.7
0.3
0.8
0.4
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing from February 10, 2026, to March 10, 2026. Economies are listed on 
the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1 Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2026 WEO Update, and October 2025 WEO forecasts.  
2 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3 For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2022 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2022/23 as a 
base year.
4 Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
5 Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $67.74 in 2025; 
the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $82.22 in 2026 and $75.97 in 2027.
6 Excludes Venezuela. See the country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7 The assumed inflation rates for 2026 and 2027, respectively, are as follows: 2.6 percent and 2.2 percent for the euro area, 2.2 percent and 2.3 percent for 
Japan, and 3.2 percent and 2.1 percent for the United States.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
8
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Europe and Asia by 160 percent in the second quar-
ter relative to baseline, before also mostly unwinding 
in 2027, and food commodity prices increase by 
2.5 percent. (2) One-year-ahead inflation expecta-
tions increase by as much as 50 basis points by 2027 
in advanced economies and as much as 90 basis 
points in emerging markets excluding China. Infla-
tion expectations are unchanged in China, as current 
low inflation makes this less of a risk than for other 
countries. (3) A risk-off episode increases corporate 
premiums in advanced economies and China by 
50 basis points, while emerging markets excluding 
China experience a 100 basis point increase as well 
as a 50 basis point increase in sovereign spreads. The 
tightening in financial conditions fades in 2027. 
Given the large impact on inflation expectations, 
the monetary policy response assigns less weight to 
output stabilization than usually assumed.
	• In the severe scenario, (1) The shock to commodity 
prices is more severe and persistent, with oil prices 
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Reference Forecast (continued)
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Q4 over Q48
Projections
Difference from January
2026 WEO Update1
Difference from October
2025 WEO1
2025
2026
2027
2026
2027
2026
2027
World Output
3.3
2.9
3.5
–0.3
0.3
–0.4
. . .
Advanced Economies
1.9
1.5
1.9
–0.4
0.2
–0.3
. . .
United States 
2.0
2.2
2.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
. . .
Euro Area
1.2
1.2
1.5
–0.5
0.2
–0.6
. . .
Germany
0.4
0.7
1.3
–0.3
–0.2
–0.3
. . .
France
1.2
0.6
1.0
–0.3
–0.3
–0.4
. . .
Italy
0.8
–0.2
1.8
–0.9
1.1
–0.3
. . .
Spain
2.6
1.6
2.2
–0.4
0.3
–0.2
. . .
Japan 
0.5
1.0
0.7
–0.5
0.3
–0.1
. . .
United Kingdom
1.0
1.0
1.9
–0.4
0.0
–0.4
. . .
Canada
0.7
2.3
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
. . .
Other Advanced Economies2
4.1
1.5
2.5
–1.3
. . .
–1.3
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
4.0
4.6
–0.3
0.4
–0.4
. . .
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.3
4.7
5.1
–0.3
0.3
–0.6
. . .
China
4.4
3.9
4.6
–0.6
0.5
–1.1
. . .
India3
7.5
7.1
6.5
0.6
0.0
0.9
. . .
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.9
1.8
2.2
–0.3
–0.2
–0.5
. . .
Russia
1.0
0.6
0.6
0.0
–0.5
0.1
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean 
2.1
2.9
2.3
0.1
–0.1
0.3
. . .
Brazil
2.0
2.6
1.9
0.3
–0.3
0.3
. . .
Mexico
1.8
1.5
2.4
–0.7
0.3
–0.2
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
5.0
3.1
4.5
–1.4
0.9
–0.9
. . .
Sub-Saharan Africa 
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
3.9
3.8
4.5
–0.5
–2.0
–0.5
. . .
South Africa
1.5
0.7
1.5
–0.5
–0.2
–0.3
. . .
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
2.7
2.4
2.7
–0.3
0.1
–0.4
. . .
European Union
1.4
1.1
1.8
–0.4
0.2
–0.6
. . .
ASEAN-54
4.9
3.7
4.7
–0.5
0.1
–0.8
. . .
Middle East and North Africa
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.4
3.9
4.3
–0.3
0.2
–0.5
. . .
Low-Income Developing Countries
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
–15.1
29.2
–6.7
30.6
–7.6
31.4
. . .
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity  
import weights) 
14.2
14.6
1.1
13.8
0.5
13.4
. . .
World Consumer Prices6
3.5
3.9
3.0
0.8
0.0
0.9
. . .
Advanced Economies7
2.5
2.9
2.0
0.8
–0.1
0.9
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
4.2
4.6
3.7
0.7
0.1
0.9
. . .
8 For world output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
For emerging market and developing economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 85 percent of annual emerging market and 
developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
9
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
increasing by 100 percent starting in the second 
quarter of 2026, relative to the January 2026 WEO 
Update baseline, but also staying at that level in 
2027, before dissipating in 2028 (correspond-
ing to an average petroleum spot price index of 
about $110 per barrel in 2026 and about $125 
in 2027). Gas prices for Europe and Asia increase 
by 200 percent over the same period, and food 
commodity prices increase by 5 percent in 2026 and 
10 percent in 2027. (2) One-year-ahead inflation 
expectations ratchet up by as much as 100 basis 
points in advanced economies by 2027 and by 
as much as 130 basis points in emerging markets 
excluding China, also by 2027. (3) A significant 
risk-off episode pushes up corporate premiums in 
advanced economies and in China by 100 basis 
points in 2026, and they stay at that level in 2027, 
while emerging markets excluding China experience 
a widening in sovereign spreads of 100 basis points 
over the same period, along with an increase in cor-
porate spreads of 200 basis points. As in the adverse 
scenario, the monetary policy response is geared 
toward containing inflationary pressures rather than 
stabilizing output.
	• Under the adverse scenario, global growth would 
be reduced by 0.8 percentage point in 2026, 
dropping to 2.5 percent. There would also be a 
modest 0.2 percentage point impact on growth 
in 2027, bringing global growth to 3.0 percent. 
Inflation would be 1.5 percentage points higher 
at 5.4 percent in 2026, and 0.4 percentage point 
higher at 3.9 percent in 2027. Most of the impact 
on inflation and over half the impact on growth in 
2026 come from higher energy prices. The more 
persistent effect on growth in 2027, however, is 
driven by the tightening in financial conditions and 
rise in inflation expectations, which implies a mod-
est tightening in policy rates of 50 basis points in 
advanced economies by 2027 and a somewhat larger 
increase in emerging market economies. 
	• Under the severe scenario, the effects on global 
growth are substantial and longer lasting. Global 
growth would be reduced by 1.3 percentage points 
in 2026. This would mean a close call for a global 
recession (growth rate below 2 percent), which has 
happened only four times since 1980, with the latest 
two occasions corresponding to the global financial 
crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. The effects 
on growth are also more persistent, with global 
growth reduced by 1.0 percentage point in 2027, 
to 2.2 percent. Inflation would be 190 basis points 
higher in 2026, reaching 5.8 percent, and 260 basis 
points higher in 2027, reaching 6.1 percent. The 
increase in oil and gas prices has not only a larger, 
but also a more persistent, impact on growth, 
subtracting 0.6 percentage point in 2026 and a 
further 0.5 percentage point in 2027. The amplifi-
cation through inflation expectations and financial 
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Reference Forecast at Market Exchange Rate Weights
(Percent change)
Projections
Difference from January
2026 WEO Update1
Difference from October
2025 WEO1
2025
2026
2027
2026
2027
2026
2027
World Output
2.9
2.6
2.6
–0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.1
Advanced Economies
1.9
1.8
1.7
–0.1
0.0
0.1
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.3
3.7
3.9
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.3
4.7
4.5
–0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.0
2.1
2.2
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
–0.2
Latin America and the Caribbean 
2.2
2.3
2.6
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
Middle East and Central Asia
3.8
1.6
4.8
–2.5
0.8
–2.4
0.9
Sub-Saharan Africa 
4.3
4.1
4.2
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
Memorandum
European Union
1.5
1.3
1.4
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
Middle East and North Africa
3.5
1.0
4.9
–3.1
1.0
–2.9
1.1
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.2
3.6
3.9
–0.3
0.1
–0.2
0.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.9
4.8
4.9
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
–0.4
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, in which a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years is 
used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1 Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2026 WEO Update, and October 2025 WEO forecasts.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
10
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
conditions would also be sizable, reducing growth 
by 0.7 percentage point in 2026 and 0.5 percentage 
point in 2027. This in part reflects a more aggres-
sive monetary policy response. The federal funds 
rate would increase by 50 basis points in 2026 and 
100 basis points in 2027, relative to baseline.
	• In both scenarios, the impact on emerging mar-
kets would again be greater than that on advanced 
economies. In the adverse scenario, growth in 2026 is 
lower by 1.3 percentage points in emerging mar-
kets excluding China, relative to baseline, and by 
0.6 percentage point in advanced economies. The 
severe scenario lowers growth in 2026 by 1.9 percent-
age points in emerging markets excluding China, 
almost twice the decline in advanced economies. 
This reflects a combination of a larger exposure to 
higher commodity prices and disruption to energy 
production, a larger increase in inflation expecta-
tions, and a more pronounced tightening in finan-
cial conditions.
Growth Forecast for Advanced Economies
Under the reference forecast, growth in advanced 
economies is projected to be 1.8 percent in 2026 and 
1.7 percent in 2027. The overall effect on growth in 
advanced economies of the conflict in the Middle East 
is modest, lowering growth by 0.2 percentage point 
in 2026 relative to the preconflict forecast, thanks to 
positive terms-of-trade effects in the United States and 
stronger growth momentum and offsetting government 
measures in Japan, with a large negative effect expected 
only in some net energy-importing economies, such as 
the euro area and the United Kingdom.
	• In the United States, the economy is projected 
to expand by 2.3 percent in 2026, with growth 
supported by fiscal policy and the lagged impact of 
monetary policy rate cuts in 2025, even as the rise 
in trade barriers since April 2025 continues to weigh 
on the level of activity. This 0.1 percentage point 
downward revision relative to the January 2026 
WEO Update reflects the balance of a small negative 
effect from the war—given the net-energy-exporter 
status of the United States—and offsets from a 
rebound in activity in the first quarter of 2026 
compared with the fourth quarter of 2025 following 
the end of the 2025 federal government shutdown, 
stronger-than-previously-assumed productivity 
growth, and the associated carryover. While the 
International Emergency Economic Powers Act 
(IEEPA) ruling may reduce fiscal revenues raised by 
tariffs, the impact on the fiscal balance and activity 
is expected to be small and spread over the forecast 
horizon. Growth is projected to remain solid at 
2.1 percent in 2027, with a near-term fiscal boost 
from tax incentives, including those for corporate 
investment under the OBBBA. Technology-driven 
momentum is expected to moderate but still provide 
some offset to lower immigration and moderating 
consumption. Strong productivity growth is pro-
jected to gradually fade and converge to historical 
norms.
	• In the euro area, growth is expected to decline from 
1.4 percent in 2025 to 1.1 percent in 2026 and to 
1.2 percent in 2027. The forecast is revised down-
ward by 0.2 percentage point in each year compared 
with the January 2026 WEO Update, with the effect 
of better-than-expected growth at the end of 2025 
giving way to the negative impact of the Middle 
East conflict over time. The latter will add to the 
lingering effects of the persistent rise in energy 
prices since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, dragging 
on manufacturing, with additional pressure from 
the real appreciation of the euro relative to curren-
cies of countries exporting similar products. The 
impact of the planned increase in defense spending 
for most countries is expected to materialize only in 
subsequent years, given commitments to reach target 
levels gradually by 2035 (see Chapter 2 for estimates 
of defense spending multipliers). In Japan, growth 
is projected to drop from 1.2 percent in 2025 to 
0.7 percent in 2026 and to 0.6 percent in 2027. 
This marks an upward revision for 2026 relative to 
the October 2025 figure, reflecting the fiscal stim-
ulus package announced by the new government 
last November, stronger domestic-demand-driven 
growth carryover from 2025, and government 
measures to limit the effects of higher energy prices, 
partly offset by weaker external demand and the 
Middle East conflict. In the United Kingdom, the 
war and a slower pace of monetary easing mean that 
growth is projected to decline from 1.3 percent in 
2025 to 0.8 percent in 2026, a downward revision 
of 0.5 percentage point relative to the October 
2025 forecast. Growth is projected to recover to 
1.3 percent in 2027, slower than expected before 
the war as the impact of higher energy prices 
lingers. In Canada, growth is projected to slow 
from 1.7 percent in 2025 to 1.5 percent in 2026 
before recovering to 1.9 percent in 2027. The softer 
near-term profile reflects weaker momentum at the 
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
11
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
end of 2025 and slower population growth, while 
earlier monetary easing and supportive fiscal policy 
help sustain domestic demand. This is broadly 
unchanged from the October 2025 WEO forecast, 
with the positive terms-of-trade shock of higher oil 
prices offsetting the other effects of the war in the 
Middle East. 
Growth Forecast for Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies
In emerging market and developing economies, growth 
is expected to fall to 3.9 percent in 2026 and recover 
to 4.2 percent in 2027. The conflict in the Middle 
East has a varied impact on growth given differential 
exposure—through geographic proximity, financial 
flows, remittances, and energy dependencies. Over-
all, it has a larger net impact on growth in emerging 
market and developing economies compared with 
advanced economies, lowering growth in 2026 for the 
former group by 0.3 percentage point relative to the 
preconflict forecast.
	• Growth in emerging and developing Asia is expected 
to decline from 5.5 percent in 2025 to 4.9 percent 
in 2026 and to 4.8 percent in 2027. Growth in 
China for 2026 is revised upward by 0.2 percentage 
point, relative to October (a 0.1 percentage point 
downward revision from January), to 4.4 percent, 
reflecting the lower US effective tariff rates on 
Chinese goods, and stimulus measures offset the 
negative impact of the shock induced by the Middle 
East conflict. The economy’s growth rate is expected 
to decelerate to 4.0 percent in 2027 as structural 
headwinds—including those from a grinding 
slowdown in the housing sector, a declining labor 
force, decreasing returns on investment, and slower 
productivity growth—assert themselves. In India, 
growth for 2025 is revised upward by 1.0 percentage 
point relative to October, to 7.6 percent, reflecting 
the better-than-expected outturn in the second and 
third quarters of the fiscal year and sustained strong 
momentum in the fourth quarter. For 2026, growth 
is revised upward moderately by 0.3 percentage 
point (0.1 percentage point relative to January) 
to 6.5 percent, led by positive contributions from 
the carryover of the strong 2025 outturn and the 
decline in additional US tariffs on Indian goods 
from 50 to 10 percent, which outweigh the adverse 
impact of the Middle East conflict. Growth is 
projected to stay at 6.5 percent in 2027. In several 
South and Southeast Asian economies, disruptions 
in the Middle East are expected to reduce tourism 
and remittance inflows, thereby weakening domestic 
demand. Growth in the Philippines is revised down-
ward by 1.5 percentage points for 2026, relative 
to January, with the war shock compounding the 
negative base effects from a weaker-than-expected 
2025 outturn related to a sharp decline in public 
investment and confidence.
	• In the Middle East and Central Asia, growth is 
projected to decline from 3.6 percent in 2025 to 
1.9 percent in 2026 and recover to 4.6 percent 
in 2027 as the region experiences the most direct 
impact of the conflict and the expected subsequent 
rebound. For commodity exporters directly affected 
by the conflict, diminished production and exports 
imply a severe downward revision of GDP growth 
projections for 2026, depending on the degree 
of damage suffered in energy and transportation 
infrastructure as well as the dependence on the Strait 
of Hormuz and availability of alternative export 
routes. The contraction of GDP growth for 2026 is 
therefore more pronounced for Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, 
Kuwait, and Qatar and less significant for Oman, 
Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. For 
all these economies, growth in 2027 is expected 
to rebound, based on the assumption that energy 
production and transportation are normalized over 
the next few months—an assumption that may need 
to be revised if the duration of the conflict extends 
and the degree of damage suffered gets reassessed. 
Growth in Iran in 2026 is revised downward 
by 7.2 percentage points, relative to January, to 
–6.1 percent, while that for 2027 is revised upward 
by 1.6 percentage points to 3.2 percent. In Saudi 
Arabia, the growth forecast for 2026 is revised 
downward by 1.4 percentage point relative to 
January, to 3.1 percent, and that for 2027 is revised 
upward by 0.9 percentage point, to 4.5 percent. 
For commodity importers in the Middle East and 
North Africa, the terms-of-trade shock from higher 
commodity prices contributes to a somewhat 
modest downward revision of growth projections in 
2026 and 2027, with some differentiation as a result 
of varying exposures to imports of energy, energy 
derivatives, and food items, as well as different 
economic trajectories before the conflict erupted. In 
Egypt, growth is projected to slow to 4.2 percent in 
2026 and recover to 4.8 percent in 2027, a cumu-
lative downward revision of 1.1 percentage points. 
For Caucasus and Central Asia countries, the growth 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
12
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
momentum experienced over the past few years is 
expected to continue, with aggregate GDP growth 
for the group revised upward in 2026 and 2027, by 
a cumulative 0.3 percentage point.
	• Growth in sub-Saharan Africa is expected to be rela-
tively stable at 4.3 percent in 2026 and 4.4 percent 
in 2027. This masks variation across countries, 
with some in the region—particularly oil-importing 
non-resource-intensive countries—adversely 
affected by the Middle East conflict. Key econo-
mies continue to benefit from past macroeconomic 
stabilization and reform efforts. In Nigeria, growth 
momentum is sustained at 4.1 percent in 2026, 
supported by improved macroeconomic stability 
and positive terms-of-trade effects, while higher 
goods and transport costs are headwinds. Growth 
is expected to strengthen in 2027 to 4.3 percent as 
these headwinds ease. In South Africa, the disrup-
tions from the Middle East conflict are projected 
to slow growth slightly to 1.0 percent in 2026. The 
economy is expected to bounce back in 2027, grow-
ing at 1.3 percent, supported by a gradual resump-
tion of structural-reform-driven private investment 
as disruptions from the conflict subside. Growth in 
other countries in the region as a whole is expected 
to decline from 5.6 percent in 2025 to 5.2 percent 
in both 2026 and 2027, revised downward relative 
to January by a cumulative 0.6 percentage point.
	• In Latin America and the Caribbean, growth is 
projected to remain broadly stable at 2.3 percent 
in 2026 and pick up to 2.7 percent in 2027. The 
impact from the conflict in the Middle East within 
the region is heterogeneous, with smaller econo-
mies affected more negatively. In Brazil, growth 
is projected to moderate to 1.9 percent in 2026, 
unchanged from October, and 2.0 percent in 2027. 
The war is expected to have a small net positive 
effect in 2026, as a result of the country being a 
net energy exporter, boosting growth by about 
0.2 percentage point. In 2027, slowing global 
demand, higher input costs (including of fertilizers), 
and tighter financial conditions are expected to 
dominate, reducing growth by approximately 
0.3 percentage point, compared with the projection 
in January. Adequate international reserves, low 
reliance on foreign-currency debt, large government 
cash buffers, and a flexible exchange rate are expected 
to help the country weather the shock. In Mexico, 
weaker growth in 2025 amid fiscal consolidation, 
restrictive monetary policy, and headwinds from 
trade tensions is expected to give way to a mild 
recovery, with the economy expanding at a rate of 
1.6 percent in 2026 and 2.2 percent in 2027. 
	• In emerging and developing Europe, a sharp slowdown 
in 2025 to a growth rate of 2.0 percent is expected 
to reverse only slightly, with economies in the region 
expanding at an average rate of 2.0 percent in 2026 
and 2.1 percent in 2027. In Russia, higher commod-
ity prices are projected to drive the 0.3 percentage 
point upward revision of 2026 growth relative 
to January, to 1.1 percent, with the momentum 
continuing to register another 1.1 percent growth 
rate in 2027. In Türkiye, expected growth is revised 
downward by 0.8 percentage point for 2026 to 
3.4 percent relative to the figure in the January 
2026 WEO Update, as 2025 growth was weaker 
than expected and higher oil and gas prices weigh 
on activity.
Inflation Forecast 
Global inflation is projected to pause its decline, 
with headline inflation increasing from 4.1 percent 
in 2025 to 4.4 percent in 2026 before falling back 
to 3.7 percent in 2027. This is a 0.7 percentage 
point upward revision for 2026 from the figure in 
the October 2025 WEO, reflecting expected higher 
energy and food prices. There is divergence across 
countries, shaped by the stubborn dynamics in services 
inflation—which tends to have a larger domestic 
component—and the increasing share of inflation 
explained by country-specific factors (Figure 1.10). 
Gradual pass-through from higher tariffs and lim-
ited pass-through of higher energy prices along with 
gradually moderating services inflation amid a broadly 
balanced labor market mean that US core inflation is 
projected to return to the country’s 2 percent target 
during 2027. Sustained strong productivity growth 
slowly converging back to historical norms will 
provide support for supply-driven disinflation. In the 
United Kingdom, inflation, which in 2025 increased 
partly because of one-off changes in regulated prices, 
is expected to pick up again temporarily toward 
4 percent before returning to target by the end of 2027 
as the effects of higher energy prices fade and a weak-
ening labor market continues to exert downward pres-
sure on wage growth. In Japan, inflation is expected 
to moderate in 2026, relative to the outturn in 2025, 
and converge toward the country’s target by the end of 
2027 as food and commodity prices ease. In the euro 
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
13
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
area, headline inflation is projected to increase tem-
porarily to above 2 percent in 2026 and remain above 
target in 2027. Core inflation is expected to increase 
more modestly but stay above 2 percent until 2028. 
Inflation in China is projected to start rising from low 
levels, whereas inflation in India is expected to return 
to near target levels after subdued food prices drove a 
marked decline in 2025.
World Trade Outlook and Global Imbalances
World trade volume growth is expected to decline 
from 5.1 percent in 2025 to 2.8 percent in 2026 and 
increase to 3.8 percent in 2027. These dynamics reflect 
front-loading early on and the impact of tariffs miti-
gated by adjustments in trade linkages and production 
chains as time goes by. Exports of both goods and ser-
vices are projected to decline in percent of world GDP 
over the forecast horizon, with the decline in services 
trade being much less pronounced. This reflects the 
stronger underlying trend growth and greater resilience 
to rising risks in services trade compared with that in 
goods trade (see Box 1.2). 
Over the medium term, global imbalances are 
expected to decline only modestly. Expansionary fiscal 
packages in some economies with current account sur-
pluses are expected to contribute to this cyclical decline 
(Figure 1.11). Countering this is a technology-driven 
business investment surge, which is expected to con-
tinue to attract capital flows to the United States even 
as investment in technology moderates. Stronger pro-
ductivity growth in the United States could enhance 
US competitiveness in technology-related services 
and improve the country’s trade balance. But positive 
wealth effects that boost domestic demand, together 
with sustained capital inflows driven by higher returns, 
would dominate and keep the US current account 
2020–21
22–23
24–25
2020–21
22–23
24–25
Core goods
Services
Core goods
Services
Figure 1.10.  Global Inflation
(Percent)
1. Global Average Inflation
0
10
2
4
6
8
2. Variations Explained by Country-Specific Factors
0
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the average inflation across 27 countries for which data are 
available. All numbers are simple averages. Panel 2 shows the share of country-level 
inflation variation not explained by global inflation, proxied by the first principal 
component of inflation across 27 countries, computed in a rolling two-year window.
European debtors
Japan
Oil exporters
European creditors
China
Others
Overall balance (right scale)
United States
Figure 1.11.  Current Account and International Investment 
Positions
(Percent of global GDP)
1. Global Current Account Balance
−3
3
−2
−1
0
1
2
−6
6
−4
−2
0
2
4
2. Global International Investment Position
−30
20
−20
−10
0
10
2005 07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
31
2005 07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
31
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: “European creditors” are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, 
Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, and Switzerland. “European 
debtors” are Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. “Oil exporters” are Algeria, 
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, 
United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
14
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
deficit wider than that observed during the decade 
preceding the COVID-19 pandemic (also see the dis-
cussion of scenario A in Box 1.3). Sustained large fiscal 
deficits in the United States and China’s continued 
reliance on export-led growth and limited rebalancing 
to domestic consumption contribute to external imbal-
ances in these two countries.
Medium-Term Outlook
Many countries are facing challenges in lifting 
medium-term growth prospects, compounded by 
geoeconomic fragmentation and rising geopolitical 
risks. Absent decisive policy actions or technological 
breakthroughs, growth forecasts over the five-year 
WEO horizon remain mediocre. The global economy 
is projected to expand at an average annual pace of 
3.1 percent in 2028–31, a persistently lackluster per-
formance compared with the prepandemic (2000–19) 
historical average of 3.7 percent. This pace of growth 
reflects primarily the slowdown in China’s growth, 
but average annual growth is also expected to slow in 
several other major Asian economies, the Middle East 
and Central Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa, as well as in 
North America and Europe.
Policy-driven reversal of global economic integration 
and a more volatile international economic environ-
ment are expected to hurt the potential of the world 
economy through multiple interconnected channels 
(Aiyar and others 2023). First, the catalyst role that 
international trade played for cross-country income 
convergence—helping lift large numbers of people out 
of poverty in the developing world—is expected to be 
reduced. Second, many tangible benefits that inter-
national migration brought to source and destination 
countries alike are likely to decline with more limited 
migration flows. This would have particularly adverse 
implications for poverty reduction and macroeconomic 
stability in remittance-dependent countries. Third, 
capital flows, including foreign direct investment, 
may decrease as firms weigh the costs and benefits 
under greater uncertainty. All in all, increased barriers 
to movement of goods and services, investment, and 
people may reduce technological diffusion, the flow of 
ideas, and innovation. Estimates of long-term global 
GDP losses from trade fragmentation alone range 
between 0.3 percent and 7.0 percent after 10 years 
(Bolhuis, Chen, and Kett 2023). Crucially, some of 
these effects may take longer to manifest than the 
WEO horizon of five years. 
Risks to the Outlook: Downside 
Dominates
Risks are firmly on the downside, with some adverse 
risks gaining prominence since the January 2026 
WEO Update, most notably those related to a more 
protracted conflict in the Middle East. While recent 
momentum might prove to be stronger than projected 
if recent tailwinds such as AI-driven activity moderate 
less than envisioned or financial conditions remain 
accommodative, such support may also prove short-
lived and is likely to be dominated by downside risks 
from the conflict in the Middle East. Medium-term 
risks are also more firmly on the downside, including 
a potential misallocation of resources resulting from AI 
exuberance or a continuation of policies that give rise 
to real, fiscal, and financial vulnerabilities, potentially 
amplified through financial market mechanisms. 
Downside Risks
Further intensification of conflicts and eruption of 
domestic political tensions. The current war and geo-
political tensions could intensify further. The effects 
that are already being felt through volatile commodity 
prices, disrupted supply chains, and exchange rate 
depreciation could get worse. Food security could be 
threatened, with disruptions to fertilizer markets ahead 
of the planting season leading to substantial food price 
inflation. Erosion of real incomes and increasing pov-
erty in commodity-importing countries could exacer-
bate those countries’ external imbalances and put those 
with limited reserves at risk of balance of payments 
distress and social unrest. Political instability could 
ensue, with the economic toll of the ongoing conflicts 
imposing knock-on effects on preexisting domestic 
political tensions. Sub-Saharan African economies may 
be especially susceptible to such dynamics. An increase 
in risk aversion or increased frictions in cross-border 
financial transactions could lead to capital flow rever-
sals and abrupt asset price adjustments, particularly 
in emerging market economies with weaker policy 
frameworks as well as smaller fiscal and external buffers 
(Barrett and others 2021; April 2023 and April 2025 
Global Financial Stability Report). Surges in military 
spending could boost economic activity in the short 
term, but, even when not followed by conflict and war, 
may distort resource allocation and involve nontrivial 
macroeconomic trade-offs (see Chapter 2). If con-
flict breaks out, direct losses—human casualties and 
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
15
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
destruction of physical capital—are likely to dominate 
other channels (see Chapter 3).
The severe scenario discussed earlier in the chapter 
indicates that a more pronounced conflict could 
result in a major energy crisis, with a significant effect 
on global output. More generally, the direct mac-
roeconomic effects of country-specific geopolitical 
risk on the domestic economy can be sizable, even 
though episodes of elevated risk tend to be relatively 
short-lived, with a half-life of about two quarters. A 
one-standard-deviation increase in geopolitical risk 
is associated with a decline in real GDP of about 
0.8 percent one year after the initial shock, with the 
decrease driven by weaker private consumption and 
investment (Figure 1.12). To give a sense of magni-
tude, the average geopolitical risk in Europe (calculated 
across all country-year observations) rose by about 
1.2 standard deviations in 2022 following Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine and remained elevated at about 
0.5 standard deviation in 2025. Roughly 10 percent 
of the estimated GDP impact can be attributed to 
the direct effect of higher oil prices, implying that 
other transmission channels play a much larger role. 
Increased geopolitical risk is, on average, associated 
with a level of prices about 2.5 percent higher relative 
to that in the no-shock baseline three years after the 
shock. Core inflation rises as well, although more mod-
estly, suggesting that the inflationary impact comes 
mostly through the impact on commodity prices, 
as a result of disruptions to global food and energy 
supply chains. The nominal exchange rate depreciates 
by about 1.8 percent one year after the shock, which 
could compound the upward price pressures.
Reevaluation of productivity gains from new 
technology. Should AI-driven profitability projections 
turn out to be overly optimistic, real investment in 
technology sectors could drop sharply. In addition, 
equity markets—particularly those with high concen-
trations in technology sectors—could be vulnerable to 
a sharp repricing (April 2026 Global Financial Stability 
Report). A stock market correction—on top of the 
adjustment that has already happened in the stock 
prices of some technology firms—might lead to a slow-
down in private consumption growth through nega-
tive wealth effects. Spillovers would spread, directly 
through trade flows, to export-oriented economies 
specializing in technology products and through a 
reversal in capital flows and impacts on cross-border 
portfolio holdings. An associated tightening of global 
financial conditions would weigh on global activity 
more broadly (see scenario B in Box 1.3). 
Disruption of the fragile balance of current trade 
policies. More countries could adopt a protectionist 
posture, in particular if trade diversion and rerouting 
become disruptive, breaking the pattern of limited 
retaliation followed so far. Additional tariffs would 
further weigh on global growth, while sector-specific 
tariffs—especially if imposed on upstream industries 
in supply chains—could create supply bottlenecks 
and have an outsize impact on economic activity and 
prices. Nontariff measures targeting critical inputs such 
as rare earth minerals might also disrupt global supply 
chains (see the Commodity Special Feature). The 
effects would be amplified if actions trigger retaliatory 
tariff and nontariff measures. 
Repricing of borrowing costs triggered by fiscal vulner-
abilities. Public debt is elevated in several major econ-
omies, especially those whose currencies and securities 
Investment
Consumption
Headline CPI
Core CPI
Figure 1.12.  Estimated Impact of Geopolitical Risks
(Percent)
1. GDP
−2.5
0.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
−2.0
2. Consumption and
Investment
−5
2
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
Quarter
Quarter
0
3
6
9
12
0
3
6
9
12
3. CPI
−1
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
4. Nominal Effective
Exchange Rate
−5
1
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
0
3
6
9
12
0
3
6
9
12
Sources: Caldara and others 2026; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The analysis uses local projections, controlling for lagged country-specific 
geopolitical risk and changes in macroeconomic variables, as well as country and 
time fixed effects. Geopolitical risk is measured based on newspaper archives. See 
Caldara and others (2026) for details. The country-level data were downloaded from 
https://www.matteoiacoviello.com/gpr.htm. The lines denote point estimates, and the 
shaded areas denote 90 percent confidence intervals. CPI = consumer price index.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
16
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
are important in international financial markets (see 
the April 2026 Fiscal Monitor). Fiscal sustainability 
worries in those economies—potentially triggered by 
the crystallization of other shocks—could not only put 
pressure on those economies’ own borrowing costs but 
also tighten broader financial conditions and amplify 
financial market volatility (see scenario B in Box 1.3) 
and refinancing risk in some high-debt developing 
economies. Elections are often associated with fiscal 
slippage (Shi and Svensson 2006), which, as well as 
raising borrowing costs, risks triggering boom-bust 
growth dynamics. For low-income countries, planned 
reductions in official development assistance (ODA) 
pose an additional challenge through, among other 
things, their effects on health, education, and social 
protection outcomes. Many recipients in sub-Saharan 
Africa experienced a gradual decline in ODA as a share 
of GDP after the global financial crisis. Over the same 
period, Chinese lending expanded significantly, reflect-
ing multiple factors, yet it has weakened in recent 
years, with net transfers recently turning negative 
(Figure 1.13; see also Chapter 2 of the April 2026 
Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa). 
Erosion of confidence in economic institutions. Inten-
sification of political pressure on independent central 
banks and other policy institutions can erode hard-
won public confidence in their ability to fulfill their 
mandates and lift inflation expectations (Chapter 2 of 
the October 2025 WEO). Reanchoring expectations—
when it occurs—usually requires a prolonged period 
of tight monetary policy, with longer-term yields 
rising because of widening term premiums and higher 
inflation expectations, ultimately lowering economic 
growth. Countries may experience persistently higher 
funding costs and capital outflows if international 
investors divert investment toward assets that are per-
ceived as safer or more stable. 
Upside Risks
Sooner materialization of productivity gains from 
artificial intelligence. The reference forecast does not 
include direct effects of AI on productivity, with 
adoption rates for AI still modest in many sectors 
(Figure 1.14). But the recent surge in AI-related 
investment and acceleration in the adoption of AI 
could substantially increase productivity and boost 
medium-term growth sooner rather than later, as 
possibly foretold by the above-trend US productivity 
growth since 2020. This could lift global growth by 
as much as 0.3 percentage point in the near term and 
by 0.1–0.8 percentage point in the medium term (see 
Box 1.3 of the October 2025 WEO). The benefits 
could be shared across the economy, provided there 
China’s net transfers to LIDCs (non-SSA)
China’s net transfers to LIDCs (SSA)
World’s net ODA
Figure 1.13.  International Flows to LIDCs
(Billions of US dollars)
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; World Bank, World 
Development Indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Net official development assistance (ODA) is weighted by and shown as 
percentages of gross national income. LIDCs = low-income developing countries; 
SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
November 2025 
survey
Expected use 
in six months 
following survey
February 2026 
survey
Figure 1.14.  Use of Artificial Intelligence by US Firms by 
Sector
(Percent)
Information
Professional and business services
Financial activities
Educational and health services
Wholesale trade
Utilities
Manufacturing
Retail trade
Construction
Other services
Leisure and hospitality
Transportation
Agriculture
Mining
0
10
20
30
40
50
Sources: US Census Bureau, Business Trends and Outlook Survey; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Sectors are aggregated using gross-value-added shares. Blue bars and red 
markers show responses to the survey question: “In the last six months, did this 
business use Artificial Intelligence (AI) in any of the following business functions?” 
The yellow markers show responses from the February 2026 survey to the question: 
“During the next six months, do you think this business will be using AI in any of its 
business functions?” Survey responses for Construction and Mining sectors were not 
available from the November 2025 survey.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
17
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
are complementary policies to contain the potential 
impact on energy prices by relaxing power supply 
constraints, initiatives to scale up the necessary critical 
intermediate inputs, and labor market programs to 
manage workforce transitions. In low-income coun-
tries, realizing these benefits might require additional 
efforts to close gaps in energy and digital infrastructure 
and reduce the concentration of labor in sectors such 
as agriculture and mining, in which AI-driven produc-
tivity gains are likely to be limited.
Structural reforms as countries seize the moment. 
Current challenges and the possibility of transforma-
tional technology changes could open a window for 
structural reform efforts to gain momentum. Accel-
erated implementation of reforms that upskill the 
existing labor force, reduce barriers to labor mobility, 
streamline and rationalize business regulations, reduce 
internal trade barriers, enhance competition, and 
promote innovation would make it possible to lift the 
growth potential of economies in a lasting manner 
while enhancing their resilience and capacity to adapt. 
Scenario C in Box 1.3 suggests that a package of 
reforms across major economies would lift near-term 
global growth by more than half a percentage point. 
Progress in trade talks and enhanced policy 
predictability. Tangible progress in trade talks could 
lower tariffs and support global activity. It could also 
enhance policy predictability, allowing businesses to 
plan better and unlock investment plans. The gains to 
investment and activity could be even larger if cooper-
ation extends beyond tariffs to services trade, foreign 
direct investment, and international taxation. In this 
context, efforts to develop or complete new regional 
trade agreements might help reduce trade costs and 
facilitate adjustment to recent policy changes, such 
as the EU’s recent trade agreements with India and 
MERCOSUR. A broad reduction in US tariffs and 
reduction in uncertainty could lift global growth by 
0.6 percentage point (see scenario C in Box 1.3). 
Incidentally, should US Section 122 tariffs fail to be 
extended and if no new tariffs are imposed under dif-
ferent statutes, the effective tariff rate would turn out 
to be lower than is assumed in the reference forecast.
Policies: Addressing the Current Shock, 
Preparing for the Next
The current hostilities in the Middle East pose 
immediate policy trade-offs: between fighting inflation 
and preserving growth and between supporting those 
affected by the rising cost of living and rebuilding 
fiscal buffers. Amid frequent global shocks, countries 
need to calibrate policies to ensure that they not only 
step up to the moment but also stand up to the next 
test. There are actions countries can take on their own, 
some of which can also help increase global stability. 
Then there are actions that require collective action to 
reinstate stability in international economic relations.
Getting One’s Own House in Order
Preserving Price and Financial Stability
Responding to the commodity price shock. Central 
banks should be ready to act decisively in line with 
their mandates. Monetary policy should preserve price 
stability and be carefully attuned to spillovers from 
actual inflation to inflation expectations, especially 
over the medium- to long-term horizon. The transmis-
sion of the current war-infused shock to inflation will 
differ across countries, reflecting varying exposure to 
commodity markets and the region in which countries 
are located, the strength of the anchoring of inflation 
expectations, and the extent of exchange rate deprecia-
tion. With the memories of the postpandemic inflation 
surge still fresh, second-round effects could possibly 
be larger than they were in 2021–22. At the same 
time, tightening prematurely could be destabilizing, if 
financial conditions tighten further—as in the severe 
scenario presented earlier in the chapter—or consumer 
and business confidence declines. Reacting strongly 
to flexible commodity prices, when supply constraints 
are present only in the related sectors, brings down 
inflation fast but risks a recession later (Chapter 2 of 
the October 2024 WEO). Where monetary policy 
was already properly calibrated before the shock, 
policymakers may have the option to wait to discern 
the duration and impact of the shock, also consider-
ing that inflation expectations may have shifted by 
the time the persistence of the shock becomes clear. 
Where negative demand shocks emerge and activity 
falls below potential, a reduction in policy rates may be 
appropriate, but only if risks to price stability remain 
contained. In non-inflation-targeting economies, such 
as those with fixed exchange rate regimes, policymakers 
may need to rely more heavily on other tools, such as 
fiscal policy, to manage shocks. 
Communicating with impact. Clear, timely, and 
consistent central bank communication is essential at 
a time of heightened uncertainty and renewed fear of 
inflationary pressures. Central banks should articulate 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
18
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
their commitment to their mandates, including the 
resolve not to allow inflation expectations to de-anchor 
and their determination to tighten policy if incom-
ing data and the evolving balance of risks make it 
necessary. 
Safeguarding independence and credibility. Central 
bank independence, both legal and operational, 
is crucial for monetary policy credibility. It helps 
anchor inflation expectations and protect against 
fiscal dominance. Credibility that has been built over 
decades was a crucial factor in bringing inflation down 
without substantial output losses during the postpan-
demic inflation surge. But that episode of prolonged 
above-target inflation has also left the policy credibility 
of some central banks blemished. That puts an addi-
tional premium on avoiding pressures to subordinate 
monetary policy to fiscal or financial considerations 
or political objectives. Central banks should be able 
to maintain a prolonged period of restrictive policy if 
necessary.
Maintaining a flexible but orderly exchange rate. 
Exchange rates should generally move flexibly in 
response to market forces to facilitate macroeconomic 
adjustment. With the conflict in the Middle East 
triggering volatility and threatening an abrupt tight-
ening in global financial conditions, foreign exchange 
movements may become excessive or disorderly, 
amplifying the impact of higher commodity prices on 
inflation and financial stability. The IMF’s Integrated 
Policy Framework provides guidance for tailoring 
country-specific policy responses in instances in which 
such risk is imminent. In select cases, temporary 
foreign exchange intervention or targeted capital flow 
management measures may be warranted, alongside 
appropriate monetary and fiscal policy stances.
Enhancing prudential oversight. Heightened uncer-
tainty, rising geopolitical risks, and fragilities in asset 
valuations underscore the need for strong prudential 
oversight to protect financial stability. In the context of 
the Middle East conflict and its adverse effects on sov-
ereign risk premiums, financial market volatility, and 
the stability of financial institutions, countries with 
significant exposure to the war should devote adequate 
resources to identifying, quantifying, and managing 
these risks. Policymakers should be ready to deploy 
contingency plans against a wide range of shocks and 
outcomes, including by conducting scenario analysis 
that contemplates different paths for the hostilities in 
the Middle East. Macroprudential policies and over-
sight of nonbank financial institutions should curb risk 
taking and fiscal-financial linkages. Preserving suffi-
cient monetary and fiscal policy space and maintaining 
adequate liquidity, capital, and international reserve 
buffers remain essential.
Upholding Debt Sustainability
Protecting the vulnerable while staying disciplined. The 
increase in salient prices—such as those for energy and 
food—has renewed calls for supporting households 
and firms, as many countries did in the aftermath of 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Fiscal responses to the 
Middle East conflict should heed the lessons learned 
from that episode and ideally adhere to first principles 
of limiting distortion of price signals and keeping a 
fiscal and monetary policy mix consistent with price 
stability. In principle, and under an exceptional set 
of conditions—that the commodity price shock is 
temporary, pass-through from headline inflation to 
core is strong, economic overheating is low, spillovers 
to global commodity markets are small, and there is 
available fiscal space—temporary fiscal measures in 
the form of subsidies, tax cuts, and price caps can help 
prevent the amplification of large cost-push shocks and 
smooth inflation. In practice, however, those condi-
tions are difficult to ascertain in real time and, even 
when they are satisfied, such measures are often regres-
sive, fiscally costly, and politically difficult to roll back. 
Hence, discretionary fiscal support should typically 
be avoided. If the cost-of-living squeeze is drastic and 
some support is unavoidable, as it could very well be 
if the severe scenario materializes, it should be timely, 
explicitly temporary, and channeled through tightly 
targeted transfers to the most vulnerable, with clear 
sunset clauses and identified offsets through reduc-
tions in nonpriority spending or through new revenue 
measures, particularly where fiscal space is limited. For 
economies experiencing increased fiscal room—for 
example, because of windfalls from recent swings in 
commodity prices—maintaining fiscal discipline is 
essential to ensure that the gains are used prudently 
and consistently within a coherent medium-term fiscal 
framework with debt sustainability at its core.
Replenishing buffers. Rebuilding fiscal buffers is 
crucial given high public debt levels, eroded fiscal 
space following a sequence of global shocks, uncer-
tainty surrounding the outcome of the latest conflict, 
and pressing spending needs. Credible medium-term 
fiscal consolidation—supported by fiscal transpar-
ency and clear communication (April 2026 Fiscal 
Monitor)—should be grounded in realistic assessments 
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
19
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
of long-term spending pressures while maintaining a 
focus on growth-friendly adjustment (October 2025 
Fiscal Monitor). Dependence on financial repression, 
monetary financing, or benign market sentiment 
would carry significant macrofinancial risks and should 
be avoided. Governments should strengthen revenues 
through base broadening and improved tax admin-
istration, enhance spending efficiency, and reorient 
expenditures toward high-multiplier areas such as 
infrastructure, skills development, and well-targeted 
social protection while crowding in private investment. 
Strong fiscal frameworks, credible fiscal rules, indepen-
dent fiscal institutions, and prudent debt management 
practices are central to supporting these efforts. The 
mix of expenditure rationalization and revenue mobi-
lization should be calibrated to country circumstances. 
High-debt countries, in particular, might need to limit 
state-financed services, better target social spending, 
and explicitly integrate interest payment risks into 
fiscal planning. In high-debt low-income countries 
facing refinancing and rollover risks, international 
cooperation, timely concessional financing, and debt 
resolution might be needed.
Promoting Medium-Term Growth
Mobilizing labor. Policymakers should seek to raise 
labor utilization and job creation, which would also 
help ease macroeconomic trade-offs and support 
fiscal sustainability. Labor market institutions should 
promote mobility and increase matching efficiency, 
supported by measures that help workers reallocate and 
stay skill-ready for a job market reshaped by AI. Por-
table benefits across jobs and contract types, together 
with affordable childcare and parental leave, can 
raise labor market participation—particularly among 
women—and smooth income risks during transitions. 
Pension and retirement systems should support partic-
ipation and well-being among older workers through 
flexibility and actuarially fair incentives, including vol-
untary part-time work and gradual retirement options 
(see Chapter 2 of the April 2025 WEO). Migration 
policies aligned with domestic skill shortages can help 
alleviate bottlenecks while safeguarding domestic work-
ers (see Chapter 3 of the April 2025 WEO).
Implementing smarter regulation. Reduction of ineffi-
cient regulations and constraints through well-targeted 
and carefully sequenced deregulation can lift imped-
iments to entrepreneurship, investment, and innova-
tion. Efforts should focus on promoting competition, 
broadening access to finance, and increasing the 
efficiency of capital allocation to stimulate risk sharing 
and productivity growth (see Chapter 3 of the April 
2024 WEO). These measures, however, must not come 
at the expense of prudential standards or macrofinan-
cial stability, as premature or uncoordinated reforms 
could heighten vulnerabilities and trigger destabilizing 
boom-bust cycles.
Harnessing technological progress. Digitalization and 
AI can accelerate productivity growth and expand 
potential output. To fully capture the associated 
gains, complementary measures are needed, including 
investments in skills, energy, and digital infrastructure; 
competitive markets; and robust frameworks for data 
governance and cybersecurity (Gopinath 2023). Poli-
cies that encourage the diffusion and adoption of new 
technologies should accompany traditional support 
for research and development, while competition and 
product market reforms can facilitate the reallocation 
of resources toward more productive firms. Where 
trade or technological shocks are concentrated, targeted 
and time-bound adjustment assistance, including 
training, relocation support, and wage insurance, is 
preferable to open-ended protectionist measures.
Fostering energy transition. Adoption of renewable 
and energy-efficient systems can deliver multiple ben-
efits, supporting economies in facing both the current 
challenges and longer-term ones. Actions to acceler-
ate energy transition can help contain the impact on 
energy prices and enhance resilience to future shocks 
by improving energy security. They can also bring 
climate change mitigation goals within closer reach 
and prepare countries for increased risks from cli-
mate-change-related extreme weather events.
Addressing domestic imbalances. Taking actions to 
correct domestic imbalances helps lay a foundation for 
sustainable growth at home. Incidentally, it also helps 
on the external front by reducing global imbalances 
(see the 2025 External Sector Report; IMF 2026a). 
Hence, it is one of those rare cases in which policy 
actions can deliver on two fronts rather than impose 
trade-offs. In China, continued progress toward a 
more consumption-led growth model would help 
narrow external surpluses. Near-term fiscal support 
should focus on boosting household consumption and 
stabilizing the property sector, while medium-term 
sustainability will require addressing the overhang of 
local government debt. In the United States, credible 
fiscal consolidation would help moderate demand 
pressures and limit associated global spillovers. In the 
EU, further deepening of the single market, alongside 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
20
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
growth-enhancing reforms to stimulate private invest-
ment, would support more resilient and sustainable 
growth.
Restoring Predictable International Economic 
Rules
Advancing efforts to resolve tensions and promote 
trade. Clear, transparent, and coherent trade policy 
frameworks are essential to reduce uncertainty, limit 
volatility, and anchor expectations. Pragmatic cooper-
ation can be critical for containing adjustment costs 
and lowering distortive barriers to trade and invest-
ment flows. This includes safeguarding key global 
commons and updating international rules to reflect 
structural shifts in the global economy—including a 
growing share of services—and to align with poli-
cies that bolster job growth, the green transition, or 
supply-chain resilience. Modernization of trade rules 
should be targeted and proportionate, focusing on 
clearly identified cross-border spillovers and respect-
ing legitimate prudential objectives. Negotiations at 
bilateral, regional, and plurilateral levels should aim to 
reduce frictions, remain open to new participants, and 
avoid discriminatory provisions that raise barriers to 
third parties. They should also steer clear of distortive 
arrangements—such as purchase commitments and 
quantitative restrictions—that are unlikely to address 
external imbalances stemming from domestic saving 
and investment dynamics. Policymakers should also 
avoid export controls and barriers to cross-border 
trade that would exacerbate supply disruptions, 
including those associated with the war in the 
Middle East. 
Promoting effective international cooperation. Interna-
tional cooperation will be essential in addressing both 
the immediate threats from the Middle East conflict 
and longer-term challenges. In countries facing refugee 
inflows, integration support should be adequately 
funded with strong international contributions rather 
than be left to host countries, which may not have the 
fiscal space to support it. Access to emergency liquid-
ity, including that provided through IMF facilities, 
is a crucial backstop against international financial 
spillovers. For some countries at risk of debt distress, 
liquidity support will not suffice, and a timely and 
orderly debt resolution process is the best way to 
contain the economic fallout. Continued progress in 
operationalizing international sovereign debt resolu-
tion mechanisms—including the Group of Twenty 
(G20) Common Framework—and greater conver-
gence of practices through the Global Sovereign Debt 
Roundtable can make necessary restructuring more 
predictable and less costly.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
21
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Higher tariffs and policy uncertainty were projected 
to have a significant impact on global activity in 2025. 
In the April 2025 World Economic Outlook (WEO) ref-
erence forecast—the first WEO projections to incor-
porate these two factors—global growth was projected 
to slow by 0.5 percentage point to 2.8 percent in 
2025. Eventually, global GDP growth was 3.4 percent 
in 2025, 0.6 percentage point stronger than expected.
The resilience of global growth reflects not only 
forecast errors and other unobserved variables, but also 
a combination of factors that included lower tariffs 
than announced in early April 2025 and tailwinds 
such as fiscal policy, financial conditions, and artificial 
intelligence (AI) investment. While the WEO global 
growth forecast is the outcome of a bottom-up 
exercise, simulations conducted using the IMF’s 
Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF) model 
provide a top-down perspective on what mattered and 
by how much.
Headwinds as Projected in April 2025
The April 2025 WEO reference forecast was based 
on information available up to April 4, 2025. It incor-
porated a rise in the statutory US tariff rate to about 
25 percent, alongside countermeasures from Canada 
and China. Trade policy uncertainty had also increased 
markedly, contributing to weaker investment incen-
tives and tighter financial conditions. These were only 
partly offset by fiscal stimulus announced in China 
and Germany. Taken together, these factors reduced 
global growth by 0.6 percentage point in 2025, close 
to the downward revision in the April 2025 WEO 
(Figure 1.1.1). 
Tailwinds since April 2025
Reduced impact of tariffs. US firms and households 
front-loading foreign goods purchases in early 2025 
in anticipation of higher tariffs and prices provided a 
small temporary boost to activity in some economies. 
The effective statutory tariff rate was reduced to about 
18 percent by the end of the year, reflecting bilateral 
trade agreements and the introduction of exemp-
tions. Countermeasures by trading partners were also 
scaled back. The actual collected tariff rate has been 
persistently below the effective statutory tariff rate 
(Gopinath and Neiman 2026) and was about half 
the announced rate in December 2025. While the 
gap may partly reflect shipment lags, which ought to 
The author of this box is Chris Jackson.
dissipate, other factors such as greater use of prefer-
ential trade agreements and shifts in the composition 
of imports may prove more persistent and reflect the 
adaptability of the private sector. 
Accommodative financial conditions. Despite an 
initial tightening in April, financial conditions eased 
over the remainder of 2025: Equity prices rose while 
sovereign spreads narrowed in many emerging markets. 
This may have reflected some abatement of the uncer-
tainty shock and improved risk sentiment, includ-
ing that around AI. The US dollar depreciated by 
6 percent between April 1 and the end of December, 
in contrast to the appreciation typically expected after 
a persistent increase in US tariffs. While the sources 
of this depreciation—including an increased risk 
premium on the US dollar and hedging demand—
may have reflected medium-term risks, it provided 
near-term monetary policy space and strengthened 
balance sheets in emerging market and developing 
economies (Juselius, Wooldridge, and Xia 2025) and 
News before
April 2025
News after
April 2025
Figure 1.1.1.  News in 2025 and World GDP 
Growth
(Percent)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AI = artificial intelligence; CTR = collected tariff rate; 
ESTR = effective statutory tariff rate; WEO = World Economic 
Outlook.
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Fiscal: Apr. 2025 WEO
Tariff: Apr. 2025 WEO
Change in ESTR
Lower CTR
Financial conditions and
US dollar depreciation
Uncertainty: Apr. 2025 WEO
Front-loading
Fiscal
AI investment
Box 1.1. Explaining the Resilience of Global Growth in 2025
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
22
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
boosted competitiveness in economies with currencies 
pegged or closely linked to the US dollar. Historically, 
a weaker US dollar is associated with stronger GDP 
growth in emerging markets (Figure 1.1.2). 
Fiscal support. In addition to the major fiscal 
packages incorporated in the April 2025 WEO, the 
United States passed the One Big Beautiful Bill Act in 
July 2025, which also renewed expiring provisions in 
the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, providing support to 
activity in 2025. 
Investment in artificial intelligence. Technology 
investment, related to AI, added an estimated 
0.5 percentage point to US GDP growth in 2025. The 
import-intensive nature of this investment implied 
large spillovers to some parts of the world, notably 
Asia. The estimates of the boost from AI since April 
2025 do not include an impact on general productiv-
ity from the adoption of AI by other businesses. 
Tallying the Net Effect
Together, these factors added an estimated 
0.6 percentage point to global growth in 2025, close 
to the upward revision in the latest forecasts compared 
with those in the April 2025 WEO. About a quarter 
of the gain came from a lower-than-expected impact of 
tariffs, while the remainder came from other tailwinds. 
These factors offset the headwinds incorporated in 
the April 2025 WEO, with the total impact close to 
zero. This is somewhat below the upward revision of 
0.2 percentage point to the growth forecast compared 
with that in the October 2024 WEO, suggesting that, 
alongside these factors (and the usual errors and other 
unobserved variables that typically explain the diver-
gence of actual outcomes from forecasts), there may be 
other country-specific factors at play. 
A Revival in US Productivity?
In the United States, acceleration in productivity 
growth since the pandemic is an additional factor that 
could explain the positive growth surprises. Growth in 
output per hour worked has shown strength both rela-
tive to that in other economies (Chapter 1 of the April 
2025 WEO) and relative to its own history (Jefferson 
2026), averaging 2.2 percent every year since 2020 
compared with a 1.5 percent annual pace over the 
previous business cycle (2009–19). 
While some of this strength may reflect one-off fac-
tors, other drivers may signal longer-lasting, structural 
shifts (Cline, Kahn, and Rich 2025). Investment in 
labor-saving technologies during pandemic-era labor 
shortages, as well as reallocation of labor across sectors 
and increased flexibility to work remotely, may have 
brought efficiency gains. The surge in new business 
formation during the pandemic may have changed 
the composition of businesses toward more innovative 
and more productive types and bolstered competition 
(Dao and Platzer 2024). Fiscal policy over the past 
few years has supported investment in infrastructure 
and increased tax incentives for private investment. 
Measurement challenges associated with a concept 
that is not directly observable aside, compositional 
issues such as removal of lower-wage workers from the 
workforce—along with temporary cyclical effects such 
as increased capacity utilization—could generate noise 
and significant revisions to past data (Fernald and Li 
2024; Gimbel 2026). It may be too early, though, for 
the benefits of AI adoption to show up materially in 
the data. While AI adoption indeed correlates with 
faster productivity growth across sectors, it explains lit-
tle of the aggregate gain in productivity (Çakır Melek 
and Miller 2026). AI may not be the major force 
behind stronger productivity growth yet—and is not 
part of the reference forecast—but may become so in 
the future as adoption of AI among sectors broadens.
Unconditional
Conditional on 
weak US dollar
Figure 1.1.2.  Correlation between US Dollar 
and Emerging Market Growth
(Density)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Weak US dollar” is defined as a depreciation of at least 
5 percent in Bloomberg’s US dollar index (USDX) during 2020, 
with GDP growth measured as the one-year-ahead outcome 
following the depreciation. Both unconditional and conditional 
series are estimated over 1990–2025. The density functions are 
computed using the Epanechnikov kernel method.
Box 1.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
23
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
The growth of trade in services has outstripped 
that of trade in goods during recent decades. 
Between 1985 and 2024, services exports as a share 
of world GDP expanded by 150 percent, com-
pared with 60 percent for exports of goods, defying 
the post-2008 “slowbalization” in goods trade 
(Figure 1.2.1). While goods still account for more 
than 70 percent of global trade, structural forces 
could push services trade higher in the years ahead.
For one, geography is becoming less of a barrier 
to services trade. Despite improvements in trans-
portation technologies, distance remains a powerful 
force in shaping goods trade (Disdier and Head 
2008). A simple gravity model—regressing bilateral 
trade on market size and distance—explains about 
63 percent of the variation in goods trade patterns 
in 2019, a percentage comparable to that for the 
early 2000s. While services trade remains harder 
to measure than goods trade, evidence from a new 
research dataset tells a different story for services 
(Figure 1.2.2). In the early 2000s, a 1 percent 
increase in geographic distance was associated with 
a 0.63 percent decline in bilateral trade—the same 
as for goods. This had fallen to 0.52 percent in 
2022–23. 
Two forces are driving this change. First, the 
composition of services trade has shifted dramati-
cally. Transportation and travel once dominated—
both tightly bound to the physical movement of 
goods and people—but their share fell from about 
70 percent in 2000 to less than 40 percent in 
2023. Most recent growth has come from “modern 
services”—primarily financial, information tech-
nology (IT), and business services in broadly equal 
measure. These modern services are less constrained 
by distance. Second, advancements in information 
and communications technology, accelerated by 
the pandemic, have made previously nontradable 
services tradable (Baldwin 2016). Digital platforms, 
cloud computing, and remote delivery have reduced 
the need for proximity of suppliers and consumers 
and fundamentally altered what can be supplied 
across borders. 
The authors of this box are Nan Li and Robert Zymek.
Services trade has also proved resilient to 
rising geopolitical tensions. Geopolitical distance 
between countries—measured by the degree of 
their disagreement in UN General Assembly 
voting—adversely affects their bilateral goods trade 
intensity, and this effect has intensified since 2016 
(Figure 1.2.3). There is no similar trend for services 
trade. While some modern services—most notably 
IT and intellectual property licensing—show some 
sensitivity to geopolitical alignment, aggregate 
services trade remains largely unaffected, possibly 
because it is harder to target services trade with 
traditional protection tools such as tariffs, quotas, 
and import bans.
The untapped potential is particularly large 
for emerging markets. Although services have 
accounted for two-thirds of GDP growth in these 
economies over the past three decades, this growth 
has been domestic rather than export led (Kose 
and Ohnsorge 2024). The structure of global trade 
networks illustrates this pattern. While goods trade 
is dominated by the world’s largest economies—the 
United States, China, Germany, and Japan—with 
Goods
Services (right scale)
Figure 1.2.1.  World Exports
(Percent of world GDP; dotted = pre-GFC trend; 
dashed = April 2026 WEO reference forecast)
10
45
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
12
2
4
6
8
10
1985
90
95
2000
05
10
15
20
25
30
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dotted lines represent respective linear trends based 
on 1985–2008 data prior to the global financial crisis (GFC). 
Dashed lines 2025 and on represent April 2026 WEO reference 
forecasts. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
Box 1.2. Services Trade: An Emerging Engine for Global Growth
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
24
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
strong geographic clustering, services trade is more 
concentrated among advanced economies. The 
United States remains central, but smaller advanced 
economies such as Ireland and The Netherlands 
play a larger role than would be expected given 
their economic size. Meanwhile, emerging mar-
kets that are major players in goods trade, such as 
China, occupy a much smaller position in services 
trade. This presents both an opportunity and a 
challenge: Economic size and geography matter less, 
providing an opening for smaller, distant econo-
mies, yet despite some recent growth, many emerg-
ing markets remain peripheral to global services 
flows (Li and others 2025). 
The potential gains from services trade can be 
substantial. Services exporters are more productive 
and pay higher wages than nonexporters, offering 
better jobs (Breinlich and Criscuolo 2011). Firms 
that export both goods and services outperform 
those focusing on goods alone (Ariu, Mayneris, and 
Parenti 2020; Berlingieri, Marcolin, and Ornelas 
2025), suggesting that services exports can reinforce 
manufacturing development. Digital transformation 
creates leapfrogging opportunities by reducing reli-
ance on traditional physical infrastructure.
Realizing these benefits requires addressing trade 
barriers. Unlike goods trade, in which tariffs are a 
major obstacle, services trade faces a range of barri-
ers relating to infrastructure, skills, and behind-the-
border regulatory barriers: restrictions on foreign 
ownership, licensing requirements, local-presence 
requirements, and regulatory standards. These 
regulatory barriers can be eased through multilateral 
efforts or deeper bilateral and regional integration 
frameworks. Complementary investments in digital 
infrastructure, skills development, and regulatory 
quality can help countries better capture the gains 
from expanding services trade.
Figure 1.2.3.  Impact of Geopolitical Distance 
on Bilateral Trade
(Percent)
1. Goods
−14
4
−8
−2
−12
−6
0
−10
−4
2
−14
4
−8
−2
−12
−6
0
−10
−4
2
2004–06
07–09
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–21
22—23
2. Services
2004–06
07–09
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–21
22–23
Sources: Centre d’Études Prospectives et d’Informations 
Internationales; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Based on a panel estimation of a structural gravity model 
with standard controls; importer-time, exporter-time, and 
importer-exporter fixed effects; and a time-varying coefficient 
on geopolitical distance. Horizontal lines reflect the values in 
2004–06 for each panel. Whiskers reflect 95 percent confidence 
bands. “Geopolitical distance” is measured as the ideal-point 
distance between trade partners. See Li and others (2025) for 
details.
Figure 1.2.2.  Impact of Geographic Distance 
on Bilateral Trade
(Percent)
1. Goods
−0.8
−0.4
−0.7
−0.6
−0.5
2004–06
07–09
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–21
22—23
2. Services
−0.8
−0.4
−0.7
−0.6
−0.5
2004–06
07–09
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–21
22–23
Sources: Centre d’Études Prospectives et d’Informations 
Internationales; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Based on repeated cross-sectional estimations of a 
structural gravity model with standard controls and importer 
and exporter fixed effects. Horizontal lines reflect the values in 
2004–06 for each panel. Whiskers reflect 95 percent confidence 
bands. “Geographic distance” is the weighted average distance 
between trade partners’ most populous cities. See Li and others 
(2025) for details.
Box 1.2 (continued)
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
25
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
This box uses the IMF’s Group of Twenty (G20) 
model to derive confidence bands around the World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) reference forecast and the 
IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF) 
model to assess the impact of plausible shocks and 
policies that are not included in the current refer-
ence forecast. Three scenarios are considered: (A) a 
deepening of the divergent forces currently shaping the 
outlook; (B) a reversal of the ongoing boom related to 
artificial intelligence (AI), coupled with a global risk-
off episode; and (C) a reform scenario. Scenario A is 
neutral for activity over the WEO horizon but deepens 
global imbalances; scenario B is negative for activity 
but reduces imbalances; and scenario C is positive for 
activity and reduces imbalances. These scenarios are 
distinct from and complement the commodity shock 
scenario presented in the chapter text.
Confidence Bands
The G20 model is used to generate distributions 
around the reference forecast by drawing on shocks 
recovered from the historical data (Andrle and Hunt 
2020). By oversampling years with negative shocks 
to growth, the distribution is tilted to align with the 
growth-at-risk assessment presented in the April 2026 
Global Financial Stability Report; prominence has been 
given in this exercise to historical oil price episodes of 
the 1970s.
Panels 1 and 2 in Figure 1.3.1 show the resulting 
distributions for US growth and headline infla-
tion. The probability that a recession will occur in 
2026—corresponding to an annual growth rate below 
1 percent, consistent with a relatively mild recession 
like that in 2001 and starting in the second quarter—
is assessed at about 35 percent, somewhat higher than 
the recession probability estimated in the October 
2025 WEO (at 30 percent). The probability that 
2026 US headline inflation will rise above 4 percent is 
considerably higher, about 33 percent, compared with 
17 percent in October 2025. 
The authors of this box are Jared Bebee, Benjamin Carton, 
Chris Jackson, Gene Kindberg-Hanlon, Dirk Muir, Rafael 
Portillo, Pedro Rodriguez, Philippe Wingender, and Rachel 
Zhang.
WEO reference forecast
Figure 1.3.1.  Forecast Uncertainty around 
Global Growth and Inflation Projections
(Percent)
1. US GDP Growth
−2
6
0
4
2
2025
27
29
26
28
30
31
2. US Headline Inflation
0
8
2
6
4
2025
27
29
26
28
30
31
3. Global GDP Growth
0
6
2
4
2025
27
29
26
28
30
31
4. Global Headline Inflation
2025
27
29
26
28
30
31
0
10
2
6
4
8
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Each shade of blue represents a 5 percentage point 
probability interval. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
Box 1.3. Risk Assessment Surrounding the Reference Forecast
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
26
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Panels 3 and 4 in Figure 1.3.1 show the distribu-
tions for global growth and headline inflation. While 
additional quarterly data should have reduced forecast 
uncertainty relative to the October assessment, the 
probability that global growth in 2026 will fall below 
2 percent has not changed and remains elevated at 
25 percent, reflecting increased risks to activity in 
the remainder of the year. The probability that 2026 
global headline inflation will rise above 5 percent is 
considerably higher at 38 percent (25 percent). In 
summary, downside risks to growth and upside risks to 
inflation have increased relative to October 2025.
Scenarios 
The scenarios assume that monetary policy responds 
endogenously, with floating exchange rates in most 
regions. In scenarios A and B, China’s currency adjust-
ment is limited. In scenario C, the renminbi adjusts 
flexibly. Automatic stabilizers operate on the fiscal side. 
Layers whose names are identified with an asterisk in 
the following discussion are similar to layers consid-
ered in either April or October 2025.
Scenario A: The Divide Widens
Adoption of AI in the United States deepens, trigger-
ing an additional surge in US business investment to 
capture higher-than-expected productivity from AI 
technologies. The surge is concentrated in computing 
and in infrastructure. Investment rises 5 percent above 
the reference forecast by 2030 and stays 2 percent 
higher beyond that. Because many AI-related capital 
goods are sourced from emerging Asia, the import 
intensity of US investment increases. 
The unbalanced nature of economic activity in China 
becomes more pronounced. The scenario consid-
ers a stylized policy mix that incentivizes industrial 
production but hampers consumption. Subsidies for 
employment in the tradables sector gradually increase 
by 4 percent of GDP over the WEO horizon, relative 
to the reference forecast, offset by lower transfers to 
households. Subsidies result in a gradual loss of pro-
ductivity in the tradables sector (0.5 percent). 
Lower productivity in Europe* gets entrenched. 
Starting in 2026, total factor productivity growth 
in the euro area picks up less than expected and is 
0.1 percentage point lower per year over five years, 
relative to the reference forecast. Investment-specific 
productivity growth declines by 0.05 percentage point 
per year over the same period. Productivity growth 
returns to the level in the reference forecast after 2030, 
but the effect on productivity is permanent. 
Lackluster growth prospects result in a persistent 
increase in the private saving rate, by 1 percentage 
point by 2030.
The above layers trigger a ratcheting up in tariffs 
among China, the euro area, and the United States. 
Starting in mid-2026, these three regions permanently 
impose additional tariffs of 20 percentage points on all 
trade among them. 
Scenario B: AI Disappoints, Risk Off Ensues
A reappraisal of expected productivity gains from 
AI leads to a sharp decline in real investment in the 
technology sector. The decline is concentrated in the 
United States. The fall in total investment, of 3 percent 
in 2026 relative to the reference forecast, unwinds the 
recent run-up in technology-related investment. The 
direct decline in investment elsewhere is more limited, 
but as in scenario A, the import intensity of invest-
ment is higher than usual.
The scenario also includes a layer of lower asset prices 
and tighter financial conditions. Equity prices in the 
United States fall by 20 percent in 2026, about half 
the size of the correction after the dot-com bubble 
burst in the early 2000s. Equities outside the United 
States fall by 15 percent, given lower exposure to the 
technology sector. The correction triggers a broader 
tightening in financial conditions and a loss of risk 
appetite. Corporate risk premiums temporarily rise 
by 75 basis points in the United States, 50 basis 
points in other advanced economies and China, and 
75–100 basis points in other emerging markets. 
The reduced risk appetite spills over to sovereign 
bond markets, leading to a moderate, temporary increase 
in term premiums of 30–50 basis points in advanced 
economies and 75–100 basis points in emerging 
markets. Finally, the concentration of the shock in 
the United States manifests as less appetite for US assets 
and puts downward pressure on the US dollar. These 
shocks are assumed to fade over the WEO horizon.
Scenario C: Reforms Reset Economies
In China, the reset involves a short-term fiscal 
expansion of about 0.5 percent of GDP, including 
higher social spending that elicits a reduction in the 
saving rate and measures to support residential invest-
ment, followed by a gradual consolidation. Industrial 
policy support is cut in half and coupled with efforts 
to increase business dynamism, boosting productivity 
(IMF 2026b). 
In the euro area,* public investment increases 
relative to the reference forecast. It reaches 1 percent 
Box 1.3 (continued)
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
27
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
of GDP by 2027, stays at that level until 2030, and 
remains permanently higher by 0.4 percent after that. 
Over the WEO horizon, about two-thirds of the surge 
in spending is financed by higher deficits. From 2030 
onward, there is a reallocation of existing spending, 
such that debt ratios gradually return to their level 
in the reference forecast. Further progress toward the 
Capital Market Union results in a permanent reduc-
tion in corporate financing costs of 25 basis points.
The United States* embarks on fiscal reforms to 
reduce inefficiencies from poorly targeted tax expen-
ditures, shifts from labor to consumption taxes, and 
contains health care costs. Government consumption is 
also permanently reduced. Increases in fiscal sustainabil-
ity lead to a reduction in the term premium of 50 basis 
points starting in 2026. The overall fiscal deficit gradu-
ally decreases by 1 percent of GDP after five years. 
Trade policies* also reset. Tariffs imposed since 
January 2025 are permanently removed, reducing 
effective tariff rates on US imports by about 
10 percentage points relative to the reference forecast. 
Trading partners also remove tariffs on US exports, 
with US exports to China seeing a decrease in effective 
tariff rates of about 10 percentage points. Greater 
predictability in trade arrangements reduces uncer-
tainty relative to the reference forecast. The reduction 
is about the absolute size of the spike observed in 
2018–19 in the global economic policy uncertainty 
measure in Davis (2016). 
Impact on the World Economy
Figures 1.3.2, 1.3.3, and 1.3.4 present the effects, 
for scenarios A, B, and C, on the level of GDP during 
2026–30 for China, the United States, the euro area, 
and the world. Figure 1.3.5 shows the effects of the 
scenarios on the current account balances of the three 
regions and on China’s real effective exchange rate. 
Scenario A
The AI-driven surge is moderately expansionary 
for the United States. GDP increases by 0.2 percent 
relative to the reference forecast in 2026 (0.5 percent 
in 2027). US investment increases by 2–4 percent 
in 2026–27, but a large part of the impulse goes to 
imports (2–3 percent). Higher absorption widens the 
US current account deficit; the dollar depreciates in 
real and nominal terms (about 3 percent). US inflation 
rises modestly, by 10–20 basis points. The increase 
in the federal funds rate is therefore small, less than 
25 basis points by 2027. International spillovers are 
positive, with global output rising by 0.3 percent 
in 2026–27. Emerging Asia, as the direct recipient 
of much of the surge in US imports, experiences an 
increase in output of 0.3–0.4 percent. China also ben-
efits in the short term, through supply chain linkages 
with the rest of Asia and because the management of 
US-led AI surge
Add China export-led growth
Add euro area weak productivity
Add China—euro area—US tariff war
Figure 1.3.2.  Impact of Scenario A on GDP
(Percent deviation from reference forecast)
1. United States
−1
2
0
1
−3
−2
1
−1
0
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
2. Euro Area
−1.0
1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
3. China
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
−0.5
1.0
0
0.5
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
4. World
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: “Long term” is at least 50 years ahead. AI = artificial 
intelligence.
Box 1.3 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
28
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Unwinding AI-related investment
Add lower equity prices, tighter financial conditions
Add term premium and US dollar shock
Figure 1.3.3.  Impact of Scenario B on GDP
(Percent deviation from reference forecast)
1. United States
−2
1
−1
0
2025
26
28
29
27
30
2. Euro Area
−1.5
−1.0
1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
2025
26
28
29
27
30
3. China
2025
26
28
29
27
30
−1.0
0.5
−0.5
0
4. World
2025
26
28
29
27
30
−1.5
−1.0
0.5
−0.5
0
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: AI = artificial intelligence.
China broad reform
Add euro area productivity reforms
Add US fiscal reform
Add tariff rollback (with TPU)
Figure 1.3.4.  Impact of Scenario C on GDP
(Percent deviation from reference forecast)
1. United States
−0.5
2.0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
−0.5
3.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
3.0
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
2. Euro Area
0
3.5
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
3.0
3. China
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
0
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
4. World
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: “Long term” is at least 50 years ahead. TPU = trade policy 
uncertainty.
Box 1.3 (continued)
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
29
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
the exchange rate with respect to the dollar implies 
that the renminbi depreciates in real terms. 
Unbalanced activity in China translates into mod-
est GDP gains, 0.5 percent by 2030, relative to the 
reference forecast. The policy mix widens imbalances in 
the tradables sector and the economy more broadly, as 
it reduces production costs but also constrains domestic 
demand. Export prices gradually fall, contributing to 
a decrease in China’s terms of trade of 5 percent by 
2030. Inflation declines, by 40 basis points by 2028, 
and the renminbi depreciates in real terms. Real exports 
increase, reaching 5.5 percent above the reference 
forecast by 2030, while imports decrease by 3 percent. 
The boost to activity is limited by the (small) decline 
in productivity and by subdued domestic demand. The 
latter is also reflected in an increase in the private sav-
ing rate, by 1 percent of GDP. China’s current account 
surplus increases by a similar amount (from this layer 
alone). Spillovers to other regions are slightly positive 
but very small. Some manufacturing sectors outside 
China are negatively affected, while others benefit from 
cheaper intermediate goods. Investment in the rest of 
the world benefits from a small reduction in global real 
interest rates (less than 10 basis points). 
Lower productivity in Europe reduces the region’s 
GDP by 1 percent by 2030. Investment and con-
sumption decline by 1.5 and 3 percent, respectively, 
over the same period. The impact on inflation and 
monetary policy is limited since demand falls in lock-
step with potential. The euro area’s current account 
surplus increases by 0.7 percent of GDP. International 
spillovers are limited. 
The tariff ratcheting layer reduces global activity but 
does not affect imbalances. The impact on activity is 
largest for China and the euro area, about 0.75 per-
cent in 2026; US GDP declines by 0.4 percent. 
Regions not directly tariffed benefit in the short term 
through trade diversion, but the medium- to long-
term impact is uniformly negative across countries. 
Effects also build over time through lower capital accu-
mulation. Tariffs reduce global output by 0.2 percent 
in 2026 and 0.7 percent in the long term. The impact 
on current accounts is negligible. Inflation in tariffed 
countries increases by 10–20 basis points in 2026–27, 
but disinflationary pressures dominate after 2027 and 
are most evident in China. 
The combined effect from the scenario is clearly neg-
ative for the euro area, mildly negative for China, and 
mildly positive for the United States. While the impact 
on global activity is broadly neutral, the impact on 
imbalances is large. Current account surpluses in the 
euro area and China widen further. The United States 
experiences an equally large increase in its current 
account deficit. 
Scenario B
The AI correction causes a decrease in US investment 
of 3–4 percent in 2026–27. Greater import intensity 
mitigates the direct impact on the United States 
somewhat, with GDP decreasing by 0.3 percent in 
2026 and 0.6 percent in 2027, relative to the reference 
forecast. Activity in Asia (China, Japan, and emerging 
Asia) decreases by 0.2–0.4 percent of GDP, and global 
output decreases by 0.2–0.3 percent, in 2026–27. 
The correction in asset prices and tightening in finan-
cial conditions amplify the shock. Wealth effects from 
lower asset prices lead to a decrease in US consump-
tion of 1 percent of GDP in 2026. Effects on con-
sumption in other countries are substantial, between 
0.5–0.7 percent. The hit to investment is amplified 
by lower asset prices and higher corporate spreads. 
Global investment declines by about 1.5 percent, with 
the United States and emerging markets experiencing 
larger declines. This layer subtracts 0.6–0.7 percent 
from global output in 2026–27. 
Additional spillovers to sovereign bond markets and 
US asset demand are shown together in Figure 1.3.3 
but have different effects across countries. Higher term 
premiums subtract 0.3 percent from global GDP in 
2026. Lower demand for US assets is instead globally 
neutral. It leads to a depreciation of the US dollar 
by 6 percent in nominal effective terms, supporting 
external demand for US exports but also adding to the 
tightening in US financial conditions. The positive 
effect of net exports slightly dominates for US GDP. 
China benefits from the depreciation of the US dollar 
through the management of its exchange rate. Other 
regions experience a decrease in GDP from lower 
external demand. 
The combined effect from the scenario is a large 
decrease in US GDP, of 1.5 percent in 2026, relative 
to the reference forecast. Activity in the euro area 
declines by 1 percent, while the impact on China is 
milder (0.3 percent). Global activity is 1.2 percent 
lower. US inflation and policy rates are lower than 
those in the reference forecast, notwithstanding the 
depreciation of the US dollar. Finally, global imbal-
ances are reduced over the WEO horizon. As the 
US experiences a larger shock than other regions, 
and demand for US assets decreases, the US current 
Box 1.3 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
30
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
account balance increases (its deficit decreases) by 
about 1 percent of GDP. The current account sur-
pluses in China and the euro area decrease; in China, 
the immediate impact is mitigated by the temporary 
real depreciation of the renminbi (Figure 1.3.3). 
Scenario C
The reforms in China lower the private saving rate 
by 2 percent, boosting private consumption; help 
rekindle residential investment over 2026–28; and 
raise long-term productivity and potential output 
by close to 2 percent. China’s GDP increases by 
1–2 percent over the WEO horizon, with domestic 
demand providing a boost to inflation (0.7 percent 
during 2027–30). The current account surplus 
decreases by 1.5 percent of GDP from this layer alone. 
A permanently lower saving rate reduces China’s 
demand for foreign assets and, under exchange rate 
flexibility, accounts for the real appreciation of the 
renminbi in the scenario (Figure 1.3.5). 
Euro area reforms raise GDP by 1–1.4 percent in 
2026–27. Inflation increases by close to 30 basis 
points over the WEO horizon, with the policy rate 
increasing by 60 basis points over the same period. 
The buildup in public capital raises productivity and 
potential output. Spillovers to other regions are posi-
tive but small, and the region’s current account surplus 
decreases. 
US fiscal reforms reduce US public debt by 
25 percent of GDP over the long term, increasing 
fiscal sustainability. The combination of growth-
friendly measures and lower premiums lifts GDP by 
0.7 percent in 2026–27. Inflation net of tax effects is 
slightly higher, as are policy rates. Lower fiscal deficits 
contribute to a decrease in the US current account 
balance.
Tariff rollback and reduced uncertainty raise global 
GDP by 0.6 percent in 2026, with effects broadly 
similar across countries. The combined effect of scenario 
C is an increase in global output of 1.2 percent by 
2026 (1.5 percent in the long term) and a reduction 
in global imbalances. 
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Figure 1.3.5.  Impact of Scenarios on Current 
Accounts and Exchange Rates in the United 
States, China, and the Euro Area
1. Current Account: United States
(Percentage point of GDP deviation from 
reference forecast)
−1.5
3.0
0
1.5
2025
26
28
29
27
30
2. Current Account: Euro Area
(Percentage point of GDP deviation from 
reference forecast)
−1.0
−0.5
1.5
0
0.5
1.0
2025
26
28
29
27
30
3. Current Account: China
(Percentage point of GDP deviation from 
reference forecast)
−2
3
−1
0
1
2
2025
26
28
29
27
30
4. Real Effective Exchange Rate: China
(Percent deviation from reference forecast)
−6
9
−3
0
3
6
2025
26
28
29
27
30
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Box 1.3 (continued)
31
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and the Economics of Rare Earths
Compared with the October 2025 World Economic 
Outlook (WEO), the projections for commodity prices 
have been revised sharply upward. The military conflict in 
the Middle East has upended the outlook for energy and 
food as higher oil and gas prices increase the cost of fuels, 
petrochemicals, and fertilizers. Uncertainty surrounding 
the outlook for commodity prices remains very high, with 
risks tilted to the upside. A longer conflict than assumed 
in the WEO reference forecast would delay and substan-
tially complicate the restoration of oil and gas production 
and exports to preconflict levels. At the same time, gold 
and other precious metal prices have retreated from their 
preconflict peaks. Despite elevated geopolitical uncertainty, 
retail investor profit taking—amid upward revisions 
to interest rate expectations and a stronger dollar—has 
reversed the near-parabolic gains recorded in the first 
two months of the year. Supply disruptions have driven 
base metal prices higher in markets already strained by 
strong demand and limited supply. Food prices have also 
increased as cereal prices have rebounded from historical 
lows, mainly as a result of growing weather concerns in 
large producing regions. Should the conflict linger on, 
higher transport and fertilizer prices, together with higher 
demand for biofuel feedstocks, could drive food prices 
higher. This Special Feature also examines the global 
implications of shortages in rare earth element markets, 
showing that such shortages could impose sizable GDP 
losses on importing countries. Avoiding trade tensions 
and restrictions remains the first-best outcome to pro-
mote a steady supply; de-risking supply chains through 
targeted industrial policies is fiscally costly, although 
less so if pursued simultaneously by various importers. 
Commodity Market Developments
Oil prices increased 57.6 percent between August 
2025 and March 2026 to $105.8 per barrel as a result 
The contributors to this Special Feature are Christian Bogmans 
(co-lead), Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, Jorge Miranda Pinto, Jean-Marc 
Natal (team lead), and Andrea Paloschi, with research assistance 
from Francis Cuadros Bloch, Maximiliano Jerez Osses, and Joseph 
Moussa. The Special Feature is based on Bogmans, Cuadros Bloch, 
and others (forthcoming) and Bogmans, Jerez-Osses, and others 
(forthcoming).
of the military conflict in the Middle East. Oil prices 
spiked in March as oil shipments through the Strait of 
Hormuz—a critical choke point with few alternatives 
for rerouting—stopped, curtailing about 8.5 million 
barrels per day (mb/d) of crude oil exports. Usually, 
about 20 mb/d of oil, equivalent to 20 percent of daily 
global oil consumption, flow daily through the strait, 
of which 15 mb/d is crude oil. Major oil-producing 
facilities were also shut down as a precaution or as 
storage ran out or was damaged. Global strategic and 
commercial inventories, standing at a five-year high of 
8 billion barrels, offer only a partial buffer. 
After reaching a peak of $119 on March 10, Brent 
prices retreated following first communication by the 
US administration that it expected the conflict to be 
short-lived and then the announcement of a ceasefire. 
The situation remains fluid and uncertainty is high. 
The futures curve is in steep backwardation (higher 
spot prices than futures prices), indicating supply dis-
ruptions and elevated geopolitical risk (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 2). If the conflict drags on, prospects of quickly 
restoring maritime transit and energy production to 
prewar levels diminish, with obvious ripple effects on 
refined product prices.
Middle East supply disruptions put upward pressure 
on European and Asian natural gas prices. Title Transfer 
Facility (TTF) trading hub prices in Europe rose by 
61 percent between August 2025 and March 2026, 
peaking at $17.7 per million British thermal units 
(MMBtu). Asian liquefied natural gas (LNG) prices 
surged to $20.8 per MMBtu—an 80.6 percent increase 
since August 2025—as more than three-quarters of 
global LNG shipments through the strait (a fifth of 
global seaborne LNG) are destined for Asia. Prospects 
for a quick recovery of gas production and exports 
after the conflict have dimmed dramatically follow-
ing strikes on the Iranian South Pars gas field, which 
prompted retaliatory strikes on Persian Gulf energy 
facilities, including Qatar’s Ras Laffan gas field on 
March 18. At the same time, US Henry Hub prices 
rose by only 4.9 percent to $3 per MMBtu, as US 
LNG exporters are close to capacity, limiting the 
diversion of domestic gas production to LNG plants. 
Futures markets for TTF are in steady backwardation, 
Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and  
the Economics of Rare Earths
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
32
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
reaching $7.5 per MMBtu through 2031, thanks to 
an expected doubling of US export capacities by 2027. 
Henry Hub futures prices are expected to hover around 
$3.5 per MMBtu through 2031. 
Retail traders unwound part of their bets on rising 
prices for precious metals, while supply disruptions put 
upward pressure on base metal prices. The IMF’s metals 
price index jumped 36.6 percent between August 
2025 and March 2026. Prices for precious metals led 
the surge, with gold up 44.4 percent and reaching 
record prices exceeding $5,000 per ounce as inves-
tors sought safe haven assets amid rising geopolitical 
uncertainty and persistent concerns about the dollar. 
These dynamics pushed demand for exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs) for gold to record highs, alongside 
still-robust central bank purchases. Since the onset of 
the conflict, however, broad-based profit taking across 
precious metals—amid upward revisions to interest 
rate expectations and a stronger dollar—has trig-
gered a sharp correction, bringing gold prices back to 
their levels at the start of the year. At the same time, 
supply disruptions have led the increase in the price 
of base metals. Copper prices surged 29.5 percent 
following mining accidents in Chile and Indonesia, 
while aluminum increased 29.8 percent following 
the shutdown of smelters in Iceland, Mozambique, 
and the Middle East (which accounts for roughly 
9 percent of global aluminum production). Futures 
markets for base metals suggest further price increases 
in 2026, indicating resilient demand amid still-fragile 
supply. 
Rising food prices outweighed falling beverage prices, 
lifting the IMF’s food and beverages price index by 
4.7 percent between August 2025 and March 2026. 
Beverage prices plunged by 24.8 percent, led by a 
57.4 percent drop in cocoa prices as favorable weather 
in West Africa boosted supply and inventories while 
global demand softened. Coffee prices fell by 9.9 per-
cent following a record Brazilian harvest and improv-
ing supply conditions in Vietnam. In contrast to 
beverage prices, food prices are expected to increase 
by 6.0 percent in 2026. Cereal prices rebounded from 
historical lows in the first quarter of 2026 owing to 
growing weather concerns in key producing regions, 
while futures prices suggest that higher fuel prices are 
expected to boost demand for biofuel feedstocks such 
as soybean oil. Should the conflict linger on, higher 
transport and gas-derived fertilizer prices, together 
with higher demand for biofuel feedstocks, could 
drive food prices much higher—particularly those for 
cereals. 
The Economics of Rare Earths: Global 
Impact of Shortages and Industrial Policy 
Motivation
Since 2020, successive waves of trade restrictions 
imposed by all major economic blocs have harmed 
international cooperation and growth. In April 2025, 
shortly after the US imposed sizable tariffs on most of 
its trading partners, China—the world’s top producer 
of rare earth elements (REEs)—introduced export 
licensing requirements for seven REEs and REE-based 
permanent magnets, causing temporary but serious 
supply disruptions for manufacturers worldwide. 
Like other hard-to-substitute inputs in 
high-technology manufacturing, produced through 
geographically concentrated supply chains, REE supply 
chains are structurally vulnerable. Tensions around 
these critical inputs have heightened economic security 
concerns and accelerated efforts to reshore and diver-
sify imports of REE production.
As manufacturing regains strategic importance, 
understanding the economics of rare earths has become 
All commodities
Base metals
Precious metals
Food
Energy
October 2024 WEO
April 2025 WEO
October 2025 WEO
April 2026 WEO
Figure 1.SF.1.  Commodity Market Developments
60
100
70
80
90
2. Brent Crude Oil Price Forecasts
(US dollars per barrel)
1. Commodity Prices
(Index, 2016 = 100, US CPI adjusted)
0
400
100
200
300
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, Primary Commodity Price 
System; International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 2, expiration dates are on the x-axis. CPI = consumer price index; 
WEO = World Economic Outlook.
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
2015
32
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
2024
33
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and the Economics of Rare Earths
increasingly urgent. This Special Feature addresses two 
questions: (1) What would be the macroeconomic impact 
of a major REE supply disruption across sectors and coun-
tries? and (2) What would it cost to sufficiently de-risk 
the REE supply chain over the next decade?
Foundations: Rare Earths Market Structure
REEs are a group of 17 chemically similar metals, 
typically divided into two categories based on atomic 
weight: light rare earth elements (LREEs) and heavy rare 
earth elements (HREEs), substantially less abundant 
in the earth’s crust than LREEs. REEs possess unique 
chemical and physical properties—including excep-
tional magnetism and catalytic enhancement—that 
make them valuable inputs across electronic, magnetic, 
optical, and catalytic applications. They are used 
in small quantities and are essential for automotive 
manufacturing (especially electric vehicles), renewable 
energy, oil refineries, defense systems, semiconductors, 
and consumer electronics. Arguably the single most 
important application for rare earths is permanent 
magnets—invented in 1983 by General Motors—in 
which as many as four REEs are combined with iron 
and boron to create a highly magnetic alloy that 
maintains its properties at elevated temperatures. These 
permanent magnets convert electricity into motion 
(or vice versa), making them central to both the clean 
energy transition and advanced manufacturing.
REEs constitute a relatively small commodity 
market, with rare earth oxides (REOs) valued at about 
$6 billion and permanent magnets at approximately 
$25 billion in 2024 (Market Data Forecast 2025). 
As such, the economics of rare earths are increasingly 
driven by just 4 of the 17 elements: the LREEs neo-
dymium and praseodymium and the HREEs terbium 
and dysprosium. These “magnet-4” elements jointly 
comprise 96 percent of the total REO1 market value 
despite representing only 23 percent of REO produc-
tion by weight.2
1“Total REO” represents the sum of all individual rare earth 
oxides (REOs) contained in mined material. It provides a consistent 
measure for comparing rare earth output across mines, deposits, and 
countries.
2This extreme value concentration reflects both strong demand 
for permanent magnets—the largest and fastest-growing application, 
consuming 83 percent of the value of all REOs—and the natural 
composition of rare earth deposits, which yield lower-demand 
elements like lanthanum and cerium in far greater proportions than 
the higher-demand magnet elements neodymium, praseodymium, 
terbium, and dysprosium.
The rare earth supply chain involves multiple 
specialized stages: mining, concentration, separation 
of chemically similar elements through solvent-based 
extraction, and refining to metals or alloys. The 
resulting metals or alloys then serve as inputs for 
downstream manufacturers, including permanent 
magnet producers. The separation stage is particularly 
technically demanding, requiring hundreds of sequen-
tial processing steps, and it is also a pollution-intensive 
process. Establishing new capacity for separation and 
refining—the main stages of REE processing—requires 
billions in capital investment, years of regulatory 
approval, and specialized technical expertise, making 
rapid diversification of processing capacity extremely 
difficult. 
Technical expertise acquired over decades, estab-
lished infrastructure, differences in environmental 
and labor regulations, and subsidies made China the 
dominant world producer of REEs during the 2000s. 
Today, China’s dominance varies significantly by rare 
earth type and supply chain stage. In regard to LREEs, 
diversification in mining reduced China’s share of 
global output from 97 percent at its peak in 2010 to 
58 percent in 2024 (Figure 1.SF.2), but China main-
tains 88 percent of the world’s oxide separation capac-
ity and 93 percent of its metal refining. With respect 
to HREEs, China retains a near monopoly across 
the entire global supply chain: 98 percent of mining 
(including mining out of Myanmar; Figure 1.SF.3, 
panel 2), 97 percent of oxide separation, 95 percent of 
Figure 1.SF.2.  Rare Earth Mining by Country 1998–2024
(Thousands of metric tons per year, in TREO equivalents)
0
50
150
250
350
100
200
300
400
450
1998 2000
02
08
10
12
16
22
24
04
06
14
18
20
Sources: Nassar and others 2023; National Minerals Information Center, US Geological 
Survey, “Rare Earths Statistics and Information”; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: TREO = total rare earth oxide. 
Australia
China
Myanmar
Others
United States
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
34
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
metal refining, and 90 percent of permanent magnet 
production (Bedford 2025).3
This concentration creates potential choke points in 
the supply chain.4 While the geographic concentration 
in HREE mining constitutes an important potential 
choke point, the separation and refining stages consti-
tute the most binding bottlenecks, as nearly all rare 
earth concentrates, regardless of origin, flow through 
Chinese processing facilities. Permanent magnet man-
ufacturing represents yet another stage in the supply 
chain in which China holds a dominant market share 
(90 percent). However, this segment faces lower barri-
ers to capacity expansion: Multiple established magnet 
producers already operate in Japan, the United States, 
and Europe, though typically at a smaller scale than in 
China (Figure 1.SF.3).5 In many applications REEs are 
not truly irreplaceable: Substitutes often exist but come 
with penalties in terms of efficiency, weight, size, or 
cost. Research suggests that the possibilities of substi-
tuting for HREEs are significantly weaker than those 
of substituting for the average element, with HREEs 
scoring 78 out of 100 on a substitutability index (on 
which 100 indicates no adequate substitute exists), 
compared with 57 for non-REEs (Graedel and others 
2015). While certain rare earths have no substitutes, 
others may be partially replaced by inferior alternatives 
given enough time and resources. 
Macroeconomic Impact of Supply Disruptions
Following a special licensing requirement introduced 
by China—mainly for HREEs and related products, 
including permanent magnets—on April 4, 2025, 
there was a sharp global slowdown in permanent mag-
net exports between April and June. Exports of these 
magnets had fallen about 70 percent year over year 
as of May 2025, indicating a system-wide disruption 
3By industry convention, Myanmar’s heavy rare earth element 
(HREE) mining output is often consolidated with China’s, reflecting 
the integration of the two countries’ rare earth sectors through 
upstream investment and downstream processing links.
4A choke point emerges when three conditions align: extreme geo-
graphic concentration in a single country, potential for disruption, 
and barriers to rapid diversification.
5With China’s consumption of REEs, which amounts to 
50–60 percent of its production, taken into account, China’s market 
domination is somewhat less apparent. This is especially the case in 
regard to light rare earth element (LREE) mining, of which China 
absorbs most of its production at home. For all other supply chain 
stages, however, dependence on China remains high (74–96 percent 
of total imports are sourced in China). See Online Annex 1.1, Part 
I. All online annexes are available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/
WEO.
that extended beyond formally controlled products, 
but proved short-lived, with monthly Chinese export 
volumes quickly returning to their positive trend and 
displaying double-digit year-over-year growth rates 
(Figure 1.SF.4). In October 2025, China announced 
further tightening of its REE licensing requirements, 
which were later suspended in November under 
a China-US agreement. In January 2026, China 
restricted HREE exports to Japan. Despite these 
developments, strong REE export growth contin-
ued in January and February 2026. Policymakers in 
import-dependent countries grew increasingly con-
cerned about the macroeconomic consequences of 
33
37
16
5 2 2 3
57.5
87.5
92.5
42.5
12.5
7.5
98
96.5
95
89.5
2
3.5
5
10.5
20
6
3
8
3
12
5
15
22
United States
The Netherlands
Russia
Japan
Korea
Vietnam
India
United States
The Netherlands
Russia
Japan
Korea
Vietnam
Germany
Thailand
India
Dependence on China
Dependence on rest of world
Figure 1.SF.3.  Average Import Dependence on China by Rare 
Earth Supply Chain Segment 
(Percent) 
1. LREE Supply Chain Segments
0
100
20
40
60
80
Mining
Oxide
separation
Metal
reﬁning
2. HREE Supply Chain Segments
0
100
20
40
60
80
Permanent
magnets
Mining
Oxide
separation
Metal
reﬁning
3. Chinese Exports of Rare Earth
Metals and Compounds
4. Chinese Exports of Rare Earth
Permanent Magnets
Sources: Bedford 2025; World Bank, World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS); and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Data for panels 1 and 2 are based 2023–24 production, synthesized in Bedford 
(2025). Data for panels 3 and 4 are from 2024 from WITS. HREE = heavy rare earth 
element; LREE = light rare earth element.
35
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and the Economics of Rare Earths
potential supply disruptions. Notwithstanding REEs’ 
relatively small market size, their use unlocks trillions 
of dollars in downstream value creation across sectors 
globally. 
IMF staff analysis of US Geological Survey data 
shows that rare earths are used as inputs in 34 of the 
405 sectors of the US economy (Nassar and oth-
ers 2025). These sectors jointly added $233 billion 
in goods and services value in 2017, equivalent to 
0.8 percent of nominal GDP. The estimated share 
of value added dependent on rare earths is similarly 
substantial in other advanced economies and major 
emerging markets: France (0.4 percent), Germany 
(2.5 percent), India (1.3 percent), Japan (1.7 per-
cent), and the United Kingdom (0.6 percent). These 
estimates show that REE exposure varies substan-
tially across countries, with the variance driven by 
differences in sectoral composition and the relative 
importance of REE-intensive industries such as auto-
motive manufacturing, renewable energy, and electron-
ics manufacturing (Figure 1.SF.5).
This “value added at risk” (VAAR) measure provides 
a useful first-pass estimate of possible GDP losses from 
a hypothetical prolonged and severe REE supply dis-
ruption. The VAAR measure also reveals the macroeco-
nomic importance of rare earth permanent magnets: 
In the United States, they drive about 70 percent of 
VAAR.
But the VAAR measure omits important adjustment 
mechanisms. It likely overstates losses by assuming that 
REEs and magnets cannot be substituted for at all but 
also understates losses by abstracting from cascading 
input-output (I-O) effects. To quantify potential GDP 
losses from REE supply disruptions, it is essential to 
account for both substitutability of other things for 
REEs and intersectoral linkages between industries 
directly affected by REE shortages and those that 
depend on them. For example, if permanent magnets 
were to become unavailable, electric-vehicle production 
would be disrupted, with knock-on effects that could 
ultimately raise transportation costs and ripple through 
the production of other goods and services. The 
impact would be larger in industries in which there are 
no available substitutes for REEs.
To that effect, this Special Feature develops and 
calibrates a small open economy model with network 
linkages (Silva and others 2024, extended to incor-
porate imported REE supply constraints; see Online 
Annex 1.1, Part II, for more details). The model 
Figure 1.SF.4.  China’s Exports of Rare Earth Permanent 
Magnets and Rare Earth Magnet Components Intended for 
Permanent Magnet Production
(Thousands of metric tons; dashed = trend)
0
1
2
4
3
5
6
7
Apr.
2015
Apr.
16
Apr.
17
Apr.
20
Apr.
21
Apr.
22
Apr.
24
Apr.
18
Apr.
19
Apr.
23
Apr.
25
Oct.
25
Sources: General Administration of Customs of the People’s Republic of China (GACC); 
Hong Kong Trade Development Council, China Customs Statistics; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Data are from the series “CN: Export: HS 8: Permanent Magnets or Articles Going 
to Be Permanent Magnets, of Rare-Earth Metals,” Code HS 850511.
Figure 1.SF.5.  Value Added and Gross Output at Risk
(Percent of goods and services using rare earth elements as inputs)
0
1.5
2.5
3.5
0.5
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
4.5
Germany
France
India
United
Kingdom
Japan
United
States
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
Input-Output Tables; Nassar and others 2025; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Calculations are based on Nassar and others (2025), which provides 
industry-specific measures of gross output dependence on rare earths at the Bureau of 
Economic Analysis 405 × 405 detailed input-output level. These dependence measures 
are first mapped onto the US input-output structure and then translated to the OECD 
industry classification input-output with 50 sectors from 2017. Using the OECD 
input-output framework, country-specific shares of rare-earth-dependent consumption 
are derived for each OECD-level industry across countries. The value-added share is 
computed as the value added attributable to rare-earth-dependent activities divided by 
total GDP. The gross output share is defined as an economy’s gross output dependent 
on rare earths divided by its total gross output.
Value-added share
Gross output share
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
36
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
analyzes an REE supply shock affecting REE-using 
sectors—including indirectly through I-O linkages—
with implications for prices, real wages, and net foreign 
assets.6 The calibration relies on an REE-augmented 
I-O table based on US Geological Survey data and is 
applied to a set of major REE-dependent economies. 
For each country, the analysis considers a persistent 
80 percent reduction in all rare earth inputs—oxides, 
metals, compounds, and magnets—consistent with the 
average single-supplier import concentration of each of 
the advanced economies.
Model simulations show how the magnitude of the 
supply disruption strongly depends on substitution 
possibilities. When firms have limited scope to replace 
rare earths, which is the base case for short horizons of 
less than a year (Nassar and others 2025), GDP losses 
may exceed those predicted by the VAAR measure 
(Figure 1.SF.6). Network amplification means that 
GDP declines by 1.5 percent in the United States, a 
number almost twice as large as the VAAR measure. 
By contrast, GDP declines by about 1.2 percent in 
6The model features domestic general equilibrium adjustment, 
assuming a common shock across countries, and limits exports to 
commodity sectors. REE-intensive sectors, such as motor vehicles, 
are thus assumed to be fully domestic.
Germany (with a VAAR measure score of 2.5 per-
cent). This difference reflects the stronger forward 
linkages of US REE-intensive sectors relative to those 
in Germany, particularly those in motor vehicles, 
electrical equipment, and computers and electronics. 
When the substitution elasticity is set higher, reflecting 
greater opportunities for producers to adjust (typically 
for horizons longer than five years, similar to those 
in Alfaro and others 2025), estimated GDP losses are 
negligible, averaging only 0.006 percent.7
Coping with Risks of Supply Disruptions
In response to high REE supply concentration, 
countries and firms are adopting a variety of adapta-
tion strategies. Stockpiling provides a short-term buffer 
against disruptions and may deter coercion, but it does 
not address underlying structural dependence and may 
be constrained in practice. Recycling holds longer-term 
promise, but in a rapidly expanding market, it cannot 
yet serve as a primary supply source. Likewise, the 
superior performance of permanent magnets makes 
large-scale substitution unlikely in the near term. In 
this context, reshoring and import diversification have 
emerged as the main medium-term responses, despite 
uncertain viability given the long development time-
lines for these measures, coordination challenges, and 
potential shortages of skilled labor. 
Following China’s introduction of REE export 
licensing requirements in April 2025, advanced econo-
mies accelerated the implementation of industrial poli-
cies to reduce reliance on China-centric supply chains. 
Efforts in this area have focused on three approaches. 
First, price floors and offtake agreements have been 
concluded aiming to provide investment certainty in 
volatile markets, as many REE projects are not com-
mercially viable at current neodymium prices (about 
$55 per kilogram; see Online Annex Figure 1.1.1). 
For example, a July 2025 agreement between the US 
government and US rare earth producer MP Mate-
rials included a price protection mechanism akin to 
a floor for key REE products, and price floors more 
broadly featured prominently in discussions at high-
level Group of Seven (G7) critical minerals meetings. 
Second, governments have provided direct financial 
7Alfaro and others (2025) estimate industry-specific substitution 
elasticities between REEs and labor using cross-industry responses to 
the 2010 REE shock observed over the postshock period 2011–18. 
Their estimates range from 0.8 to 1.4, reflecting medium-term, 
innovation-inclusive adjustment.
Figure 1.SF.6.  Output Losses by Country from a Major REE 
Disruption
(Percent of GDP)
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
Germany
France
India
United
Kingdom
Japan
United
States
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The scenarios are based on an 80 percent supply disruption affecting 80 percent 
of imported goods, specifically rare earths and magnets. The high-elasticity scenario 
uses a substitution elasticity of 0.8 between the imported goods and their varieties as 
in Alfaro and others (2025), while the low-elasticity scenario uses an elasticity of 0.015. 
REE = rare earth element.
High elasticity (multiplied by 100)
Low elasticity
37
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and the Economics of Rare Earths
support—through equity stakes, loans, and grants—to 
supply capital and signal long-term commitment.8 
Third, agreements—signed in October 2025 between 
the United States and Australia, Japan, Malaysia, and 
Thailand—alongside the G7 Critical Minerals Action 
Plan promote joint financing and coordinated procure-
ment, mobilizing an estimated $6.4 billion in public 
and private funding to de-risk REE supply chains. 
These measures have been effective in improving the 
financial prospects of publicly listed firms in the indus-
try (Figure 1.SF.7).
Quantifying the Impact of Industrial Policies to 
De-risk Rare Earth Supply Chains
Because reshoring is costly, policymakers should 
balance efficiency losses from reshoring in normal times 
against expected disruption losses in times of crisis. Opti-
mal de-risking is better viewed as an insurance policy 
8The July 2025 MP Materials deal included substantial equity and 
loan components, and the January 2026 agreement between the US 
Department of Commerce and USA Rare Earth similarly combines 
government equity, below-market lending, and direct federal funding 
(grants) to support domestic capacity expansion.
in which the cost of the premium to be paid in normal 
times (efficiency losses) should be commensurate with 
the damage expected in crisis times (disruption losses).9 
Given these considerations, policymakers usually 
emphasize de-risking rather than decoupling. It should 
be noted that similar considerations also play a role for 
other goods and commodities, including energy, food, 
fertilizers, and semiconductors.
To analyze alternative industrial policies, a calibrated 
dynamic trade model of the global rare earths market 
has been developed for this Special Feature. The model 
features producers in different countries that invest in 
both extraction and processing capacity to produce 
raw and processed REEs. The model calibration draws 
on detailed market, industry, and geological data (see 
Online Annex 1.1, Part III, for details). 
The model is used to assess the effects of two 
industrial policies—investment subsidies and price 
floors—applied to oxide separation (the most crucial 
processing stage) under two hypothetical implemen-
tation scenarios: either unilaterally—in the example 
here by US-based producers—or through simultaneous 
action among all importer countries.10 To illustrate the 
economic trade-offs, policy instruments are calibrated 
to achieve 25 percent self-sufficiency in rare earth process-
ing by 2035 in the US.11 This is 15 percentage points 
higher than the comparable figure in the baseline (with 
unchanged policies) and in line with International 
Energy Agency projections (IEA 2025).12 The same 
benchmark is used in the case of simultaneous action 
in order to highlight the fiscal cost implications of 
de-risking by various countries instead of unilaterally.
The analysis allows a certain number of conclusions 
to be drawn (Figure 1.SF.8). First, sizable inter-
ventions would be needed to attain the 25 percent 
self-sufficiency target; for example, in the unilat-
eral scenario, the investment subsidy must cover 
77.2 percent of total investment costs for the US to 
9Moreover, security benefits may exhibit diminishing returns, with 
the first 10–20 percent increase in self-sufficiency delivering the larg-
est reduction in vulnerability. This means that modest self-sufficiency 
rates can substantially reduce vulnerability to supply disruptions at 
minimal efficiency costs (Clayton, Maggiori, and Schreger 2024).
10Price floors are currently being discussed among Group of Seven 
policymakers, while investment subsidies proxy for a broad class of 
capital expenditure support measures used in practice, including 
grants and below-market lending.
11US self-sufficiency is defined here as the share of domestic rare 
earth consumption supplied either by domestic production or by 
imports from countries other than China (through friend-shoring).
12See Online Annex 1.1, Part III, for an analysis of a more ambi-
tious 50 percent self-sufficiency target.
April 9:
China
imposes
REE export
restrictions
June 11:
US and
China
strike
trade
deal
July 10:
US DoD 
invests in 
US rare earth 
producer MP 
Materials
October 9:
China 
expands 
REE export 
restrictions
Figure 1.SF.7.  Aggregate Stock Market Value of Publicly 
Listed Firms in the Rare Earth Industry
(Billions of US dollars)
20
40
60
80
100
120
Jan.
2025
Feb.
25
Mar.
25
Jun.
25
Jul.
25
Aug.
25
Oct.
25
Jan.
26
Apr.
25
May
25
Sep.
25
Nov.
25
Dec.
25
Sources: S&P Global; S&P Capital IQ Pro; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Firms are identified using Capital IQ based on keyword searches for 
rare-earth-related terms in business and long business descriptions. The sample is 
restricted to operating, publicly listed companies with primary locations outside China. 
This initial screen yields 315 firms. Each firm is manually reviewed to retain only those 
with active involvement in rare earth extraction, processing, or project development. 
Firms with only peripheral references to rare earths are excluded, resulting in a final 
sample of 89 companies. DoD = US Department of Defense; REE = rare earth element; 
S&P = Standard and Poor’s.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
38
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
reach 25 percent self-sufficiency by 2035. The required 
policy intervention is also sizable under a price floor: 
2.4 times the period market price for the unilateral sce-
nario. These large policy interventions reflect the rela-
tive efficiency of Chinese producers but also point to 
important price effects. Because there are already large 
capacities in both mining and refining of REEs, boost-
ing production in a well-supplied market depresses 
prices and profits, which reduces private investment 
incentives and, all else equal, requires more generous 
government interventions to induce development of 
additional capacity.
Second, investment subsidies are typically more fis-
cally efficient than price floors when evaluated in pres-
ent-value terms. This reflects the fact that investment 
subsidies are targeted at new capacity, whereas price 
floors also generate windfall gains for incumbent pro-
ducers by supporting existing production. As a result, 
for a given self-sufficiency target, the net present value 
of subsidy payments is lower than that of price floor 
interventions. To achieve the 25 percent target under 
the unilateral scenario, US fiscal costs associated with 
the investment subsidy over the first decade amount to 
141 percent of the annual US market size—equivalent 
to about $1.19 billion ($0.81 billion).13 At the same 
time, investment subsidies are more costly in the short 
term (Figure 1.SF.8, panel 2) than price floors as they 
front-load fiscal outlays, with costs declining in the 
long term once investment is largely limited to replac-
ing depreciated capital.
Third, simultaneous action reduces the fiscal cost of 
achieving a given self-sufficiency target. For example, 
when all importing economies incentivize investment 
in refining, US self-sufficiency is achieved through a 
less concentrated buildup of capacity, as part of the 
fiscal cost is outsourced to the incentivizing economies. 
Under simultaneous action, those economies can also 
leverage the higher US efficiency in REE processing 
and experience substantial gains in self-sufficiency, at 
comparatively lower fiscal costs.14
Conclusion 
This Special Feature shows that large disruptions to 
REE supplies could substantially reduce GDP in many 
economies, particularly in the short term when substi-
tution options are limited. Avoiding trade tensions and 
restrictions remains the first-best outcome to promote 
steady REE supply. Model-based analysis suggests that 
de-risking supply chains through targeted industrial 
policies is fiscally costly. Costs are lower if de-risking 
is pursued by various importers simultaneously and if 
policy instruments directly target the expansion of new 
production capacity. IMF research also suggests that 
industrial policies should be used cautiously (Baquie 
and others 2025). Beyond industrial policy, govern-
ments can promote complementary structural reforms 
that would lower barriers to entry into REE markets 
through simpler mining permits, investment in the 
specialized skills the sector requires—from separation 
chemistry to metallurgy—and competitive allocation 
of subsidies. 
13Global REEs’ market size is about $6 billion. The US share is 
14 percent, so roughly $0.81 billion.
14See Bogmans, Cuadros Bloch, and others (forthcoming) for 
more analysis.
Figure 1.SF.8.  Effectiveness and Fiscal Cost of Alternative 
Industrial Policies to Achieve 25 Percent REE Self-Sufficiency 
in the US
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
10
20
30
40
50
2025
30
35
40
45
2025
30
35
40
45
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Investment subsidy to US refiners only implemented with a 77.2 percent 
subsidy; investment subsidy to refiners outside China only implemented with a 
77.8 percent subsidy; price floor subsidy to US refiners only implemented with a price 
floor 2.42 times the period market price; price floor subsidy to refiners outside China 
implemented with a price floor 2.2 times the period market price. Baseline scenario 
assumes 4.7 percent global demand growth in 2025–29, 1.42 percent global demand 
growth in 2030–34. REE = rare earth element.
1. Level of US REE
Self-Sufficiency
(Percent of US REE usage)
2. US Fiscal Cost of REE
Industrial Policies
(Percent of baseline US
REE usage)
Unilateral US subsidies
Unilateral US price floor
Baseline
Simultaneous subsidies
Simultaneous price floors
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
39
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
Europe
1.6
1.4
1.6
6.2
5.4
4.3
1.6
1.3
1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Europe
1.5
1.2
1.3
2.3
2.6
2.2
2.3
1.9
2.0
5.9
6.0
5.8
Euro Area4,5
1.4
1.1
1.2
2.1
2.6
2.2
1.6
1.3
1.5
6.3
6.2
6.1
Germany
0.2
0.8
1.2
2.3
2.7
2.3
4.4
3.9
3.8
3.8
3.9
3.5
France
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
1.8
1.7
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
7.6
7.9
7.9
Italy
0.5
0.5
0.5
1.6
2.6
2.4
1.2
0.6
1.1
6.1
6.0
6.1
Spain
2.8
2.1
1.8
2.7
3.0
2.3
2.9
2.2
1.9
10.5
9.8
9.8
The Netherlands
1.9
1.2
1.4
3.0
2.7
2.4
8.8
8.8
8.7
3.9
4.1
4.2
Belgium
1.0
0.7
1.1
3.0
2.8
2.2
–2.1
–2.0
–1.9
6.2
6.2
6.1
Ireland
12.3
2.5
2.4
2.1
3.1
2.4
8.2
8.1
8.1
4.7
4.8
4.8
Austria
0.6
0.7
1.0
3.6
2.5
2.6
1.0
0.4
0.7
5.7
5.7
5.6
Portugal
1.9
1.9
1.8
2.2
3.1
2.3
1.2
0.5
0.7
6.0
5.9
5.9
Greece
2.1
1.8
1.7
2.9
3.5
2.7
–5.7
–6.4
–5.7
8.9
7.4
7.1
Finland
0.2
1.0
1.5
1.8
2.5
2.2
1.3
0.1
0.4
9.7
9.6
9.1
Bulgaria
3.1
2.8
2.5
3.5
3.8
3.7
–5.9
–4.0
–3.2
3.6
3.4
3.3
Slovak Republic
0.8
0.6
1.6
4.2
4.2
3.3
–3.6
–3.0
–1.7
5.4
5.8
5.7
Croatia
3.2
2.6
2.6
4.4
4.4
2.7
–3.2
–3.8
–3.3
4.5
4.6
4.6
Lithuania
2.9
2.9
2.2
3.4
4.0
2.7
1.3
0.2
1.0
6.9
6.5
6.3
Slovenia
1.1
2.0
2.1
2.5
2.9
2.1
3.5
3.2
2.8
3.9
3.9
3.9
Luxembourg
0.6
1.6
1.7
2.5
2.1
2.2
4.7
4.5
4.7
6.0
5.9
6.1
Latvia
2.1
2.2
2.4
3.8
3.0
2.7
–3.4
–3.6
–3.6
6.9
6.7
6.5
Estonia
0.6
1.4
1.9
4.8
3.8
3.0
–0.2
–1.1
–2.0
7.4
7.3
7.0
Cyprus
3.8
3.0
3.0
0.8
2.6
1.6
–8.1
–9.3
–10.3
4.4
4.6
4.7
Malta
4.0
3.7
3.8
2.4
2.5
2.4
5.7
5.8
5.2
3.0
3.0
3.0
United Kingdom
1.3
0.8
1.3
3.4
3.2
2.4
–3.1
–3.4
–3.1
4.9
5.6
5.3
Switzerland
1.3
1.3
1.3
0.2
0.5
0.5
7.1
6.8
7.1
2.8
3.0
2.9
Sweden
1.5
2.0
1.9
2.6
1.5
1.8
6.1
5.3
4.7
8.9
8.6
8.0
Czech Republic
2.5
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.4
2.2
0.7
–1.5
–1.3
2.9
3.0
2.9
Norway
1.1
1.5
1.3
3.0
3.3
2.6
14.1
14.3
13.6
4.5
4.2
4.2
Denmark
2.9
2.0
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
12.5
12.3
11.5
2.9
2.9
2.9
Iceland
1.3
1.9
2.1
4.1
4.8
2.8
–3.6
–0.7
–0.1
4.4
4.2
4.3
Liechtenstein
0.0
–0.4
0.4
0.2
0.5
0.7
13.4
12.7
12.7
3.5
3.9
3.8
Andorra
3.9
2.1
1.8
2.4
3.0
2.3
15.9
16.0
16.0
1.1
1.1
1.1
San Marino
1.5
1.3
1.2
2.3
2.8
2.6
17.1
17.1
16.9
4.5
4.4
4.4
Emerging and Developing Europe6
2.0
2.0
2.1
13.5
10.5
8.2
–1.2
–1.2
–1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Russia
1.0
1.1
1.1
8.7
5.6
4.3
1.6
2.9
2.3
2.2
2.4
2.6
Türkiye
3.6
3.4
3.5
34.9
28.6
21.4
–1.9
–2.8
–2.5
8.3
8.3
8.7
Poland
3.6
3.3
2.4
3.6
3.3
3.3
–0.7
–1.1
–0.9
3.1
3.4
3.4
Romania
0.7
0.7
2.5
7.3
7.8
3.9
–8.0
–6.8
–6.2
6.1
6.0
5.9
Ukraine7
1.8
2.0
3.5
12.7
6.1
7.7
–15.0
–18.9
–16.6
11.6
10.2
12.0
Hungary
0.4
1.7
2.0
4.4
3.8
3.5
1.3
–0.4
0.4
4.3
4.2
4.0
Belarus
1.3
1.2
1.0
6.6
6.4
6.2
–2.6
–2.7
–3.4
2.9
2.9
2.9
Serbia
2.0
2.8
3.5
3.9
5.2
4.9
–4.9
–5.7
–4.4
8.7
8.8
8.7
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 
5 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
6 Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.
7 See the country-specific note for Ukraine in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
40
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
Asia
5.0
4.4
4.2
1.4
2.6
2.4
3.5
3.0
2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Asia
2.5
2.0
1.6
2.5
2.4
2.2
5.9
5.3
5.3
2.9
2.9
2.9
Japan
1.2
0.7
0.6
3.2
2.2
2.3
4.8
3.8
3.9
2.5
2.5
2.5
Korea 
1.0
1.9
2.1
2.1
2.5
1.9
6.6
5.6
5.4
2.8
2.8
2.9
Australia
2.0
2.0
1.7
2.9
4.0
3.2
–2.6
–2.3
–2.2
4.2
4.2
4.3
Taiwan Province of China
8.7
5.2
3.0
1.7
1.5
1.6
17.4
18.1
18.0
3.4
3.4
3.4
Singapore
5.0
3.5
2.7
0.9
2.3
1.9
16.7
16.6
16.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
Hong Kong SAR
3.5
2.4
2.4
1.4
2.1
1.8
12.2
12.6
12.3
3.6
3.3
3.2
New Zealand
0.2
2.1
2.4
2.8
3.1
2.3
–3.7
–4.0
–3.8
5.3
5.4
5.0
Macao SAR 
4.7
3.0
3.1
0.3
1.8
1.9
35.7
35.0
34.2
1.7
1.7
1.7
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.5
4.9
4.8
1.1
2.6
2.5
2.7
2.2
2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
China
5.0
4.4
4.0
0.0
1.2
1.5
3.7
3.5
3.3
5.1
5.1
5.1
India4
7.6
6.5
6.5
2.1
4.7
4.0
–0.9
–2.0
–1.6
4.9
4.9
4.9
Indonesia
5.1
5.0
5.1
1.9
3.0
2.6
–0.1
–1.1
–0.9
4.9
4.9
4.8
Thailand
2.4
1.5
2.1
–0.1
0.9
1.0
3.1
0.7
1.4
1.0
1.0
1.0
Vietnam
8.0
7.1
6.7
3.3
4.9
4.6
6.7
5.3
4.4
2.2
2.1
2.2
Malaysia
5.2
4.7
4.3
1.4
1.9
2.0
1.6
1.4
1.6
3.0
3.0
3.0
Philippines
4.4
4.1
5.8
1.7
4.3
3.2
–3.3
–4.4
–3.5
4.2
4.7
4.6
Other Emerging and Developing Asia5
3.4
4.2
4.0
8.5
8.4
6.4
0.9
–0.3
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
ASEAN-56
4.5
4.1
4.4
1.4
2.6
2.3
3.0
2.2
2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Asia7
5.6
5.0
4.8
0.8
2.4
2.3
2.7
2.2
2.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5 Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, 
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6 Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
7 Emerging Asia comprises China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
41
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and 
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
North America
1.9
2.2
2.1
2.8
3.2
2.3
–3.3
–3.3
–3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
United States 
2.1
2.3
2.1
2.7
3.2
2.1
–3.6
–3.7
–3.6
4.3
4.4
4.2
Mexico
0.6
1.6
2.2
3.8
3.9
3.4
–0.4
–0.4
–0.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
Canada
1.7
1.5
1.9
2.1
2.5
2.1
–0.9
–0.2
–0.3
6.9
6.5
6.3
Puerto Rico4
–0.8
–0.1
1.0
1.4
2.1
2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
6.4
6.0
5.8
South America5
2.7
2.3
2.5
9.7
8.2
5.6
–1.7
–1.3
–1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Brazil
2.3
1.9
2.0
5.0
4.0
3.4
–3.0
–2.7
–2.4
6.0
6.8
7.4
Argentina
4.4
3.5
4.0
41.9
30.4
15.7
–1.1
–0.8
–0.6
7.4
7.2
6.9
Colombia
2.6
2.3
2.5
5.1
5.9
5.2
–2.4
–2.5
–2.6
8.0
9.0
10.0
Chile
2.3
2.4
2.6
4.2
2.9
3.3
–2.3
–0.8
–1.8
8.5
8.1
7.6
Peru
3.4
2.8
2.8
1.5
2.5
1.8
3.1
3.4
2.5
5.9
6.3
6.3
Ecuador
3.7
2.5
2.5
0.7
2.9
1.6
5.8
5.2
4.6
3.1
3.1
3.1
Venezuela
1.5
4.0
6.0
252.0
387.4
94.4
2.6
7.1
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Bolivia
–1.2
–3.3
. . .
19.5
20.7
. . .
–1.9
1.2
. . .
3.3
4.5
. . .
Paraguay
6.0
4.2
3.5
4.1
3.3
3.5
–3.5
–3.0
–2.1
5.2
5.2
5.2
Uruguay
1.8
1.8
2.6
4.7
4.0
4.5
–0.5
–0.8
–0.9
7.5
8.0
8.0
Central America6
3.7
3.7
4.0
1.8
2.8
3.4
1.0
–0.3
–0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Caribbean7
6.2
5.7
8.6
5.9
6.1
6.1
–0.4
0.6
–0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Latin America and the Caribbean8
2.4
2.3
2.7
7.6
6.7
4.9
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9
2.8
2.4
2.3
1.4
2.2
2.1
–10.6
–10.4
–9.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. Aggregates exclude 
Venezuela.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5 See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6 Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, 
Nicaragua, and Panama.
7 The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8 Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and 
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9 Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as Anguilla and 
Montserrat, which are not IMF members.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
42
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and 
Unemployment 
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
Middle East and Central Asia
3.6
1.9
4.6
11.2
11.9
9.1
0.7
1.1
0.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
3.1
0.5
4.6
10.7
13.4
9.2
2.4
2.8
2.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
4.5
3.1
4.5
2.0
2.3
2.1
–3.0
–1.6
–3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iran 
–1.5
–6.1
3.2
50.9
68.9
39.6
0.6
–1.8
–0.2
8.0
9.2
9.0
United Arab Emirates
5.8
3.1
5.3
1.3
2.5
2.0
15.3
11.4
11.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kazakhstan
6.5
4.6
4.4
11.4
10.7
10.1
–3.9
–1.0
–2.0
4.6
4.6
4.5
Algeria
3.8
3.8
2.9
1.4
2.9
3.0
–7.7
–1.2
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iraq
–0.4
–6.8
11.3
0.3
3.0
3.3
–1.7
–5.3
0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
2.8
–8.6
8.6
0.6
3.9
2.5
14.5
11.0
9.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kuwait
3.5
–0.6
2.8
2.4
2.8
2.5
23.3
26.0
21.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Azerbaijan
1.4
2.2
2.5
5.6
6.0
5.1
5.5
9.7
5.4
5.3
5.3
5.2
Oman
2.4
3.5
3.4
1.0
1.7
1.9
1.3
7.5
5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Turkmenistan
3.6
2.6
2.0
2.7
3.9
4.7
3.3
3.7
1.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Bahrain
3.1
–0.5
4.5
–0.1
2.4
1.2
5.9
3.9
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Importers5,6
4.4
4.1
4.5
12.1
9.8
8.9
–3.8
–3.3
–4.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Egypt
4.4
4.2
4.8
20.4
13.2
11.1
–4.2
–4.2
–4.6
7.3
7.4
7.1
Pakistan7
3.1
3.6
3.5
4.5
7.2
8.4
0.5
–0.4
–0.9
7.1
6.9
6.5
Morocco
4.9
4.9
4.5
0.8
1.3
1.6
–2.1
–3.1
–2.9
13.0
12.2
11.3
Uzbekistan
7.7
6.5
5.9
8.8
7.0
5.6
–3.9
–1.3
–3.4
4.8
4.3
3.8
Tunisia
2.5
2.1
1.6
5.3
6.5
7.2
–2.8
–4.2
–5.8
15.2
. . .
. . .
Sudan7
3.2
0.7
8.1
100.2
75.1
44.6
–8.1
–4.5
–10.3
60.6
61.3
59.3
Jordan
2.7
2.7
3.1
1.8
2.3
2.2
–5.6
–6.2
–5.1
21.3
21.3
21.3
Georgia
7.5
5.3
5.0
3.9
4.4
3.0
–2.6
–5.0
–4.5
13.9
13.9
13.9
Armenia
7.2
5.3
5.5
3.3
3.6
3.4
–6.7
–6.0
–5.2
13.0
12.8
12.7
Tajikistan
8.4
6.0
4.8
3.4
4.0
4.7
16.6
6.3
2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kyrgyz Republic
11.1
6.1
6.1
8.2
10.6
10.0
–23.4
–7.1
–6.1
4.0
4.0
4.0
Mauritania
4.2
4.4
4.5
1.6
4.1
4.1
–5.8
–6.5
–6.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
West Bank and Gaza7
. . .
. . .
. . .
10.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Caucasus and Central Asia 
6.2
4.8
4.5
8.4
8.0
7.2
–2.2
0.0
–1.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,  
and Pakistan6
3.2
1.4
4.6
11.7
12.6
9.4
1.1
1.2
0.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East and North Africa
3.2
1.1
4.8
12.9
13.5
9.6
1.4
1.4
0.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Israel8
2.9
3.5
4.4
3.0
2.3
2.1
1.5
1.9
2.3
3.0
3.2
3.3
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 Includes Libya.
5 Includes Djibouti, Lebanon, Somalia, and Yemen. See the country-specific note for Lebanon and Yemen in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6 Excludes Afghanistan and Syria because of a lack of adequate data. See the country-specific notes in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7 See the country-specific notes for Sudan and West Bank and Gaza in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8 Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is shown for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
43
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
2025
2026
2027
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.5
4.3
4.4
12.5
8.8
8.8
–0.9
–0.6
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
4.0
3.7
4.0
21.3
14.6
14.5
2.6
3.8
1.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria5
4.0
4.1
4.3
23.0
16.0
15.9
5.1
5.8
3.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Angola
3.1
2.3
2.6
20.2
12.9
12.8
0.4
2.2
1.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Gabon
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.0
2.5
2.4
–3.1
–4.3
–5.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Chad
5.6
5.2
4.9
–2.6
0.5
3.9
0.2
0.8
0.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Equatorial Guinea
–6.4
–2.7
–1.3
2.8
3.2
2.9
–3.0
–1.6
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle-Income Countries6
3.5
3.2
3.4
4.5
4.3
4.3
–0.7
–1.0
–1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
1.1
1.0
1.3
3.2
3.9
3.4
–0.5
–0.9
–1.4
32.4
32.5
32.4
Kenya
4.9
4.5
4.7
4.1
5.9
5.9
–2.7
–4.1
–3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ghana
6.0
4.8
4.9
14.2
5.8
7.8
7.9
10.1
9.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Côte d’Ivoire 
6.5
6.2
6.3
0.1
1.8
2.0
–1.1
–1.1
–3.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Cameroon
3.1
3.3
3.8
3.4
3.5
3.2
–3.8
–5.1
–5.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Senegal
7.9
2.2
2.3
1.4
2.5
2.2
–5.6
–6.2
–5.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Zambia
3.8
4.3
4.7
13.9
9.0
8.0
–3.5
0.9
1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income Countries7
6.5
6.6
6.4
11.1
6.6
6.8
–3.9
–3.9
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ethiopia
9.2
9.2
7.9
13.2
11.8
10.7
–0.9
–2.4
–1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tanzania
5.9
5.9
6.1
3.3
4.0
4.3
–2.4
–2.3
–2.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Democratic Republic of the Congo
5.7
5.9
5.4
7.4
3.3
6.4
–3.7
–2.0
–1.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Uganda
6.7
7.5
8.2
3.6
4.0
4.9
–6.2
–3.9
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mali
4.9
5.5
5.7
2.3
2.2
2.0
–0.8
–1.5
1.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Burkina Faso
5.0
4.9
4.8
–0.5
1.5
2.1
6.7
8.6
8.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP. 
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 Includes Republic of Congo and South Sudan.
5 See the country-specific note for Nigeria in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6 Includes Benin, Botswana, Cabo Verde, Comoros, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Seychelles.
7 Includes Burundi, the Central African Republic, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Togo, and 
Zimbabwe.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
44
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 
(Annual percent change; in constant 2021 international dollars at purchasing power parity)
Average
Projections 
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
World
1.8
2.5
1.8
–3.9
5.7
2.8
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.7
2.3
Advanced Economies
0.8
1.9
1.5
–4.4
6.0
2.5
0.9
1.2
1.6
1.6
1.5
United States
0.8
2.4
2.1
–2.9
5.8
2.0
2.1
1.9
1.5
2.0
1.8
Euro Area1
0.4
1.6
1.4
–6.3
6.5
3.4
–0.1
0.6
1.1
0.9
1.0
Germany
1.1
1.0
0.9
–4.0
4.1
1.1
–1.8
–0.8
0.2
0.8
1.2
France
0.3
1.3
1.7
–7.9
6.4
2.2
1.1
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
Italy
–0.8
1.0
0.6
–8.6
9.7
5.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.6
Spain
0.1
1.8
1.1
–11.1
6.5
5.0
1.3
2.5
1.4
0.9
0.8
Japan
0.6
1.0
–0.1
–4.0
3.9
1.7
1.2
0.2
1.7
1.2
1.2
United Kingdom
0.5
1.1
0.7
–10.2
8.2
4.1
–1.0
0.0
1.0
0.3
0.9
Canada
0.5
1.3
0.4
–6.1
5.3
2.9
–0.8
–0.9
0.6
1.6
1.8
Other Advanced Economies2
1.7
2.1
1.3
–2.1
6.0
2.0
0.6
1.8
2.6
2.2
1.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.3
3.3
2.5
–3.2
5.9
3.2
3.4
3.4
3.4
3.4
3.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.1
5.6
4.5
–1.3
7.1
4.1
5.0
4.9
5.0
4.4
4.3
China
7.7
6.4
5.7
2.2
8.5
3.2
5.5
5.1
5.2
4.6
4.3
India3
5.3
5.3
2.8
–6.7
8.8
6.8
6.3
6.1
6.7
5.6
5.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.8
3.4
2.4
–1.9
7.6
1.7
3.8
4.3
2.4
2.4
2.1
Russia
1.0
2.6
2.1
–2.5
6.3
–1.3
4.2
5.4
1.6
1.5
1.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
0.8
0.2
–0.9
–8.0
6.7
3.6
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.6
2.0
Brazil
0.8
1.1
0.6
–3.9
4.3
2.6
2.8
3.0
1.9
1.6
1.6
Mexico
0.3
1.0
–1.3
–9.1
5.4
2.9
2.2
0.5
–0.3
0.9
1.4
Middle East and Central Asia
1.1
0.8
0.3
–4.4
3.0
4.2
0.5
0.8
1.8
4.4
2.8
Saudi Arabia
0.5
5.9
2.1
–8.3
9.2
7.2
–4.0
–2.0
2.5
1.1
2.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
1.5
0.5
0.3
–5.7
1.4
1.9
1.3
1.5
1.9
1.8
1.9
Nigeria3
2.1
–0.4
0.0
–8.3
–1.0
2.2
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.9
2.2
South Africa
0.2
0.1
–1.2
–7.4
3.9
1.0
–0.4
–0.7
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
Memorandum
European Union
0.7
2.1
1.8
–5.7
6.7
3.4
0.0
0.9
1.4
1.2
1.3
ASEAN-54
3.5
3.8
3.2
–5.5
3.4
4.6
3.1
3.9
3.6
3.2
3.5
Middle East and North Africa
0.7
0.3
–0.1
–4.6
3.1
4.5
0.5
0.3
1.6
–0.8
2.9
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.6
3.7
2.7
–2.9
6.6
3.5
3.8
3.8
3.7
3.1
3.4
Low-Income Developing Countries
2.7
2.2
2.2
–3.8
1.4
2.7
1.8
1.8
2.5
4.3
2.7
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 
1 Data are calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3 See the country-specific notes for India and Nigeria in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4 ASEAN-5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
45
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
References
Ahir, Hites, Nicholas Bloom, and Davide Furceri. 2022. “The 
World Uncertainty Index.” NBER Working Paper 29763, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Jiaqian Chen, Christian H. Ebeke, Roberto 
Garcia-Saltos, Tryggvi Gudmundsson, Anna Ilyina, Alvar 
Kangur, and others. 2023. “Geoeconomic Fragmentation and 
the Future of Multilateralism.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 
23/001, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Alfaro, Laura, Harald Fadinger, Jan Schymik, and Gede 
Virananda. 2025. “Trade and Industrial Policy in Supply 
Chains: Directed Technological Change in Rare Earths.” 
NBER Working Paper 33877, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA. https://doi.org/10.3386/w33877.
Amiti, Mary, Chris Flanagan, Sebastian Heise, and David 
E. Weinstein. 2026. “Who Is Paying for the 2025 U.S. 
Tariffs?” Liberty Street Economics, February 12. https://doi.
org/10.59576/lse.20260212.
Andrle, Michal, and Benjamin L. Hunt. 2020. “Model-Based 
Globally-Consistent Risk Assessment.” IMF Working Paper 
20/64, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Antràs, Pol, and Andrea F. Presbitero. 2026. “The Remains of 
the Trade: The US-China Trade War and Its Aftermath.” 
Unpublished. https://antras.scholars.harvard.edu/sites/g/files/
omnuum5876/files/2026-03/PAAPAlUla_1.pdf.
Ariu, Andrea, Florian Mayneris, and Mathieu Parenti. 2020. 
“One Way to the Top: How Services Boost the Demand for 
Goods.” Journal of International Economics 123 (March): 
103278.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. 
“Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 131 (4): 1593–636.
Baldwin, Richard. 2016. The Great Convergence: Information 
Technology and the New Globalization. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Baquie, Sandra, Yueling Huang, Florence Jaumotte, Jaden Kim, 
Rafael Machado Parente, and Samuel Pienknagura. 2025. 
“Industrial Policies: Handle with Care.” IMF Staff Discussion 
Note 25/002, International Monetary Fund, Washington, 
DC.
Barrett, Philip, Sophia Chen, Mali Chivakul, and Deniz O. 
Igan. 2021. “Pricing Protest: The Response of Financial 
Markets to Social Unrest.” IMF Working Paper 21/079, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bedford, Jason. 2025. “Rare Earths and Industry: Why 
Dependence on China Endures.” East Asian Institute 
Background Brief 1843, East Asian Institute, National 
University of Singapore.
Berlingieri, Giuseppe, Luca Marcolin, and Emanuel Ornelas. 
2025. “Service Offshoring and Export Experience.” Economic 
Journal 135 (August): 1980–2016.
Bogmans, Christian, Francis Cuadros Bloch, Jean-Marc Natal, 
and Andrea Paloschi. Forthcoming. “Industrial Policy 
and Supply Chain Bottlenecks in Commodity Markets: 
Evidence from Rare Earth Elements.” IMF Working Paper, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Bogmans, Christian, Maximiliano Jerez-Osses, Jorge 
Miranda-Pinto, and Jean-Marc Natal. Forthcoming. 
“Macroeconomic Effects of Rare Earth Supply Chain 
Disruptions.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Bolhuis, Marijn A., Jiaqin Chen, and Benjamin R. Kett. 
2023. “Fragmentation in Global Trade: Accounting for 
Commodities.” IMF Working Paper 23/073, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Breinlich, Holger, and Chiara Criscuolo. 2011. “International 
Trade in Services: A Portrait of Importers and Exporters.” 
Journal of International Economics 84 (2): 188–206.
Çakır Melek, Nida, and Sydney Miller. 2026. “A New U.S. 
Productivity Chapter? What Industry Data Say about AI.” 
Economic Bulletin, February 11. https://www.kansascityfed.
org/research/economic-bulletin/a-new-us-productivity- 
chapter-what-industry-data-say-about-ai/.
Caldara, Dario, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea 
Prestipino, and Andrea Ruffo. 2020. “The Economic Effects 
of Trade Policy Uncertainty.” Journal of Monetary Economics 
109 (January): 38–59.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2022. “Measuring 
Geopolitical Risk.” American Economic Review 112 (4): 
1194–225.
Caldara, Dario, Sarah Conlisk, Matteo Iacoviello, and Maddie 
Penn. 2026. “Do Geopolitical Risks Raise or Lower 
Inflation?” Journal of International Economics 159 (January): 
104188.
Clayton, Christopher, Matteo Maggiori, and Jesse Schreger. 
2024. “A Theory of Economic Coercion and Fragmentation.” 
NBER Working Paper 33309, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Cline, Alexander, James A. Kahn, and Robert W. Rich. 2025. 
“Is High Productivity Growth Returning?” Economic 
Commentary 2025-01, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 
Cleveland, OH. https://doi.org/10.26509/frbc-ec-202501.
Dao, Mai, and Josef Platzer. 2024. “Post-pandemic Productivity 
Dynamics in the United States.” IMF Working Paper 24/124, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Davis, Steven J. 2016. “An Index of Global Economic Policy 
Uncertainty.” NBER Working Paper 22740, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Disdier, Anne-Célia, and Keith Head. 2008. “The Puzzling 
Persistence of the Distance Effect on Bilateral Trade.” Review 
of Economics and Statistics 90 (1): 37–48.
Fernald, John G., and Huiyu Li. 2024. “Productivity during 
and since the Pandemic.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2024-31, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
Gimbel, Martha. 2026. “An AI Productivity Boom? Don’t Count 
Your (Productivity Data) Chickens.” State of the Economy, 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
46
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
February 19. https://budgetlab.yale.edu/research/ 
ai-productivity-boom-dont-count-your-productivity- 
data-chickens.
Gopinath, Gita. 2023. “Harnessing AI for Global Good.” 
Finance & Development 60 (4): 70–72. 
Gopinath, Gita, and Brent Neiman. 2026. “The Incidence of 
Tariffs: Rates and Reality.” NBER Working Paper 34620, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
https://doi.org/10.3386/w34620.
Graedel, Thomas E., E. M. Harper, Nedal T. Nassar, and 
Barbara K. Reck. 2015. “On the Materials Basis of Modern 
Society.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 
(20): 6295–300.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2025. Global Critical 
Minerals Outlook 2025. Paris: IEA. https://www.iea.org/
reports/global-critical-minerals-outlook-2025.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2026a. “Understanding 
Global Imbalances.” IMF Policy Paper, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2026b. “People’s Republic 
of China: 2025 Article IV Consultation—Press Release; Staff 
Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for the 
People’s Republic of China.” IMF Country Report 26/044, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Jefferson, Philip N. 2026. “Economic Outlook and Supply-Side 
(Dis)Inflation Dynamics.” Speech delivered at the Brookings 
Institution, Washington, DC, February 6. https://www.
federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/jefferson20260206a.htm.
Juselius, Mikael, Philip Wooldridge, and Dora Xia. 2025. 
“Financial Channel Implications of a Weaker Dollar for 
Emerging Market Economies.” BIS Bulletin 114, Bank for 
International Settlements, Basel. https://www.bis.org/publ/
bisbull114.pdf.
Kose, M. Ayhan, and Franziska Ohnsorge, eds. 2024. Falling 
Long-Term Growth Prospects. Washington, DC: World Bank 
Publications.
Li, Nan, Sergii Meleshchuk, Qiuyan Yin, Dennis Zhao, 
and Robert Zymek. 2025. “Bilateral Trade in Services: 
Insights from a New Research Dataset.” IMF Working 
Paper 25/163, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Market Data Forecast. 2025. “Permanent Magnets Market 
Size, Share, Trends & Growth Forecast Report.” Hyderabad, 
India. https://www.marketdataforecast.com/market-reports/
permanent-magnets-market.
Nassar, Nedal T., Graham W. Lederer, Abraham J. Padilla, 
Joseph Gambogi, Daniel J. Cordier, Jamie L. Brainard, Joseph 
D. Lessard, and Ryan Charab. 2023. “Rock-to-Metal Ratios 
of the Rare Earth Elements.” Journal of Cleaner Production 
405 (June 15): 136958.
Nassar, Nedal T., David Pineault, Sydney M. Allen, Dalton 
M. McCaffrey, Abraham J. Padilla, Jamie L. Brainard, Mani 
Bayani, and others. 2025. “Methodology and Technical 
Input for the 2025 U.S. List of Critical Minerals—Assessing 
the Potential Effects of Mineral Commodity Supply Chain 
Disruptions on the U.S. Economy.” Open-File Report 
2025-1047, US Geological Survey, Reston, VA. https://doi.
org/10.3133/ofr20251047.
Shi, Min, and Jakob Svensson. 2006. “Political Budget Cycles: 
Do They Differ across Countries and Why?” Journal of Public 
Economics 90 (8–9): 1367–89. 
Silva, Alvaro, Petre Caraiani, Jorge Miranda-Pinto, and Juan 
Olaya-Agudelo. 2024. “Commodity Prices and Production 
Networks in Small Open Economies.” Journal of Economic 
Dynamics and Control 168 (November): 104968.
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
47
Defense spending is increasing rapidly. Over the past 
five years, about half of the world’s countries have 
increased their military budgets, and arms sales by the 
world’s largest defense firms have doubled in real terms 
over two decades. As geopolitical tensions intensify, 
these trends are set to continue. Drawing on a dataset 
covering 164 countries since 1946, this chapter finds 
that large defense spending booms have become more 
frequent, especially in emerging market and developing 
economies. In a typical boom, which lasts more than 
two-and-a-half years, defense outlays increase by about 
2.7 percentage points of GDP, with roughly two-thirds 
financed through higher deficits. While the resulting 
defense buildups can boost economic activity in the short 
term—lifting consumption and investment, particu-
larly in defense-related sectors—they also temporarily 
increase inflation and create significant medium-term 
challenges. On average, fiscal deficits worsen by about 
2.6 percentage points of GDP, and public debt increases 
by about 7 percentage points within three years of the 
start of a buildup, while external balances deteriorate as 
demand is geared toward imported equipment. Wartime 
booms are especially costly, with public debt jumping by 
about 14 percentage points of GDP and social spend-
ing falling in real terms. Defense spending multipliers 
are close to 1, on average, but vary widely depending 
on how spending is sustained, financed, and allocated 
and how much equipment is imported. While a defense 
buildup that is mostly deficit financed and allocates most 
of the spending to consumption maximizes short-term 
demand effects, it also risks overheating the economy 
and requires close coordination with monetary policy. 
A buildup that makes public investment a priority and 
fosters more integrated markets for military equipment 
production could support long-term productivity growth.
The authors of this chapter are Hippolyte Balima (co-lead), 
Jared Bebee, Colombe Ladreit, Andresa Lagerborg, Flavien Moreau, 
Andrea Presbitero (co-lead), and Evgenia Weaver, with contributions 
from Kareem Ismail, Pedro Juarros, Takuji Komatsuzaki, Krzysztof 
Krogulski, Moheb Malak, Ahn Dinh Minh Nguyen, Robert 
Sierhej, and Can Ugur. Maryam Abdou, Owen Desberg, Shrihari 
Ramachandra, and Isabela Rozario provided research assistance. The 
chapter benefited from comments by Ethan Ilzetzki and internal 
seminar participants and reviewers.
Introduction
With the end of the Cold War, the number of 
conflicts1 declined globally and governments world-
wide reduced the share of public resources allocated to 
defense spending and military buildup. Geopolitical 
tensions started resurfacing in the mid-2010s (see 
Chapter 1), and the number of conflicts has increased 
substantially since then, as discussed in Chapter 3. 
This shift has prompted countries to recalibrate their 
defense spending priorities. As a result, over 2020–24, 
50 percent of countries worldwide increased their 
defense spending budgets and, as of 2024, almost 
40 percent allocated more than 2 percent of GDP to 
defense spending, compared with 27 percent in 2018 
(Figure 2.1).2 According to the Stockholm Interna-
tional Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) Arms Industry 
Database, arms sales by the world’s largest 100 arms 
firms have doubled in real terms over the past two 
decades. These numbers are set to increase, as North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) members 
committed in June 2025 to raise their annual defense 
and security-related spending to 5 percent of GDP 
by 2035, more than double the previous 2 percent 
guideline.3 The actual and projected buildup of 
defense spending entails important macroeconomic 
trade-offs, especially in an environment of elevated and 
increasing public debt and growing spending pressures, 
1For simplicity, the terms “war” and “conflict” are used inter-
changeably throughout the chapter.
2Defense spending comprises all government expenditures devoted 
to the maintenance, development, and deployment of military 
forces. Following the definition of the Stockholm International Peace 
Research Institute (SIPRI), defense spending includes personnel 
costs, operations and maintenance, procurement of arms and 
equipment, military research and development (R&D), and military 
infrastructure.
3The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is a military 
alliance founded in the aftermath of World War II, currently includ-
ing 32 member countries (30 in Europe as well as Canada and the 
United States). It serves as a system of collective security whereby 
member states agree to mutual defense in response to an attack by 
any nonmember country. In June 2025, NATO members committed 
to investing 3.5 percent of GDP annually on core defense require-
ments and up to 1.5 percent of GDP to security-related spending 
to protect critical infrastructure, defend networks, ensure civil 
preparedness and resilience, innovate, and strengthen the defense 
industrial base.
CHAPTER
2
DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND 
TRADE-OFFS
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
48
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
as governments worldwide are already facing increasing 
demand to invest in infrastructure, public services, 
and economic security, while also needing to scale 
up spending on the green transition as well as health 
care and pensions to meet the needs of aging societies 
(Acalin and others 2025; Eble and others 2025).
This chapter studies the macroeconomic conse-
quences of ramping up defense spending, considering 
potential intertemporal trade-offs, in which a country’s 
economy runs hot in the short term but faces increased 
risks to medium-term macroeconomic stability, as 
well as weakening economic resilience, reflected in 
higher government deficits, cuts to social spending, 
and worsening external balances. Increasing defense 
spending can also help countries reach other objectives, 
such as strengthening defense resilience and serving as 
a deterrent.4 The chapter, however, does not aim to 
quantify countries’ defense resilience, which is related 
to national security objectives and, hence, beyond the 
scope of the chapter’s analysis.
A large literature examines the macroeconomic 
effects of defense spending, initially motivated by its 
usefulness as a source of plausibly exogenous variation 
4Defense resilience refers to the ability to withstand and recover 
from attacks, encompassing military capability as well as civil 
preparedness. Recent literature shows deterrence effects are modest. 
Increases in defense spending lead to a small and persistent decline 
in conflict over the long term, with no effect on short-term conflict 
risk (Benmelech and Monteiro 2025).
in government expenditure, since major defense build-
ups are often driven by geopolitical events—such as 
wars, security threats, or strategic realignments—rather 
than by contemporaneous domestic economic condi-
tions (Barro 1981; Ramey and Shapiro 1998). Early 
contributions, largely focused on the United States, 
exploited historical military buildups and narrative 
evidence to isolate government spending shocks from 
the business cycle, establishing benchmark estimates 
of output and employment responses (Hall 2009; 
Barro and Redlick 2011; Ramey 2011; Nakamura 
and Steinsson 2014; Ramey and Zubairy 2018). More 
recently, renewed geopolitical tensions have spurred 
work on European economies (Ben Zeev, Pappa, and 
Scola Gagliardi 2025; García-Serrador, Sarasa-Flores, 
and Ulloa 2025; Ilzetzki 2025; Alloza and others 
2026; Furceri and others 2026) as well as on emerg-
ing market and developing economies (Miyamoto, 
Nguyen, and Sheremirov 2019; Sheremirov and 
Spirovska 2022), typically using data from the late 
1980s onward. While this literature documents 
important differences across countries, most studies 
remain narrowly focused on short-term multipliers, 
which measure the response of real GDP to changes in 
defense spending, or immediate budgetary implications 
of military outlays (Marzian and Trebesch 2025),5 
leaving important gaps in understanding the broader 
macroeconomic consequences of defense spending 
buildups.
To fill these gaps, this chapter provides a bird’s-eye 
view of defense spending in a large sample of countries 
since World War II. In particular, the chapter addresses 
the following questions:
	• What do defense spending booms (that is, episodes 
of large defense spending buildup) look like? How 
frequent have such booms been? How do they differ 
in frequency, size, and duration during wartime and 
peacetime and between advanced economies and 
emerging market and developing economies? And 
how are they financed?
	• What are the key macroeconomic trade-offs of increas-
ing defense spending? How do defense spending 
booms affect macroeconomic dynamics? Do the 
buildups associated with these booms overheat the 
economy in the short term? And do they lead to 
a deterioration of fiscal balances through higher 
government deficit and debt, as well as a widening 
5A related literature, discussed in Chapter 3, studies the economic 
toll of war.
World average
NATO target for 2035
Share of countries with military spending >2% of GDP, right scale
Figure 2.1.  Defense Spending on the Rise
(Percent of GDP, left scale; percent, right scale)
Sources: Gethin 2024; Stockholm International Peace Research Institute Military 
Expenditure Database; World Human Capital Expenditure Database; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: NATO = North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
60
70
80
90
10
20 24
2000
1946
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
49
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
of the current account? Do defense spending booms 
imply a reorientation of government spending that 
crowds out other outlays, including social spending?
	• How large are defense spending multipliers? Do they 
vary with country characteristics and the design of 
the stimulus—such as its duration, the import con-
tent of defense outlays and their allocation between 
current and capital spending—and to what extent 
are they affected by the response of monetary and 
fiscal policy? How large are spillovers to third coun-
tries? What are the potential general equilibrium 
effects of ramping up defense spending?
To answer these questions, the chapter compiles a 
comprehensive dataset on yearly defense spending and 
macroeconomic variables for 164 countries since 1946. 
It first discusses the channels through which higher 
defense spending percolates through the economy, 
how it differs from other forms of fiscal stimulus, 
and the trade-offs that it generates. Next, it defines 
defense spending booms as periods when the two-year 
moving average of defense spending increases by at 
least 1 percentage point of GDP, lasting for as long 
as defense spending does not decline as a share of 
GDP. It characterizes booms by their length, size, and 
financing and discusses a rich set of stylized facts to 
highlight key short-term macroeconomic trade-offs and 
medium-term vulnerabilities arising from ramping up 
defense spending. In the second part of the chapter, the 
focus shifts to the macroeconomic effects of defense 
spending. The chapter contributes to the debate sur-
rounding defense spending multipliers through novel 
estimates based on a large sample of countries and 
through model simulations. Both approaches consider 
how defense multipliers may depend on country char-
acteristics, the design of the associated buildups, and 
monetary and fiscal policy responses.
Based on this dataset and approaches, the chapter’s 
main findings are as follows:
	• Defense spending booms have become more frequent, 
involve significant resources relative to an econo-
my’s overall capacity, and are mostly debt financed. 
They have increased since the mid-2010s and are 
more common in emerging market and develop-
ing economies. Booms raise defense spending by 
about 2.7 percentage points of GDP and last for 
more than two-and-a-half years, on average. About 
two-thirds of the additional spending is financed 
through higher budget deficits, especially in the 
case of temporary booms, with a more modest 
contribution from revenue mobilization and spend-
ing reprioritization.
	• On the one hand, ramping up defense spending 
propagates through the economy as a sector-specific 
demand shock and can also raise medium-term growth 
through capital accumulation and productivity gains. 
In the short term, defense spending boosts private 
consumption and investment, through positive 
demand-side effects, especially in defense-related sec-
tors, leading to higher output and prices. Firm-level 
analysis supports the presence of a strong demand 
channel benefiting firms in the defense sector, but 
also shows that booms associated with rising public 
debt reduce private investment as firms’ financing 
constraints become more binding. In addition, 
bottlenecks in sectoral reallocation can mitigate the 
boost in demand. On the supply side, booms are 
followed by a higher capital stock and an increase in 
total factor productivity over the long term.
	• On the other hand, scaling up defense spending can 
weaken fiscal and external sustainability and risk 
crowding out social spending. The average defense 
spending boom is followed by an increase in the 
fiscal deficit of about 2.6 percentage points of GDP 
and an increase in the public-debt-to-GDP ratio 
of about 7 percentage points three years after the 
boom’s onset. Such dynamics create trade-offs that 
manifest themselves through time and can put fiscal 
sustainability under strain, particularly in countries 
with limited fiscal space. While the average defense 
spending boom does not lead to a contraction in 
social spending, when higher defense outlays are 
financed primarily through spending reprioritiza-
tion, the guns versus butter trade-off emerges, and 
spending on social protection, health, and education 
is substantially reduced. The fiscal costs are particu-
larly salient in wartime, when public debt jumps by 
14 percentage points of GDP and social spending is 
reduced in real terms, regardless of how the defense 
spending is financed. On the external side, stron-
ger demand is partly directed at importing foreign 
goods, especially in countries importing military 
equipment, worsening the current account balance.
	• The multiplier of defense spending is close to 1, but it 
varies with the degree of import leakages, the financing 
mix, the allocation between current and capital spend-
ing, the persistence of the defense spending buildup, 
and the policy response. Estimates of defense spending 
multipliers are characterized by substantial uncer-
tainty, which reflects a wide variety of experiences 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
50
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
across countries and over time, with endogeneity 
concerns that tend to bias the estimates. When these 
concerns are attenuated, the average multiplier is 
close to 1 and aligns with model-based simulations. 
Defense spending multipliers are smaller in coun-
tries that rely heavily on arms imports, reflecting 
demand leakages abroad, and when the boom is 
temporary. By contrast, multipliers are larger when 
defense increases are deficit financed—as the imme-
diate demand impulse is not offset by contempora-
neous fiscal tightening elsewhere in the budget—and 
concentrated in current spending, such as that for 
personnel and operational outlays, which tend to 
have a larger short-term impact on activity. Similar 
results hold in model-based scenarios. Simulations 
further illustrate that monetary accommodation can 
raise the multiplier, though at the cost of higher 
inflation and a worsening current account deficit, 
while the immediate offsetting of fiscal measures can 
contain these pressures but dampen output effects. 
A coordinated plan for defense spending aimed at 
promoting joint procurement within regional blocs 
and at reducing the import content of defense out-
lays could lead to larger output effects and contain 
external imbalances. 
Based on these findings, and subject to the caveat 
that the macroeconomic effects of past defense spend-
ing booms should be interpreted with caution—as 
today’s defense buildups differ in conflict modalities, 
technology intensity, concentration of production 
hubs, and regional spending synchronization—the 
chapter offers these policy recommendations for navi-
gating trade-offs when ramping up defense spending:
	• Countries should consider that aggregate output 
effects of defense spending are likely to be modest and 
depend on structural characteristics and policy choices. 
Countries seeking to strengthen defense capabili-
ties may face trade-offs in the short term. While a 
deficit-financed stimulus maximizes the demand 
effect, a larger allocation to current spending, pos-
sibly directed at military personnel, could further 
boost employment and domestic demand effects, but 
at the cost of overheating the economy. In this case, 
close coordination with monetary policy is critical 
to temper inflationary pressures. By contrast, a large 
share spent on equipment—especially if imported—
will reduce inflationary pressures, but also demand 
effects, while worsening the current account balance, 
unless stronger domestic productive capacity lowers 
import leakages. In the long run, however, defense 
capital spending, especially if directed at outlays for 
research and development (R&D) without crowding 
out other nondefense productive investment, can 
promote innovation and growth.
	• As scaling up defense spending is likely to place pressure 
on both fiscal and external balances, policies should be 
directed at preserving fiscal and external sustainability. 
Over time, higher deficits and debt can narrow 
fiscal space and undermine fiscal sustainability, 
especially in wartime, while larger import bills may 
weaken external positions, limiting policymakers’ 
room to respond to future shocks. In this context, 
choices about how defense spending is financed and 
allocated become critical. Absent complementary 
measures, sustained defense buildups, particularly 
during wartime, risk crowding out other public 
priorities—most notably social spending—either 
through explicit budgetary reallocation or through 
gradual erosion in real terms. These considerations 
highlight the importance of embedding decisions 
about defense spending within a medium-term 
fiscal and macroeconomic framework that preserves 
fiscal sustainability, mitigates external vulnerabil-
ities, and safeguards social and growth-enhancing 
expenditures.
The Macroeconomics of Defense 
Spending: A Primer
The expansion of defense spending acts as a 
sector-specific positive demand shock to the economy, 
but can create positive or negative supply-side effects 
through sectoral reallocation and changes in relative 
prices (Figure 2.2). Recent empirical evidence suggests 
that, at least in the short term, military spending stim-
ulates output through positive demand effects (Ilzetzki 
2025) and can put upward pressure on prices (Ben 
Zeev and Pappa 2017). As is the case for other forms 
of fiscal stimulus, its macroeconomic consequences—
especially the reaction of private consumption and 
investment—depend on the current status of the 
economy, the monetary policy reaction, the allocation 
of defense spending between government consumption 
and investment, and its financing mix. But unlike 
other forms of fiscal stimulus, a defense buildup has 
distinctive features that shape its transmission to the 
economy (Figure 2.2, red text): 
	• First, it entails a large reallocation of resources from 
nondefense- to defense-oriented sectors as defense 
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
51
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
outlays are highly concentrated in a narrow set 
of industries—such as aerospace and transport 
equipment, electronics and instruments, machin-
ery, and specialty materials (Nekarda and Ramey 
2011)—and often take the form of procurement 
contracts rather than broad public sector payrolls or 
transfers. As a result, a defense buildup functions as 
a sector-specific demand shock that often triggers 
costly reallocations of capital and labor across sec-
tors, rather than a uniform expansion in aggregate 
demand (Ramey and Shapiro 1998). 
	• Second, a larger share of defense spending is typi-
cally allocated to government consumption (military 
personnel, services, and supplies) than to investment 
(military equipment and infrastructure). In fact, for 
35 NATO and European Union member coun-
tries for which data are available, current spending 
accounts for about 80 percent of total govern-
ment defense spending (Becker and others 2025). 
However, the capital share—including procure-
ment and R&D—has been comparatively larger 
in countries such as the United States, reflecting 
programs administered by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency. Moreover, during periods 
of defense buildup, public investment can account 
for a substantial portion of the increase in defense 
outlays (Box 2.1). This compositional bias carries 
important macroeconomic implications. Relative 
Figure 2.2.  Defense Spending: Transmission Channels
Source: IMF staff compilation.
Note: Red text highlights relevant channels for defense spending. ΔG indicates change in government spending. ↑↑ implies a substantial increase. C = consumption; CAB = 
current account balance; ER = exchange rate; G = government spending; I = investment; K = capital; L = labor; M = imports; R&D = research and development; TFP = total 
factor productivity; Y = output; Y* = potential output.
 and/or 
Fiscal expansion
ΔG > 0
Increase in demand, employment, and capital utilization
Y ↑, K ↑, L ↑ + reallocation from nondefense to defense sectors
Multiplier effect
Second round C ↑
I ↑ or ↓ depending on crowding in/out effects
Short-term 
effects
Multiplier size depends on
• Marginal propensity to consume
• Size of domestic defense industry 
(import leakages)
• Spending composition: C versus I
• Sectoral reallocation frictions
• Financing
• Monetary policy response
Output and inflation increase
Y ↑, with dampening if reallocation bottlenecks
Inflation ↑, with ↑↑ if reallocation bottlenecks
Medium-term output
If investment-led stimulus + R&D spillovers:
TFP ↑, Y* ↑
External balance
M ↑, CAB ↓, with import leakage ↑↑ for arms importers
ER appreciates, conditional on monetary policy
Medium-term 
effects
Public debt size depends on
• Financing of stimulus
• GDP multiplier 
• Interest rate on debt
Debt dynamic
• If deficit financed: Public debt ↑, borrowing cost ↑, crowding out of I
• If tax financed: Public debt →, C and/or I ↓
• If spending reprioritization: Public debt →, C ↓
Public consumption ↑
Public investment ↑
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
52
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
to public investment, defense-related govern-
ment consumption tends to generate weaker and 
less-persistent effects for potential output, as it does 
not directly expand productive capacity.6 Instead, 
it operates primarily through demand and income 
channels, increasing wages and employment in 
defense-related activities. 
	• Finally, defense spending entails a significant risk of 
demand leakages through imports, reflecting the high 
degree of concentration in global arms production 
and the fact that many countries are net importers of 
military equipment. Indeed, nearly half of total arms 
revenue among the world’s top 100 arms-producing 
firms is generated in the United States, while 
Europe accounts for about 14 percent and China 
12 percent.7 As a result, most countries import a 
large share of their military equipment, with this 
ratio as high as 80 percent for European Union 
member countries (Draghi 2024). This pattern has 
important macroeconomic implications: When 
defense spending is directed toward imported equip-
ment, as it is, for example, in Denmark (Danmarks 
Nationalbank 2025) or Poland (Box 2.1), a substan-
tial share of the associated demand stimulus accrues 
to foreign producers rather than to domestic value 
added, dampening the response of domestic output 
and employment to the spending while contributing 
to a deterioration in the external balance.
As highlighted in Figure 2.2, defense spending 
operates in the short term as a targeted government 
demand shock, increasing both activity and utilization 
rates of capital and labor in defense-intensive sectors. 
In parallel, the output boost generated by ramping 
up spending could be accompanied by an increase in 
inflation, with stronger potential inflationary effects 
if the economy is close to potential, labor markets are 
tight, capital reallocation frictions arise, or key inputs 
become scarce as resources are shifted to defense-­
oriented sectors (Antonova, Luetticke, and Mueller 
2025; Heerma van Voss and others 2026). The output 
effect can also be amplified in the case of a permanent 
defense spending shock, with potentially larger labor 
supply and investment responses (Baxter and King 
6Not only consumption, but also public investment in the defense 
sector (such as the purchase of military equipment), can yield lower 
productivity relative to other types of public investment (such as 
infrastructure).
7Europe’s share increases to 22 percent when the United Kingdom 
in included. Data are from the SIPRI Arms Industry Database.
1993; Barro and Redlick 2011). Crucially, sectoral 
adjustment costs associated with reallocating factors 
toward defense production can dampen the output 
response and short‑term multiplier and crowd out 
private consumption and interest‑sensitive investment, 
as seen during the Korean and Vietnam war buildups 
in the United States (Ramey and Shapiro 1998, 2001; 
Phelan and Trejos 2000). 
The net effect of defense spending on output will 
also depend on its composition: 
	• A larger share of government spending directed at 
consumption, especially compensation for military 
personnel and when targeted to sectors in which 
households are less wealthy and have a higher mar-
ginal propensity to consume, can crowd in private 
consumption through higher labor demand and 
wages (Fisher and Peters 2010). As a result, govern-
ment consumption multipliers could be larger than 
those coming from investment spending (Boehm 
2020), especially in the short term, as capital spend-
ing is often subject to import leakages and imple-
mentation lags, and yields returns over a longer 
horizon (Alloza and others 2026).
	• At the same time, evidence suggests that investment-­
driven buildups can have positive and persistent 
effects on output by boosting innovation, entrepre-
neurship, and private investment through public 
spending on R&D (Gross and Sampat 2023; 
Antolin-Diaz and Surico 2025; Moretti, Steinwender, 
and Van Reenen 2025). However, supply effects 
can also be negative through crowding-out effects, 
reallocating spending away from productive physical 
and human capital to defense, and through distor-
tions leading to an inefficient allocation of resources 
that can lower productivity (Deger and Smith 1983; 
Knight, Loayza, and Villanueva 1996). 
The choice of how to finance a defense spending 
buildup—whether through taxes, spending reprioriti-
zation, or borrowing—has important macroeconomic 
implications and entails distinct trade-offs (Ohanian 
1997). Tax-financed defense spending tends to crowd 
out private consumption, dampening the expansionary 
effects on output and inflation, although inflationary 
pressures may still arise from relative scarcity and sec-
toral bottlenecks. When booms are financed through 
spending reprioritization, private consumption may 
also be affected, as lower transfers and reduced provi-
sion of public services weigh on household disposable 
income.
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
53
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Deficit-financed buildups, by contrast, generally 
produce larger short-term demand effects, as immedi-
ate crowding out is weaker. However, forward-looking 
households may reduce current consumption in 
anticipation of future tax increases, particularly 
if higher defense spending is expected to persist, 
thereby lowering the effective fiscal multiplier. In 
addition, sustained reliance on debt financing raises 
intergenerational trade-offs and can increase vulner-
abilities over the medium term. Higher borrowing 
costs, especially in countries with limited fiscal space, 
could dampen private investment and partially offset 
the expansionary effects of higher public spending. 
These considerations suggest that permanent defense 
buildups require durable financing arrangements, 
such as higher revenues or lasting changes in spend-
ing composition, to limit medium-term vulnerabili-
ties. Taken together, these considerations underscore 
that the macroeconomic impact of defense spending 
depends not only on its scale and the financing mix, 
but also on expectations regarding its duration and 
permanence.8
Defense spending buildups can also generate 
important cross-border spillovers. As demand for mil-
itary goods and advanced technologies rises, countries 
typically increase imports from major arms exporters 
or technologically advanced economies. These leakages 
generate positive spillovers to foreign producers that 
absorb the additional external demand. Such effects 
tend to be larger in countries without a substantial 
domestic defense industrial base.
Defense Spending Booms
Definition and Characteristics
Episodes of defense spending expansion have been 
frequent and, after slowing in the early 2000s, have 
picked up again (Figure 2.3, panel 1). The chapter 
defines a defense spending boom as a period when the 
two-year moving average of a country’s defense spend-
ing increases by at least 1 percentage point of GDP, 
with the boom lasting for as long as defense spending 
8The financing mix and its effects likely differ across countries. 
Advanced economies generally have more room to smooth tempo-
rary defense spending increases through borrowing, whereas more 
limited fiscal space and higher risk premiums in emerging markets 
increase the likelihood of crowding out and sharper trade-offs 
between defense objectives and macroeconomic stability.
does not decline as a share of GDP.9 According to 
this definition, there have been 215 defense spending 
booms since 1946 across 164 countries, mostly con-
centrated in the late 1970s and in the 1980s. Defense 
spending booms that immediately follow a conflict or 
culminate in an on-site conflict (taking place within 
a country’s borders) within three years are classified as 
“wartime” booms, which account for about half of the 
booms. All others—denoted “peacetime” booms—are 
further classified as “belligerent” (if they are associated 
9This definition is close in spirit to how the literature identifies 
large fiscal expansions and contractions based on sustained changes 
in spending and taxes (Alesina and Perotti 1995). Lacking a widely 
used definition of defense spending booms, the chapter tests the 
robustness of its main findings using two alternative definitions, 
based on (1) a less-restrictive threshold set at 0.5 percentage point 
of GDP and (2) the measure proposed by Marzian and Trebesch 
(2025). See Online Annex 2.2 for details. All online annexes are 
available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.
0
50
100
150
Conflict sites
Belligerents
No conflict
Post–Cold War
AEs
EMDEs
Average
Figure 2.3.  Defense Spending Booms
1. Defense Spending Booms over Time
(Number)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows episodes of defense spending booms, defined as periods 
during which the two-year moving average of defense spending increases by at least 
1 percentage point of GDP, lasting for as long as defense spending does not decline as 
a share of GDP. Wartime (peacetime) booms are defined based on whether (or not) an 
on-site conflict emerges one year before or within three years following the defense 
spending boom onset. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and 
developing economies.
2. Defense Spending
Boom Characteristics
0
5
10
15
20
25
1946
55
50
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95 2000 05
10
15
20 24
Peacetime
Peacetime
Peacetime
(number)
Average size
(percent of GDP)
Average duration
(years)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Wartime
Wartime
Wartime
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
54
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
with belligerent conflicts, occurring abroad) or “no 
conflict” (if no conflict is experienced on-site nor else-
where). Booms are also evenly split between those that 
lead to a temporary or a permanent increase in defense 
spending, depending on whether the ratio of defense 
spending to GDP returns to its initial level 10 years 
after the boom’s onset.
Defense spending booms are predominantly concen-
trated in emerging market and developing economies 
(88 percent) and are especially common in the Middle 
East and in Africa, regions historically more susceptible 
to conflicts (see Chapter 3). Chapter 2 of the April 
2019 Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa 
also shows that conflicts in the region tend to lead to 
substantial increases in military expenditures. Similar 
results have been uncovered with regard to terrorist 
attacks in African countries, with spillover effects to 
neighboring countries’ defense spending (Boly and 
Kéré 2026).
Episodes of defense scaling up in advanced econo-
mies are less frequent (about 11 percent of booms have 
happened in European countries), but they tend to be 
larger and last longer than in other countries. This is 
especially the case during wartime, consistent with the 
spikes in US defense spending during the Korean War 
and World War II (Ramey 2011) and the decline in 
defense spending following the end of the Cold War 
(Sandler and George 2016). While the average boom 
lasts more than two-and-a-half years and accounts for 
an increase in defense spending of about 2.7 percentage 
points of GDP, booms in advanced economies during 
conflicts last, on average, three-and-a-half years and 
amount to about 4.5 percentage points of GDP 
(Figure 2.3, panel 2). In the post–Cold War period, 
defense spending booms have become slightly shorter 
and smaller in size. Also, size is broadly similar across 
booms linked to a temporary or permanent increase in 
defense spending, with the latter 0.7 percentage point 
of GDP greater than temporary booms.
Financing Defense Spending
Defense spending booms are front-loaded and 
financed primarily through higher deficits, with 
revenue mobilization playing a secondary role and 
spending reprioritization occurring only gradually. On 
average, most defense outlays take place in the first 
year of a boom, and nearly all additional spending 
is completed within three years of the boom’s onset 
(Figure 2.4, panel 1). The initial buildup is financed 
largely through widening budget deficits, which 
increase by about 1.1 percentage points of GDP in 
the first year and reach roughly 2 percentage points 
cumulatively by year 3, implying sizable fiscal costs. 
Revenue mobilization contributes more modestly, 
accounting for about 0.2 percentage point of GDP 
in the first year and 1.2 percentage points overall. By 
contrast, spending reprioritization plays a limited role 
early on and becomes prominent only in later years, 
suggesting that governments initially rely on borrowing 
but increasingly turn to reallocating expenditures as 
borrowing costs rise or fiscal constraints tighten. After 
year 3, deficits begin to narrow, marking a reversal 
of the initial financing pattern. These findings are 
consistent with recent evidence over a longer horizon 
for a sample of 20 advanced economies (Marzian and 
Trebesch 2025). Consistent with theory, the average 
Primary deficit
Nondefense reprioritization
Revenues
Defense spending
Peacetime EMDEs
Wartime AEs
Wartime EMDEs
Peacetime AEs
Figure 2.4.  Financing Defense Spending Booms
1. Average Boom Financing Decomposition
(Cumulative change, percentage points of GDP)
−1
5
0
1
2
3
4
2. Defense Spending Booms, by Main Financing Source
(Number)
0
80
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the black line denotes the cumulative increase in defense spending 
in percentage points of GDP. The horizontal axis measures the duration of the defense 
spending booms, in years. For each year, this increase is decomposed into its financing 
sources. “Nondefense reprioritization” is computed as the residual in this equation: 
Change in Deficit = Change in Defense Spending + Change in Nondefense Spending − 
Change in Revenues. In panel 2, wartime (peacetime) booms are defined based 
on whether (or not) an on-site conflict emerges one year before or within three 
years following the corresponding defense spending boom onset. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Years after onset of defense spending boom
1
2
3
4
5
Deficit
Revenue mobilization
Spending reprioritization
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
55
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
temporary boom is entirely deficit financed in the first 
three years, while higher revenues account for about 
half of the three-year increase in military spending 
during permanent booms.
While this average pattern masks substantial 
heterogeneity across episodes, the deficit remains the 
dominant source of financing overall, accounting for 
39 percent of booms, especially during peacetime, 
when it is the dominant financing source for almost 
half of the booms. At the same time, revenue mobi-
lization emerges as the primary financing channel in 
35 percent of cases, while spending reprioritization 
is the primary conduit in 26 percent of cases, high-
lighting meaningful variation in how countries fund 
defense expansions (Figure 2.4, panel 2).
Strengthening Defense Capabilities
Defense spending booms translate into large and 
persistent expansions in military investment, person-
nel, and capabilities. On average, real defense outlays 
increase by about 60 percent within three years of the 
onset of a boom—an amount equivalent to almost 
2 percent of GDP—reflecting a sizable buildup of 
resources devoted to military equipment, alongside 
higher spending on personnel and operating expenses 
(Figure 2.5, panel 1).
These outlays are associated with a strengthening of 
defense capabilities, as reflected in a 7 percent rise in 
the Composite Index of National Capability, a broad 
measure of national power that incorporates defense 
spending, personnel, energy use, industrial capacity, 
and population (Kadera and Sorokin 2004). The 
buildup is accompanied by a sharp increase in arms 
imports—reaching 55 percent over three years—which 
can weigh on external balances, and by a roughly 
13 percent increase in personnel, potentially generating 
second-round demand effects (Figure 2.5, panel 2). 
At the same time, countries expand their adoption 
of advanced military technologies, including artillery, 
armored vehicles, aircraft, and helicopters, as reflected 
in a higher share of available arms technologies in use.
Macroeconomic Consequences of 
Defense Spending: Empirical Evidence
Credible identification of the macroeconomic 
effects of defense spending requires isolating changes 
that are both unanticipated and plausibly unre-
lated to contemporaneous business cycle conditions. 
In practice, this is challenging to do, particularly in 
cross-country settings, as defense outlays may respond 
endogenously to domestic economic conditions, fiscal 
space, or security developments—for example, follow-
ing revenue windfalls, during economic downturns, or 
in response to rising domestic and geopolitical risks. As 
a result, observed changes in defense spending can also 
be driven by output or fiscal dynamics, complicating 
causal interpretation.
Defense spending correlates positively with lagged 
GDP growth and government revenues. To the extent 
that higher revenues and stronger growth relax fiscal 
constraints and enable greater military outlays, this 
procyclicality may bias upward the estimated mac-
roeconomic effects of defense spending. By contrast, 
defense spending is also positively associated with 
Figure 2.5.  Strengthening Defense Capabilities
(Percent change, three years ahead)
1. Defense Spending
0
60
10
20
30
40
50
2. Defense Resilience
0
60
10
20
30
40
50
0
1.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure plots three-year-ahead local projection estimates of cumulative 
responses to defense spending booms. Darker-colored bars denote coefficients that 
are statistically significant at the 10 percent level. In panel 1, the real defense spending 
decomposition focuses on a sample of 31 member countries of the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO); data are not available for Iceland. Panel 2 uses a sample of 
78 countries for “Arms imports volume,” 146 for “Military personnel,” 157 for “National 
capability score,” and 158 for “Arms technology use.”
Total
Equipment
Personnel
Operating
expenses
Infrastructure
Contributions
Arms imports
volume
Military personnel
National capability
score
Arms technology
use (right scale)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
56
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
conflicts. Because wars generate large economic costs, 
as documented in Chapter 3, failing to account for 
this simultaneity would bias the estimated effects 
downward. Similarly, if defense spending increases are 
triggered by adverse geopolitical developments—such 
as an increase in geopolitical risk—and these devel-
opments independently depress economic activity 
(Caldara and Iacoviello 2022), the estimated macroeco-
nomic consequences of defense spending would again 
be biased downward.10
Some endogeneity concerns can be attenuated by 
considering defense spending booms in peacetime 
that—unlike regular changes in defense spending—are 
not predictable based on real GDP growth, govern-
ment revenue dynamics, or recession indicators, and by 
excluding fragile and conflict-affected states and com-
modity exporters, to avoid confounding effects arising 
from long-term conflict scarring (see Chapter 3) and 
commodity price cycles. This section of the chapter 
first examines the macroeconomic implications of 
defense spending booms, with a focus on peacetime 
episodes, before turning to the estimation of defense 
spending multipliers.
Macroeconomic Dynamics after Defense 
Spending Booms
To understand how the economy reacts to a sharp 
increase in defense spending, this section uses panel 
local projections (Jordà 2005) to study macroeconomic 
dynamics following defense spending booms. It starts 
by analyzing the evolution of output, its components, 
and prices. Next, to shed light on the underlying 
channels through which defense spending can shape 
aggregate output, the macroeconomic evidence is com-
plemented with firm-level analysis to test the relative 
importance for corporate investment of a positive 
demand shock stemming from additional defense 
spending versus the crowding-out effect from higher 
public debt. Last, the section considers all booms to 
illustrate their fiscal implications, potential crowding 
out of nondefense spending (the guns versus butter 
trade-off), and their effects on external imbalances. 
While results must be interpreted with caution because 
of the endogeneity of spending booms, especially 
those during wars, exploiting the richness of the data 
and the large variation in the intensity and length of 
booms across periods of war and peace can provide a 
more informative discussion of the trade-offs generated 
10See Online Annex 2.2 for a more extensive discussion, addi-
tional results, and robustness tests.
by the buildup of defense spending (Marzian and 
Trebesch 2025).
Defense spending booms in peacetime are followed 
by a sizable increase in real GDP and by a short-lived 
rise in inflation. Following a boom, a country’s real 
output is more than 3 percent higher than in periods 
when the country is not experiencing a boom, with 
the increase materializing about two years after the 
boom’s onset and persisting over the medium term 
(Figure 2.6, panel 1). Given the average size and length 
of booms in peacetime, this pattern is consistent with 
a multiplier of defense spending above 1. The average 
increase in GDP is driven by booms that are linked 
to a permanent increase in defense spending. In these 
episodes, real GDP increases by more than 5 percent 
over five years (see Online Annex 2.3). Consumer 
prices also increase by almost 3.6 percent on average 
relative to nonboom periods, but this inflationary 
effect is temporary and fades over the medium term 
(Figure 2.6, panel 2).
1. Real GDP
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels plot local projection estimates of cumulative responses to 
peacetime defense spending booms. Fragile and conflict-affected states, as well as 
commodity-exporting emerging market and developing economies, are excluded 
from the sample. The sample period spans 1946–2024. Solid lines denote point 
estimates, and shaded areas denote 90 percent confidence intervals.
Figure 2.6.  Output and Prices after Peacetime Booms
(Percent change)
2. Consumer Price Index
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Years after onset of peacetime defense spending boom
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years after onset of peacetime defense spending boom
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
57
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
The output response is driven by higher domes-
tic absorption, reflecting increases in government 
consumption alongside crowding in of private 
consumption and investment, with broadly similar 
contributions to GDP growth across components. 
Consistent with a large share of the stimulus being 
allocated to personnel and operating expenses, gov-
ernment consumption rises by about 9 percent within 
three years (Figure 2.7, panel 1). Private consump-
tion also increases—by roughly 3 percent—likely 
supported by wider fiscal deficits and direct demand 
effects through higher labor demand in defense-related 
sectors. Total investment shows a comparable pos-
itive response, reflecting both higher public invest-
ment in defense equipment and infrastructure 
and increased private investment, particularly in 
defense-related industries. Turning to the external 
sector, stimulus-driven demand leads to wider external 
imbalances, as both the current account and trade 
balance deteriorate. Imports accelerate—reflecting 
leakages from defense spending and stronger demand 
for foreign goods—while exports remain broadly 
unchanged. Moving to the key factors of production 
(Figure 2.7, panel 2), defense spending booms are 
associated with a subsequent increase in the stock of 
capital, in line with the documented boost to invest-
ment, and an increase in total factor productivity, 
which may be explained by changes in capacity utili-
zation (Basu 1996) and learning by necessity, as firms 
adapt to surging demand by improving productivity 
when facing capacity constraints (Ilzetzki 2024).11
Firm-Level Evidence on Defense Spending and 
Private Investment
While aggregate investment increases in response to 
higher defense spending, at the firm level the response 
can differ, reflecting the balance between a demand 
channel—supporting investment, particularly in 
defense-intensive sectors—and a potential crowding-out 
effect, as increasing public debt can tighten firms’ 
financing constraints (Huang, Pagano, and Panizza 
2020). To disentangle these channels, the chapter 
estimates the sensitivity of investment to cash flows—a 
standard indicator of the presence of credit constraints 
(Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen 1988)—around 
defense spending booms, distinguishing between epi-
sodes associated with increasing public debt and those 
that are budget neutral. The analysis draws on data for 
more than 4.6 million private nonfinancial firms across 
41 countries between 1995 and 2023.12
Firm investment becomes less sensitive to internal 
funds during defense spending booms, consistent with 
a positive effect on demand that relaxes financing 
constraints and supports aggregate investment. By 
contrast, when booms coincide with higher public 
debt, financing conditions tighten and crowd out 
firm investment, as shown by a higher sensitivity 
11This interpretation is consistent with the effect on total factor 
productivity losing its statistical significance once capacity utilization 
is controlled for. However, defense spending booms are followed by 
greater total factor productivity over longer horizons, consistent with 
evidence showing that the R&D component of defense spending can 
boost innovation and crowd in private R&D spending (Antolin Díaz 
and Surico 2025; Moretti, Steinwender, and Van Reenen 2025). See 
Online Annex 2.3.
12This approach also mitigates concerns about the endogeneity of 
defense spending booms, as it controls for unobserved shocks at the 
sector and country level, such as changes in demand, that drive firm 
investment decisions. See Online Annex 2.4 for a detailed discussion 
of the data (sourced from Orbis), the methodology, and the full set 
of results.
Real percent change
Contribution to GDP growth
Figure 2.7.  Transmission Channels of Defense Spending 
Booms
(Percent, three years ahead)
1. Components of Real GDP
−4
14
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2. Factors of Production
0
3.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels plot the three-year-ahead coefficients from local projection 
estimates of cumulative responses to peacetime defense spending booms. Fragile 
and conflict-affected states, as well as commodity-exporting emerging market and 
developing economies, are excluded from the sample. The sample period spans 
1946–2024. Darker-colored bars denote coefficients that are statistically significant 
at the 10 percent level. GFCF = gross fixed capital formation; TFP = total factor 
productivity.
Government
consumption
Private
consumption
GFCF
Imports
Exports
Capital stock
Employment
TFP
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
58
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
of investment to cash flow.13 As expected, demand 
effects are strongest in defense-related sectors, in 
which the sensitivity of investment to cash flow falls 
to zero during budget-neutral booms, suggesting that 
government demand fully offsets financing frictions. 
Conversely, in countries with high import content of 
defense goods, where spending largely leaks abroad, the 
demand channel is muted, and investment sensitivities 
during booms remain unchanged relative to those in 
normal periods (Figure 2.8).
Fiscal Costs of Defense Spending Booms
Defense spending booms generally lead to a deteri-
oration in countries’ fiscal positions. Consistent with 
the evidence discussed earlier about booms being 
financed predominantly by government borrowing 
and with recent findings by Marzian and Trebesch 
(2025), within three years after a boom’s onset, the 
government deficit widens by about 2.6 percentage 
13The crowding out in response to higher debt may be consistent 
with a larger output response to deficit-financed defense spending 
booms, because of general equilibrium effects.
points of GDP and the public-debt-to-GDP ratio 
increases by almost 7 percentage points more than 
that of countries not ramping up defense spending 
(Figure 2.9, panel 1). 
Fiscal costs are not limited to rising debt and risks 
to fiscal sustainability; booms can also crowd out non-
defense primary spending. Whereas in the full sample 
of defense spending booms there is no clear evidence 
of crowding out, in line with the findings of Marzian 
and Trebesch (2025) on a smaller sample of advanced 
economies, there is a clear policy trade-off between 
higher defense outlays and other public spending 
priorities when booms are financed predominantly 
through spending reprioritization. Spending reprior-
itization implies cuts in the budget, with nondefense 
primary spending declining by more than 20 percent 
in real terms (about 2 percent of GDP) in the three 
years following a boom. The decrease in social spend-
ing amounts to about 1 percentage point of GDP 
and spans multiple categories of spending, including 
social protection, health, and education (Figure 2.9, 
panel 2).14 Taken together, these findings underscore 
the importance for policymakers of carefully consider-
ing financing choices when scaling up defense spend-
ing, as reliance on spending reprioritization, while 
potentially appropriate when a surge is permanent, can 
entail meaningful distributional and social conse-
quences over the medium term.
The fiscal implications of ramping up defense 
spending differ markedly depending on whether 
booms are associated with on-site conflicts. Wartime 
booms are followed by a sharp increase in public debt 
and a contraction in real social spending. In contrast, 
peacetime booms benefit from positive output effects 
(Figure 2.6, panel 1) and are not followed by an 
increase in debt-to-GDP ratios or by crowding out of 
social spending, on average (Figure 2.9, panel 3).
Estimating Defense Spending Multipliers
To provide a comprehensive view of the output 
response to defense spending outside boom episodes, 
this subsection estimates defense spending multipliers 
for a large sample of countries, excluding fragile and 
conflict-affected states.
Two exercises directed at attenuating the potential 
endogeneity of defense spending yield multipliers 
14The decline in social spending is smaller, at about 7 percent in 
real terms, for advanced economies. See Online Annex 2.2.
Boom without debt increase
Boom and rising debt
Boom
No boom
Figure 2.8.  Firm Investment after Booms
(Regression coefficients)
−0.05
0.15
0
0.05
0.10
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure reports coefficients measuring the sensitivity of investment to cash 
flows, estimated from a regression controlling for past investment and sales (all 
expressed as percent of assets). The blue bars correspond to the sensitivity for firms 
in countries without defense spending booms. The red bars measure the sensitivity 
for firms in countries during periods of boom not associated with debt increases, and 
the yellow bars measure that sensitivity during periods of boom associated with debt 
increases. Import-intensive countries are defined as those for which arms imports are 
above the cross-country average. The sample includes 41 countries between 1995 
and 2023. Bars denote point estimates, and whiskers denote 90 percent confidence 
intervals. See Online Annex 2.4 for further details.
All firms
Defense-related
sectors
Import-intensive
countries
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
59
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
generally closer to 1.15 First, narrative methods are 
used to identify a subset of defense spending booms 
that are driven by external geopolitical events or by 
alliance-related decisions that are largely unrelated 
to local macro-fiscal conditions and domestic secu-
rity concerns.16 Using narrative defense spending 
booms as an instrument for defense spending leads to 
multipliers that are estimated at about 1 (Figure 2.10, 
panels 1 and 2), consistent with earlier estimates 
ranging between 0.6 and 1.2 for defense spending and 
centered on 1 for government spending.17 Second, 
restricting the sample to members of defense alliances 
(NATO and the Islamic Military Counter Terrorism 
Coalition) has the advantage that their defense spend-
ing is not anticipated by macroeconomic conditions, 
such as GDP growth and government revenue (see 
Online Annex 2.2), as their defense decisions are often 
shaped by forces outside their domestic political and 
economic systems (Sheremirov and Spirovska 2022). 
In this case, the resulting estimates are not always 
statistically significant but still close to 1 (Figure 2.10, 
panels 3 and 4).18
While the positive association between defense 
spending and prior GDP growth or revenue windfalls 
may lead to upward-biased point estimates, estimating 
defense spending multipliers on a large cross-country 
sample provides more granular evidence on the factors 
shaping the output response to defense spending.
In line with the existing literature, defense spend-
ing multipliers are larger when the defense buildup is 
permanent (as sustained demand encourages capital 
formation), for arms exporters (likely because of lower 
leakage of defense spending through imports), and 
when defense spending is financed mostly by deficits 
15While these exercises rely on changes in defense spending that 
are not predicted by lagged economic conditions, they can still be 
endogenous to current and expected conditions, as well as to other 
macroeconomic shocks, such as geopolitical risks.
16These narrative episodes are uncorrelated with lagged economic 
conditions such as GDP growth, government revenues, commodity 
cycles, and recessions. See Online Annex 2.2 for details.
17Reported multipliers vary widely in the literature—ranging from 
less than 1 (Barro and Redlick 2011) to about 2 or more (Fisher 
and Peters 2010; Antolin Díaz and Surico 2025; Furceri and others 
2026), reflecting differences in samples, time periods, country char-
acteristics, and empirical approaches. See Online Annex Table 2.5.5 
for a literature review of defense spending multipliers.
18NATO comprises 24 advanced economies and 8 emerging mar-
ket and developing economies, whereas the Islamic Military Counter 
Terrorism Coalition (IMCTC) comprises 41 emerging market and 
developing economies. Restricting the sample to members of these 
alliances comes at the cost of limiting the possibility of generalizing 
results to other contexts.
Real percent change
Percentage points of GDP (right scale)
Figure 2.9.  Fiscal Consequences of Defense Spending Booms
1. Fiscal Imbalances: All Defense Spending Booms
(Percentage points of GDP, three years ahead)
2. Reduction of Social Spending: Booms Financed by Spending 
Reprioritization
(Estimates, three years ahead)
3. Fiscal Imbalances: Wartime and Peacetime Booms
(Percentage points of GDP, unless otherwise stated, three years ahead)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels plot the three-year-ahead coefficients from local projection estimates 
of cumulative responses to defense spending booms. Wartime (peacetime) booms 
are defined based on whether (or not) an on-site conflict emerges one year before or 
within three years following a defense spending boom onset. The sample period spans 
1946–2024. Darker-colored bars denote coefficients that are statistically significant at 
the 10 percent level.
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
−8
−4
0
4
8
12
16
20
Deficit
Non-
defense
primary
spending
Social
spending
Other
Components
Social
protection
Health
Education
Social spending subcomponents
Fiscal
deficit
Government
debt
Real social
spending
(percent
change)
Fiscal
deficit
Government
debt
Real social
spending
(percent
change)
Government debt
Nondefense primary
spending
Peacetime
Wartime
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
60
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
rather than through revenue mobilization or spending 
reprioritization (Figure 2.11). In addition, spending 
composition matters, with larger multipliers estimated 
for current spending items (personnel and operating 
expenses) than for capital spending (equipment and 
infrastructure), possibly from a high marginal propen-
sity to consume for current spending and high average 
import content for capital spending.19 Defense spend-
ing multipliers are also larger in countries with fixed 
exchange regimes, where monetary policy accommo-
dates the fiscal expansion (Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Végh 
2013), and with higher public investment efficiency, 
consistent with the findings discussed in the October 
19The difference between capital and current spending multipliers, 
however, is not statistically significant, given the large confidence 
bands for capital spending multipliers.
2025 Fiscal Monitor (see Online Annex 2.3). Ramp-
ing up defense spending can also generate spillovers 
to trade partners. Consistent with increasing trade 
integration and advanced economies being the main 
exporters of arms and military equipment, an increase 
in defense spending, starting in the 1990s, is associated 
with higher output in advanced economies, while there 
are no significant spillovers to emerging markets nor 
before the end of the Cold War (Box 2.2).
Macroeconomic Consequences of 
Defense Spending: Model Simulations
Modeling Assumptions
To quantify the general equilibrium implications of a 
buildup of defense spending under different scenarios, 
the chapter uses the IMF’s Flexible System of Global 
Models, an annual multiregion dynamic stochastic 
Figure 2.11.  Differences in Defense Spending Multipliers
(Cumulative multipliers, three years ahead)
Source: IMF staff calculations. 
Note: The figure shows nonlinearities in the size of three-year-ahead cumulative 
multipliers by income group, conflict status, boom persistence, size of defense 
industry, sources of financing, and spending composition. “Wartime” (“Peacetime”) is 
defined based on whether (or not) an on-site conflict has occurred in the past year or 
occurs within three years ahead. “Importer” (“exporter”) refers to economies in which 
the average share of arms exports in their arms trade is below (above) the median 
for the sample. “Deficit financed” is defined based on whether the annual change in 
a country’s defense spending is driven mostly by a change in its deficit (rather than 
by changes in its revenues or nondefense spending). “Current” spending comprises 
personnel and operating expenses, whereas “Capital” spending comprises spending 
on equipment and infrastructure. A change in defense spending in year t is defined 
as “Permanent” if the direction of the change in the ratio of defense spending to GDP 
in that year is sustained over the subsequent 10 years and as “Temporary” otherwise. 
Bars denote point estimates, and whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. 
AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
AEs
EMDEs
Peacetime
Wartime
Temporary
Permanent
Importer
Exporter
Yes
Current
Capital
No
Income
group
Conflict
condition
Spending
persistence
Arms
industry
Deficit
financed
Spending
type
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 2.10.  Defense Spending Multipliers
(Cumulative multipliers)
1. IV: Post–World War II
2. IV: Post–Cold War
−3
4
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−3
4
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−2
4
−1
0
1
2
3
−3
4
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels plot local projection estimates of cumulative responses of output to 
defense spending. Fragile and conflict-affected states are excluded from the sample. 
The sample period spans 1946–2024 in panel 1 and 1991–2024 in panels 2, 3, and 4. 
In panels 1–2, multipliers are estimated using narrative defense spending booms as an 
instrument for defense spending. Solid lines denote point estimates, and shaded areas 
denote 90 percent confidence intervals. See Online Annex 2.5 for details. IMCTC = 
Islamic Military Counter Terrorism Coalition; IV = instrumental variable; NATO = North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization; OLS = ordinary least squares.
Years after onset of defense
spending boom
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
3. OLS: NATO Members
4. OLS: IMCTC Members
Years after onset of defense
spending boom
Years after onset of defense
spending boom
Years after onset of defense
spending boom
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
61
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
general equilibrium model that combines both micro-
founded and reduced-form formulations of various 
economic sectors (Andrle and others 2015).20 Com-
pared with the empirical analysis, the model simula-
tions impose structural discipline on macroeconomic 
relationships, incorporate policy reactions, and enable 
counterfactual simulations to illustrate both short-term 
and long-term effects from increasing defense spend-
ing under different scenarios. The baseline scenario is 
calibrated considering the planned increase in defense 
spending across a representative group of European 
Union member countries, as of October 2025, mea-
sured as a deviation from spending levels before Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. On average, the ramping up of 
defense spending in Europe is sizable and is projected 
to reach 1 percent of GDP in 2026 and increase to 
1.3 percent by 2030 (Figure 2.12, panel 1). The level 
of spending is assumed to remain constant as a share 
of GDP until 2035 and then to decline linearly to 
75 percent of the 2030 level by 2050.21 Defense spend-
ing is assumed to be allocated 80 percent to consump-
tion and 20 percent to investment, in line with data on 
military spending subcomponents for European Union 
member countries (European Commission 2025). Part 
of government spending is allocated to foreign goods, 
and the baseline scenario assumes that the import con-
tent amounts to 20 percent for government spending, 
with the investment component having a much higher 
import content, including toward the United States, 
in line with its dominance in the arms industry. The 
buildup of defense spending is assumed to be fully debt 
financed through 2028. After that, offsetting measures 
are gradually introduced and fully implemented by 
2033, when all spending is budget neutral.
Modeling Scenarios
Under the baseline scenario, real GDP for European 
countries is projected to increase by 0.7 percentage 
point in 2026 and by 0.9 percentage point by 2028, 
after which it broadly stabilizes (Figure 2.12, panel 1). 
The persistent effect on output comes partly from the 
20The analysis uses the model’s euro area module, which includes 
a bloc for each of the 11 major euro area countries plus 13 other 
blocs, covering major world economies as stand-alone blocs (China, 
India, Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United 
States) and six other regions. While the defense spending buildup 
is calibrated to the European experience, the scenario results can be 
generalized to other contexts. See Online Annex 2.6 for details.
21Starting the simulation in 2026 implies that the defense spend-
ing buildup is treated as an unanticipated shock at that date, leading 
to a potential upward bias of short-term growth effects.
Baseline
Immediate fiscal measures
Monetary accommodation
Defense spending
buildup
Figure 2.12.  Defense Spending: Baseline and Alternative 
Scenarios
(Percentage point difference, unless noted otherwise)
1. GDP Path of the Shock and
Real GDP
(Percent difference)
0
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2025
35
27
29
31
33
2. Real Consumption
(Percent difference)
−1.0
1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
2025
35
27
29
31
33
3. Real Investment
(Percent difference)
0
3.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2025
35
27
29
31
33
4. Core CPI Inflation
0
0.6
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
2025
35
27
29
31
33
5. Long-Term Interest Rate
−0.10
0.15
−0.05
0
0.05
0.10
2025
35
27
29
31
33
6. Government Deficit/GDP
−0.4
1.0
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
2025
35
27
29
31
33
7. Government Debt/GDP
−1.5
3.0
−1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2025
35
27
29
31
33
8. Current Account/GDP
−0.6
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0
2025
35
27
29
31
33
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents model simulations calibrated to a defense spending shock 
in the European Union, as plotted in panel 1. The monetary accommodation scenario 
(blue lines) assumes that the central bank does not react following a standard interest 
rate rule. The immediate fiscal measures scenario (red lines) assumes that offsetting 
measures are implemented immediately rather than gradually to make the defense 
spending shock budget neutral. CPI = consumer price index.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
62
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
public investment component of the stimulus, which 
raises productivity in the long term and crowds in 
private investment. Given the size of the fiscal shock, 
this implies a medium-term fiscal multiplier slightly 
below unity (at about 0.8), within the range of recent 
estimates produced by the European Central Bank 
using different dynamic stochastic general equilibrium 
models (Bokan and others 2025). Inflation peaks at 
about 28 basis points in 2029 and then starts a gradual 
decline, although it remains permanently 0.16 per-
centage point higher than it would have been without 
the stimulus (Figure 2.12, panel 4). The policy rate 
increases as monetary policy reacts to higher inflation. 
Long-term interest rates also rise, and the exchange 
rate appreciates. The loss of external competitiveness, 
together with the assumption that part of the defense 
stimulus is directed at importing military equipment 
from abroad, leads to a worsening of the current 
account deficit that peaks at 0.4 percent of GDP in 
2028 and then stabilizes at 0.3 percent of GDP. As the 
baseline assumes that initially the defense spending is 
fully debt financed, the deficit increases through 2029, 
when the offsetting measures start to kick in, bringing 
the deficit back down rapidly (Figure 2.12, panel 6). 
However, the change in the financing mix that reduces 
government transfers crowds out private consumption 
and contributes to reducing the fiscal multiplier. Over 
the long term, thanks to the improvement in GDP, 
the budget balance improves by about 0.2 percent 
of GDP. Public debt follows a similar hump-shaped 
path, increasing by almost 2 percentage points of 
GDP by 2030 and then declining toward its baseline 
(Figure 2.12, panel 7).
Four alternative scenarios capture the key macroeco-
nomic trade-offs and the policy options for countries 
that are building up defense spending. In the first 
scenario, the model is used to show the effect of the 
same spending shock under different monetary policy 
reactions (Figure 2.12, blue lines). When monetary 
policy accommodates the shock, rather than raising 
rates in response to higher growth and inflationary 
pressures, the demand effect is larger, as shown by 
higher private consumption, stronger investment, and 
a higher path for real GDP compared with those in the 
baseline. As a result, the model yields a larger multi-
plier, which is now above 1 over the medium term. 
But core inflation spikes by half a percentage point 
and the current account deteriorates by 0.5 percentage 
points of GDP—notwithstanding a depreciation of the 
exchange rate—because of strong income effects.
In the second scenario, fiscal policy is assumed to 
react faster and the offsetting measures are imple-
mented immediately, to minimize the public debt 
buildup (Figure 2.12, red lines). In this case, the deficit 
is contained and the dynamics are more favorable, but 
the effectiveness of the stimulus is weaker, and the 
multiplier falls to about 0.7.22
The third scenario aligns with the recent experience 
of countries such as Poland (Box 2.1) and consid-
ers the long-term implications of allocating a larger 
share (40 percent) of government defense spending 
to investment (Figure 2.13, red lines). By raising the 
public capital stock and boosting productivity in the 
long term, public investment crowds in private invest-
ment and stimulates labor demand, leading to larger 
long-term output effects, consistent with evidence 
that defense R&D can generate long-term innovation 
and productivity gains through knowledge spillovers 
(Moretti, Steinwender, and Van Reenen 2025).
The final scenario is explicitly targeted at model-
ing the benefits of a coordinated program for defense 
spending and financing (Figure 2.13, blue lines). The 
scenario jointly lowers the assumption on the import 
content of the spending shock; reduces exogenous 
risk premiums by 20 basis points for as long as the 
spending is fully debt financed; and raises the produc-
tivity of public investment by 20 percent compared 
with that in the baseline, to reflect productivity gains 
coming from economies of scale, greater specialization, 
and faster diffusion of learning and innovation across 
a larger integrated market (Hartley 2008; Letta 2024). 
This scenario is in line with current proposals such as 
that of Hildebrand, Rey, and Schularick (2026) and 
the Security Action for Europe, a €150 billion loan 
facility for common procurement aiming to boost the 
European defense industry, reduce its fragmentation, 
and prioritize European suppliers. Under this scenario, 
real investment and, to a smaller extent, real consump-
tion increase in the short term compared with their 
levels in the baseline, leading to a larger output boost, 
implying a short-term multiplier close to 1. Productiv-
ity gains resulting from reduced fragmentation support 
long-term growth. The coordinated defense spending 
22Additional analysis shows the longer-term benefits of a larger 
allocation of the stimulus to capital spending (up to 40 percent, 
close to the share in the United States), as real investment keeps 
increasing over the projection horizon, sustaining output growth (see 
Online Annex 2.6). This is relevant also in the European context, in 
which there is a large variation in the investment share, from very 
low levels to up to 50 percent (European Commission 2025).
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
63
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
buildup leads to a smaller increase in public debt, but 
also to higher inflation.23 Because of reduced import 
leakages, in the medium term the current account 
improves regardless of the offsetting effect caused by 
stronger demand.
Conclusions and Policy 
Recommendations
After decades of declining global defense spending, 
rising geopolitical risks and more frequent military 
conflicts are pushing countries toward an inflection 
point, with several ramping up defense spending. As 
this reversal is happening at a time of already elevated 
spending pressures, policymakers face salient trade-offs 
when spending more on defense.
The macroeconomic impact of the current defense 
buildup could differ from that of past episodes, as 
defense outlays are increasingly capital and R&D 
intensive and are occurring in economies that are more 
integrated and more indebted. However, empirical 
and model-based results can help explain how defense 
buildups propagate through the economy.
A unique analysis of a sample of 164 countries 
since the end of World War II shows that governments 
have frequently engaged in sizable spending booms, 
mostly financed through borrowing. Operating as a 
sector-specific demand shock, defense buildups during 
peacetime raise output and prices in the short term, 
especially when the increase in defense spending is per-
manent, and they can also raise medium-term growth 
through higher capital stock and possibly productivity 
gains. Firm-level evidence shows that spending booms 
can have larger demand effects on defense-related sec-
tors, boosting investment, but they can also crowd out 
private investment when associated with debt buildups.
Defense spending booms often weaken fiscal and 
external balances. Booms occurring in wartime are 
followed by sharp increases in public debt and large 
reductions in social spending, the standard guns versus 
23An opposite scenario considers a one-off increase in risk premi-
ums by 50 basis points to model the possible implications of rising 
spreads in response to higher spending, especially in countries with 
limited fiscal space, lacking any coordination. The scenario shows a 
more muted output and price response and a larger increase in pub-
lic debt. A sustained increase in sovereign yields, particularly where 
defense expansions are perceived as fiscally unsustainable, could 
create macrofinancial vulnerabilities by weakening domestic financial 
institutions and amplifying stress in sovereign bond markets (see 
Chapter 2 of the April 2022 Global Financial Stability Report and 
Chapter 3 of the October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report).
Defense spending
buildup
Baseline
Higher defense investment
Coordinated defense spending
Figure 2.13.  Higher Investment Spending and Coordinated 
Defense Spending
(Percentage point difference, unless noted otherwise)
1. GDP Path of the Shock and
Real GDP
(Percent difference)
2. Real Consumption
(Percent difference)
0
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
−1.0
1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents the model simulations calibrated to a defense spending shock 
in the European Union, as plotted in panel 1. The higher defense investment scenario 
(red lines) assumes a larger share (40 percent rather than 20 percent) of government 
defense spending allocated to investment. The coordinated defense spending scenario 
(blue lines) assumes a lower import content of the spending shock, a 20 basis point 
reduction in the risk premiums, and a 20 percent increase in the productivity of public 
investment. CPI = consumer price index.
2025
35
2025
35
27
29
31
33
27
29
31
33
3. Real Investment
(Percent difference)
4. Core CPI Inflation
0
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2025
35
2025
35
27
29
31
33
27
29
31
33
5. Long-Term Interest Rate
6. Government Deficit/GDP
−0.2
0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
−0.4
1.0
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
2025
35
2025
35
27
29
31
33
27
29
31
33
7. Government Debt/GDP
8. Current Account/GDP
−1.0
3.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
−0.6
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0
2025
35
2025
35
27
29
31
33
27
29
31
33
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
64
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
butter trade-off. In contrast, peacetime booms tend 
to raise output without worsening debt or crowding 
out social spending. On the external side, stronger 
imports, the result of increased demand and in part of 
the purchase of foreign military equipment, worsen the 
current account.
Model-based simulations help quantify the general 
equilibrium effects of defense spending buildup. In the 
baseline scenario, the model predicts moderate output 
gains, consistent with the average multiplier estimated 
at about 1. Inflation goes up modestly and temporarily, 
monetary policy tightens in response, and the current 
account deteriorates as imports (including those of 
military equipment) increase. Public debt increases in 
the first years of the buildup but gradually stabilizes as 
offsetting fiscal measures are implemented. The policy 
reaction matters. When monetary policy accommo-
dates the shock, the demand effect is stronger and 
the multiplier is larger. But this comes at the cost of 
higher inflation and a widening of the current account. 
When fiscal policy tightens to limit the accumulation 
of public debt, the effect of the stimulus is weaker and 
the multiplier is smaller.
The chapter’s findings underscore the importance of 
policy design and structural features in shaping defense 
spending’s macroeconomic outcomes. Policymakers 
should consider the following options:
	• Integrating defense buildup within credible medi-
um-term fiscal frameworks. As defense booms 
are typically front-loaded and tend to be debt 
financed, countries should embed spending plans in 
medium-term fiscal frameworks to safeguard fiscal 
sustainability. Since wartime booms are associated 
with larger debt increases and social spending cuts, 
as shown in Chapter 3, governments should prepare 
contingency plans for conflict-related buildups, 
including mechanisms for protecting the vulnerable 
and preserving essential services. These consid-
erations are more salient for fragile and conflict-­
affected states that lack domestic defense industries 
and have limited potential to raise revenue and weak 
fiscal frameworks (IMF 2022).
	• Carefully managing macroeconomic conditions to pre-
vent overheating and friction costs. Defense buildups 
raise prices and utilization rates, especially when the 
economy is near capacity. Coordination with mone-
tary authorities is essential to avoid inflationary pres-
sures while maintaining space for productive private 
investment. When feasible, smoothing the pace of 
buildup can help mitigate bottlenecks, especially if 
large reallocations across sectors are expected.
	• Considering that defense spending composition matters 
for short‑term stimulus and long‑term productivity 
gains. Current spending produces larger short‑term 
multipliers, whereas capital spending, if it is directed 
at R&D outlays and does not crowd out nondefense 
productive investment, can support productivity 
over the longer term. While the mix is dictated 
mostly by security needs, countries should internal-
ize macroeconomic constraints and recognize that 
scaling up defense investment typically requires a 
large up-front commitment and sustained spending, 
making it fiscally more demanding than increases in 
current outlays.
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
65
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Poland has the highest spending on defense, as a 
share of GDP, among member countries of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). After donating 
significant portions of its standing arsenal to Ukraine in 
2022, Poland moved quickly to rebuild and modernize 
its military. Between 2021 and 2025, defense spending 
increased from 2.2 percent to an estimated 4.5 percent 
of GDP, in cash terms (Figure 2.1.1, panel 1). At 
$46.7 billion, Poland now has the fifth-largest defense 
outlay in Europe. This box highlights the key features 
of the scaling up of defense spending in Poland and 
discusses its macroeconomic implications. 
The increase in defense spending was driven by 
investment in equipment. Equipment spending rose 
from 0.7 percent to 2.4 percent of GDP and now 
accounts for more than half of total defense outlays, 
the highest share in NATO. Given the lack of domes-
tic capacity, this surge was met largely through imports 
(accounting for 80 percent of total capital spending, 
according to private estimates), particularly from 
Korea and the United States. However, several govern-
ment initiatives aimed to increase domestic production 
to support resilience and growth.
Poland also scaled up military personnel from 
116,200 in 2020 to 233,800 in 2025, without con-
scription, relying instead on expanding recruitment 
and raising salaries, with personnel outlays rising 
from 0.9 percent to 1.2 percent of GDP between 
2021 and 2025. As a result, Poland now has the 
first-largest standing military in the European Union 
(Figure 2.1.1, panel 2).
Thus far, the macroeconomic impact of Poland’s 
military buildup has been muted. Between 2021 
and 2025, Poland increased total public spending in 
accrual terms by 6.5 percent of GDP, of which defense 
accounted for about 2 percentage points. Given ini-
tially low public debt (at 48 percent of GDP in 2022) 
and ready access to financing, the spending increase 
was financed almost entirely by increases in the deficit. 
While the broader fiscal expansion did contribute to 
economic growth, the impact of the defense spending 
increase alone was likely modest, because the spending 
was highly import intensive. At the same time, to the 
degree that looser fiscal policy did contribute to higher 
domestic demand, it likely resulted in a tighter mon-
etary policy path than would have been seen without 
such spending increases (Figure 2.1.1, panel 3).
The authors of this box are Kareem Ismail, Krzysztof 
Krogulski, Moheb Malak, Robert Sierhej, and Can Ugur.
Box 2.1. Scaling Up Defense Spending: The Case of Poland
Infrastructure
Personnel
Equipment
NATO average spending
(unweighted)
Other
Percent of labor force
(right scale)
General government fiscal deficit (percent of GDP)
NBP policy interest rate (percent)
Figure 2.1.1.  Scaling Up Defense Spending: 
The Case of Poland
1. Poland: Defense Spending
(Percent of GDP; cash accounting)
0
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
250
50
100
150
200
0
3
1
2
0
10
2
4
6
8
2. Military Personnel: European NATO, 2025
(Thousands)
3. Key Policy Instruments
Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, World Economic Outlook; National 
Bank of Poland (NBP); North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO); 
Statistics Poland; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, 2024 and 2025 data are estimates. “Other” 
includes operations and maintenance expenditure, other 
research and development expenditure, and unallocated 
expenditure. Personnel figures are not fully comparable across 
countries because of differences in definitions and coverage of 
active personnel, reserves, and auxiliary forces. In panel 2, data 
for France and the United Kingdom refer to 2024. Data labels 
in the figure use International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) country codes.
2014 15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
POL
FRA
DEU
ITA
GBR
ESP
GRC
ROU
NLD
FIN
CZE
BGR
SWE
PRT
NOR
HUN
BEL
LTU
DNK
SVK
HRV
LVA
EST
ALB
SVN
LUX
2018
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
Military buildup period
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
66
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Defense outlays are often large, persistent, and 
characterized by complex cross-border supply chains. 
As a result, their macroeconomic effects can spill over 
to other countries, either through direct imports of 
defense-related goods and services or indirect imports 
arising from increased aggregate demand. To under-
stand the size and nature of these spillovers, this box 
constructs country-specific foreign defense expenditure 
measures based on a trade-weighted aggregation of 
partner countries’ defense expenditure. These measures 
provide the basis for quantifying the international 
transmission of defense spending shocks (Auerbach 
and Gorodnichenko 2013; Furceri and others 2026). 
By capturing the extent to which higher defense 
spending abroad translates into increased import 
demand, higher values of these measures would imply 
higher output in exporting countries.
Estimates from local projections on the sample used 
to estimate the defense spending multipliers in the 
chapter show that spillovers to advanced economies 
are statistically significant in the post-1990 period 
(Figure 2.2.1, panel 1), while they are smaller and not 
statistically significant in the full sample (1948–2023). 
By contrast, there is no evidence of spillovers to 
emerging market and developing economies. These 
results are consistent with the larger share of advanced 
economies in global exports and international arms 
trade. They also reflect the deeper trade integration, 
more interconnected supply chains, and greater 
cross-border participation in defense-related produc-
tion in the post–Cold War period, all factors that 
amplify international spillovers. 
Reflecting the dense and highly integrated trade 
networks among advanced economies, most spillovers 
originate from trade linkages among these economies, 
and boost GDP by about 0.2 percent in response to a 
defense spending shock by 1 percent of trading part-
ners’ GDP. Spillovers are even larger for common trade 
areas, such as the European Union (Furceri and others 
2026). Spillovers from emerging market and develop-
ing economies’ defense spending are, in contrast, close 
to zero (Figure 2.2.1, panel 2).
The authors of this box are Pedro Juarros and Anh Dinh 
Minh Nguyen.
Figure 2.2.1.  Spillovers from Defense 
Spending
(Percent)
1. Responses of GDP to Defense Spending Shock
2. By Corresponding Trading Partner
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows responses of trading partners to a positive 
defense spending shock of 1 percent. Panel 2 shows responses 
to a positive defense spending shock of 1 percent of GDP in 
trading partners over the 1990–2023 sample. The responses 
are rescaled by the average export share of countries in the 
group over the associated sample. The panel shows the greatest 
response in the five-year horizon since the occurrence of the 
shock. Bars denote point estimates, and whiskers indicate 
90 percent confidence intervals. “AE to AE” refers to spillovers 
from defense spending in AE trading partners to AEs; “EMDE 
to AE” refers to spillovers from defense spending in EMDE 
trading partners to AEs; “AE to EMDE” refers to spillovers from 
defense spending in AE trading partners to EMDEs; “EMDE 
to EMDE” refers to spillovers from defense spending in EMDE 
trading partners to EMDEs. AE = advanced economy; EMDE = 
emerging market and developing economy.
−0.05
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1990–2023
1948–2023
1990–2023
1948–2023
AEs
EMDEs
AE
to
AE
EMDE
to
AE
AE
to
EMDE
EMDE
to
EMDE
Box 2.2. Spillovers from Defense Spending 
CHAPTER 2  DEFENSE SPENDING: MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES AND TRADE-OFFS
67
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
References
Acalin, J., V. Alonso, C. Arroyo, R. Lam, L. Martinez, A. D. 
M. Nguyen, F. Roch, and others. 2025. “Fiscal Guardrails 
against High Debt and Looming Spending Pressures.” IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 25/004, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Alesina, A., and R. Perotti. 1995. “Fiscal Expansions and 
Adjustments in OECD Countries.” Economic Policy 10 (21): 
205–48.
Alloza, M., R. Domínguez-Díaz, P. Durá, and I. Varotto. 2026. 
“The Macroeconomic Effects of Defense Expenditure: 
Evidence from Spain.” Working Paper, Bank of Spain, 
Madrid.
Andrle, M., P. Blagrave, P. Espaillat, K. Honjo, B. Hunt, M. 
Kortelainen, R. Lalonde, and others. 2015. “The Flexible 
System of Global Models—FSGM.” IMF Working Paper 
15/64, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Antolin-Diaz, J., and P. Surico. 2025. “The Long-Run Effects of 
Government Spending.” American Economic Review 115 (7): 
2376–413.
Antonova, A., R. Luetticke, and G. J. Mueller. 2025. “The 
Military Multiplier.” CEPR Discussion Paper 20220, Centre 
for Economic Policy Research, London.
Auerbach, A. J., and Y. Gorodnichenko. 2013. “Output 
Spillovers from Fiscal Policy.” American Economic Review 103 
(3): 141–46.
Barro, R. J. 1981. “Output Effects of Government Purchases.” 
Journal of Political Economy 89: 1086–121.
Barro, R. J., and C. J. Redlick. 2011. “Macroeconomic Effects 
from Government Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 126 (1): 51–102. 
Basu, S. 1996. “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or 
Cyclical Utilization?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (3): 
719–51.
Baxter, M., and R. G. King. 1993. “Fiscal Policy in General 
Equilibrium.” American Economic Review 83 (3): 315–34.
Becker, J., S. Benson, J. P. Dunne, and E. Malesky. 2025. 
“Disaggregated Defense Spending: Introduction to Data.” 
Journal of Peace Research 62 (3): 772–88.
Ben Zeev, N., and E. Pappa. 2017. “Chronicle of a War 
Foretold: The Macroeconomic Effects of Anticipated Defence 
Spending Shocks.” Economic Journal 127 (603): 1568–97.
Ben Zeev, N., E. Pappa, and E. Scola Gagliardi. 2025. “The 
Offensive Power of Defense News in Europe.” CEPR 
Discussion Paper 20637, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research, London.
Benmelech, E., and J. Monteiro. 2025. “Military Spending and 
War.” NBER Working Paper 34123, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Boehm, C. E. 2020. “Government Consumption and 
Investment: Does the Composition of Purchases Affect the 
Multiplier?” Journal of Monetary Economics 115: 80–93.
Bokan, N., P. Jacquinot, M. Lalik, G. Muller, R. Priftis, and R. 
Rigato. 2025. “Macroeconomic Impacts of Higher Defence 
Spending: A Model-Based Assessment.” Economic Bulletin 6, 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt. 
Boly, A., and E. Kéré. 2026. “Terrorism and Military 
Expenditure in Africa: An Analysis of Spillover Effects.” 
Journal of African Economies 35 (1): ejaf007.
Caldara, D., and M. Iacoviello. 2022. “Measuring Geopolitical 
Risk.” American Economic Review 112 (4): 1194–225.
Danmarks Nationalbank. 2025. “Higher Defence Spending 
May Increase Capacity Pressures Moderately.” Danmarks 
Nationalbank Analysis 19, Danmarks Nationalbank, 
Copenhagen.
Deger, S., and R. Smith. 1983. “Military Expenditure and 
Growth in Less Developed Countries.” Journal of Conflict 
Resolution 27 (2): 335–53.
Draghi, M. 2024. “The Future of European Competitiveness: 
Part A—A Competitiveness Strategy for Europe.” European 
Commission, Brussels.
Eble, S., A. Pitt, I. Bunda, O. E. Adilbish, N. Budina, G. H. 
Hong, M. T. Malak, and others. 2025. “Long-Term Spending 
Pressures in Europe.” IMF Departmental Paper 2025/002, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
European Commission. 2025. “The Economic Impact of Higher 
Defence Spending.” Institutional Paper 318, European 
Commission, Brussels.
Fazzari, S. M., G. Hubbard, and B. C. Petersen. 1988. 
“Financing Constraints and Corporate Investment.” Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity 1988 (1): 141–206.
Fisher, J. D. M., and R. Peters. 2010. “Using Stock Returns to 
Identify Government Spending Shocks.” Economic Journal 
120 (544): 414–36.
Furceri, D., P. Juarros, S. Mishra, A. D. M. Nguyen, A. S. 
Pessoa, and A. Sollaci. 2026. “Macroeconomic Impacts of EU 
Defense Spending.” IMF Working Paper 26/53, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
García-Serrador, A., D. Sarasa-Flores, and C. Ulloa. 2025. 
“Buy Guns or Buy Roses? EU Defence Spending Fiscal 
Multipliers.” BBVA Research 25-06, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya 
Argentaria, Madrid. 
Gethin, A. 2024. “Revisiting Global Poverty Reduction: Public 
Services and the World Distribution of Income, 1980–2022.” 
Unpublished. https://amory-gethin.fr/research.html. 
Gross, D. P., and B. N. Sampat. 2023. “America, Jump-Started: 
World War II R&D and the Takeoff of the US Innovation 
System.” American Economic Review 113 (12): 3323–56.
Hall, R. 2009. “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the 
Government Buys More Output?” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity 40 (Fall): 183–249.
Hartley, K. 2008. “Collaboration and European Defence 
Industrial Policy.” Defence and Peace Economics 19 (4): 
303–15.
Heerma van Voss, B., D. de Leeuw, F. Marotta, C. Mehlbaum, 
A. Smadu, I. Stanga, and S. Wöhrmüller. 2026 “The 
Economic Consequences of Defence Spending.” De 
Nederlandsche Bank, Amsterdam. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
68
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Hildebrand, P., H. Rey, and M. Schularick. 2026. “A Proposal 
on European Defence Governance and Financing.” Kiel 
Policy Brief 199, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel, 
Germany.
Huang, Y., M. Pagano, and U. Panizza. 2020. “Local Crowd-
ing-Out in China.” Journal of Finance 75: 2855–98.
Ilzetzki, E. 2024. “Learning by Necessity: Government Demand, 
Capacity Constraints, and Productivity Growth.” American 
Economic Review 114 (8): 2436–71.
Ilzetzki, E. 2025. “Guns and Growth: The Economic Conse-
quences of Defense Buildups.” Kiel Report 2, Kiel Institute 
for the World Economy, Kiel, Germany.
Ilzetzki, E., E. G. Mendoza, and C. A. Végh. 2013. “How 
Big (Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?” Journal of Monetary 
Economics 60: 239–54.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022. “IMF Strategy for 
Fragile and Conflict-Affected States (FCS).” International 
Monetary Fund, Washington DC. 
Jordà, Ò. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses 
by Local Projections.” American Economic Review 95 (1): 
161–82. 
Kadera, K., and G. Sorokin. 2004. “Measuring National Power.” 
International Interactions 30 (3): 211–30.
Knight, M., N. Loayza, and D. Villanueva. 1996. “The Peace 
Dividend: Military Spending Cuts and Economic Growth.” 
IMF Staff Papers 43 (1): 1–37.
Letta, E. 2024. “Much More Than a Market.” Jaques Delors 
Institute, Paris.
Marzian, J., and C. Trebesch. 2025. “Guns and Butter: The Fiscal 
Consequences of Rearmament and War.” Kiel Working Paper 
2310, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel, Germany.
Miyamoto, W., T. L. Nguyen, and V. Sheremirov. 2019. “The 
Effects of Government Spending on Real Exchange Rates: 
Evidence from Military Spending Panel Data.” Journal of 
International Economics 116: 144–57.
Moretti, E., C. Steinwender, and J. Van Reenen. 2025. “The 
Intellectual Spoils of War? Defense R&D, Productivity, and 
International Spillovers.” Review of Economics and Statistics 
107 (1): 14–27.
Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a 
Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions.” American 
Economic Review 104 (3): 753–92.
Nekarda, C. J., and V. A. Ramey. 2011. “Industry Evidence on 
the Effects of Government Spending.” American Economic 
Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (1): 36–59.
Ohanian, L. E. 1997. “The Macroeconomic Effects of War 
Finance in the United States: World War II and the Korean 
War.” American Economic Review 87 (1): 23–40. 
Phelan, C., and A. Trejos. 2000. “The Aggregate Effects of 
Sectoral Reallocations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 45 (2): 
249–68.
Ramey, V. A. 2011. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: 
It’s All in the Timing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 
1–50.
Ramey, V. A., and M. D. Shapiro. 1998. “Costly Capital Real-
location and the Effects of Government Spending.” Carne-
gie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48: 145–94.
Ramey, V. A., and M. D. Shapiro. 2001. “Displaced Capital: 
A Study of Aerospace Plant Closings.” Journal of Political 
Economy 109 (5): 958–92.
Ramey, V. A., and S. Zubairy. 2018. “Government Spending 
Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence from 
US Historical Data.” Journal of Political Economy 126 (2): 
850–901.
Sandler, T., and J. George. 2016. “Military Expenditure Trends 
for 1960–2014 and What They Reveal.” Global Policy 7 (2): 
174–84.
Sheremirov, V., and S. Spirovska. 2022. “Fiscal Multipliers in 
Advanced and Developing Countries: Evidence from Military 
Spending.” Journal of Public Economics 208: 104631.
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
69
Wars have long been a feature of the global landscape. 
Armed conflict can bring profound macroeconomic 
consequences beyond its devastating human toll, including 
loss of life and forced displacement. This chapter leverages 
global data on post–World War II conflicts and draws on 
empirical analyses, case studies, and model-based simu-
lations to assess the macroeconomic implications of wars. 
The analysis shows that conflicts generate large and per-
sistent output losses in economies where the fighting occurs 
and nonnegligible spillovers to other countries. These losses 
exceed those associated with financial crises or severe nat-
ural disasters and give rise to acute macroeconomic trade-
offs across monetary, fiscal, and external sectors, alongside 
long-lasting scars. Economic recoveries from war are slow 
and uneven and depend critically on the durability of 
peace. When peace is sustained, output rebounds but often 
remains modest relative to wartime losses. By contrast, 
in fragile postconflict settings in which conflict relapses, 
recoveries frequently stall. The modest recoveries are led 
primarily by labor, while capital accumulation and 
productivity remain subdued. Empirical evidence and case 
studies highlight the central role of early macroeconomic 
stabilization, decisive debt restructuring, and interna-
tional support, including aid and capacity development, 
in restoring confidence and creating space for postconflict 
recovery. Efforts toward recovery are most effective when 
complemented by domestic reforms to rebuild institu-
tions and state capacity, promote inclusion and security, 
and mitigate human capital losses. Model-based analysis 
further suggests that comprehensive and well-coordinated 
policy packages outperform piecemeal approaches. Policies 
that jointly reduce uncertainty and rebuild capital stock 
generate positive externalities, reinforcing expectations, 
thereby encouraging capital inflows and facilitating the 
return of displaced populations. Overall, the chapter 
underscores that although postconflict recovery is inherently 
The authors of this chapter are Hippolyte Balima (co-lead), 
Colombe Ladreit, Andresa Lagerborg, Flavien Moreau, Andrea 
Presbitero (co-lead), and Evgenia Weaver, with contributions from 
Patrick-Nelson Essiane, Maria Gelrud, Andrea Manera, and Sidra 
Rehman. Maryam Abdou, Owen Desberg, Shrihari Ramachandra, 
and Isabela Rozario provided research assistance. Hannes Malmberg 
served as external consultant. The chapter benefited from comments 
by Hannes Mueller and internal seminar participants and reviewers.
challenging and context-specific, sustained peace, credible 
stabilization, and coordinated policy action are essen-
tial to achieving stronger and more durable recoveries.
Introduction
Wars have long been a feature of the global land-
scape. After decades of relative calm following the 
end of the Cold War, the number of active wars has 
surged to levels not seen since the end of World War II 
(WWII; see Figure 3.1). This is not a distant statistic. 
In 2024, more than 35 countries, about half classi-
fied as fragile and conflict-affected states, experienced 
conflict in their own territory. That same year, roughly 
45 percent of the world’s population lived in countries 
affected by conflict, ranging from localized border 
skirmishes to major wars. And since 2010 alone, 
conflicts have claimed more than 1.9 million lives 
worldwide.1 The outlook offers little reassurance. Mea-
sures of geopolitical threats continue to rise, pointing 
to heightened risks of conflict, and defense spending is 
projected to increase sharply (see Chapter 2).
Beyond their immediate human costs, wars can 
carry profound macroeconomic consequences. During 
wars, production and trade can be disrupted, insti-
tutions weakened, and lasting damage inflicted on 
economies’ productive capacity. When hostilities cease, 
the recovery period presents both opportunities and 
challenges. Governments may face the urgent task of 
stabilizing the economy, rebuilding infrastructure and 
institutions, and fostering social cohesion—each essen-
tial to securing durable peace and sustaining recovery.
A growing literature examines the macroeco-
nomics of wars. Earlier seminal contributions focus 
on civil wars (Collier 1999; Collier and Hoeffler 
2007; Blattman and Miguel 2010). More recent 
studies, either centered on the post–Cold War period 
(Chapter 2 of the April 2019 Regional Economic 
1For simplicity, the terms “war” and “conflict” are used inter-
changeably throughout the chapter. “Conflicts” in this chapter are 
defined as episodes involving armed force between parties that result 
in at least 25 battle-related deaths within a single calendar year, as is 
standard in the conflict literature. Distinctions are made to differen-
tiate conflicts by type, intensity, and duration.
CHAPTER
3
THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
70
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa; Chapter 2 of the April 
2024 Regional Economic Outlook: Middle East and 
Central Asia; Chapter 2 of the October 2025 Regional 
Economic Outlook: Middle East and Central Asia) or 
adopting a global historical perspective (Chupilkin and 
Kóczán 2022; Benmelech and Monteiro 2025; Federle 
and others 2026), document the large economic costs 
of conflicts. However, less attention has been paid to 
how wartime economies typically function, the distinct 
macroeconomic dynamics during and after conflict, 
and the provision of systematic historical evidence on 
the policies that support postconflict recovery. To fill 
these gaps, this chapter first leverages large language 
models to construct comprehensive global coverage 
of the geographic location of post-WWII conflicts. 
Second, it adopts a macroeconomic perspective to 
document how wartime economies typically operate, 
highlighting the key macroeconomic trade-offs they 
face and the policy responses used to manage war-
time pressures. Third, it provides systematic evidence 
of postconflict recovery dynamics and the policies 
associated with stronger recoveries. Specifically, the 
chapter addresses the following questions:
	• Historical overview of conflicts: How have different 
types of conflicts evolved worldwide since the end 
of WWII? What are their characteristics in terms of 
intensity, duration, and geographic distribution?
	• Macroeconomic dynamics during wars: What are 
the short- to long-term effects of wars on output? 
Through which channels do these effects operate, 
and what are the implications for the broader econ-
omy in conflict-site countries? What are the scarring 
effects on production capacity and individuals? 
What are the output spillovers to other countries?
	• Macroeconomic dynamics after wars end: How do 
economies recover after wars? How do they achieve 
macroeconomic stabilization? To what extent do 
complementary domestic policies and international 
support shape postconflict recovery?
The chapter draws on a range of empirical analyses, 
case studies, and model-based simulations to reach the 
following conclusions:
	• The number of conflicts worldwide has increased mark-
edly in recent years, reaching historically high levels in 
the past decade. This increase is driven primarily by 
conflicts within states such as civil wars. By contrast, 
conflicts between states have remained relatively 
infrequent, although their incidence has edged up 
in recent years. Most conflicts have been of minor 
intensity and relatively short duration. They are 
also unevenly distributed geographically, with the 
Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa accounting for 
a substantial share of global conflicts.
	• Conflicts generate large, persistent output losses in 
conflict-site economies and spillovers to other countries. 
For the average conflict-site economy, output falls 
sharply at the conflict’s onset, reaching cumulative 
losses of about 7 percent over a five-year period. 
Model-based analysis points to output losses of 
about the same magnitude. Output losses from 
conflicts persist even after a decade and typically 
exceed those associated with financial crises or severe 
natural disasters. Beyond conflict sites, neighbor-
ing countries and trading partners also experience 
modest but nonnegligible output losses in the 
short term, which gradually dissipate as economic 
adjustment and policy responses in their economies 
mitigate initial disruptions. 
	• Conflicts trigger acute macroeconomic trade-offs and 
long-lasting scarring that extend well beyond immedi-
ate wartime shocks. Output losses reflect sustained 
contractions in private consumption and investment 
as household incomes fall and uncertainty increases, 
alongside a reorientation of government spending 
toward military uses. Governments’ fiscal positions 
deteriorate as their ability to raise revenue weakens 
and tax administration capacity erodes. Exports 
Number of conflicts
Geopolitical threats index
Battle-related deaths (right scale)
Figure 3.1.  Conflicts and Geopolitical Threats
(Number; index, 2019 = 100, left scale; thousands of deaths, right scale)
0
200
50
100
150
0
700
100
200
300
400
500
600
60
70
80
90
10
2024
1946
2000
Sources: Caldara and Iacoviello 2022; PRIO Battle Deaths Dataset version 3.1; UCDP 
Georeferenced Event Dataset (GED) version 25.1; UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset 
version 25.1; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows the number of conflicts involving the government of at least 
one state, based on the UCDP/PRIO dataset. The geopolitical threats index captures 
threats related to war, peace, military buildups, nuclear risks, and terror, and is shown 
as a three-year moving average. Battle-related deaths are drawn from the PRIO dataset 
for 1946–88 and from the GED for 1989–2024. PRIO = Peace Research Institute Oslo; 
UCDP = Uppsala Conflict Data Program.
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
71
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
decline more substantially than imports, leading to 
a temporary deterioration in the trade balance. At 
the same time, war-driven uncertainty fuels capital 
outflows, leading wartime governments to introduce 
capital controls and rely on countercyclical financing 
flows to fund trade deficits. War dynamics further 
contribute to sustained exchange rate depreciation, 
reserve losses, and inflationary pressures, highlight-
ing the role of external sector dynamics in ampli-
fying wartime macroeconomic challenges. War also 
leaves long-lasting scars, with declines in capital 
stock, employment, and productivity persisting for 
years after conflict onset, alongside the loss of lives, 
displacements, and adverse long-term health and 
cognitive outcomes for individuals.
	• Economic recoveries from conflicts are typically slow 
and uneven, but critically depend on peace. When 
conflicts end and the ensuing peace proves to be sus-
tained, output rebounds but remains modest relative 
to wartime losses and varies widely across countries. 
Recoveries are driven primarily by labor dynamics, 
while capital accumulation and productivity remain 
subdued amid lingering uncertainty and binding 
financial constraints. By contrast, in many postcon-
flict cases, peace proves fragile, and relapse into con-
flict undermines recovery prospects. In such cases, 
output fails to recover. Policies that strengthen state 
capacity to deliver essential services and increase the 
opportunity cost of conflict can help reduce the risk 
of states falling into a conflict trap.
	• Macroeconomic stabilization, debt restructuring, and 
international support play a central role in postconflict 
recovery. Evidence from empirical analyses and 
case studies indicates that successful recoveries are 
typically underpinned by early and decisive debt 
restructuring, which helps restore fiscal sustainability 
and creates space for macroeconomic stabilization 
following sustained peace. Countries that reduce 
uncertainty through macroeconomic stabilization—
anchored in low and stable inflation and a stable 
real effective exchange rate—combined with timely 
financing and international support, including 
capacity development and aid, experience stronger 
recoveries. Case studies show that stabilization is 
achieved through a combination of rapid resto-
ration of supply, credible nominal anchors, and 
fiscal adjustment, often backed by IMF-supported 
programs. In episodes characterized by large aid 
inflows, risks of exchange rate appreciation or Dutch 
disease are generally mitigated, and this mitigation 
is partly the result of effective coordination between 
fiscal and monetary authorities in managing aid 
surges.
	• Strong recovery also depends on complementary domes-
tic reform efforts. Stabilization and international sup-
port need to be accompanied by reforms to rebuild 
institutions and state capacity, promote inclusion, 
and mitigate persistent human capital losses, while 
helping consolidate peace. Concrete measures 
include strengthening anti-corruption frameworks, 
rebuilding judicial and public investment institu-
tions, creating fiscal space for nonmilitary and social 
spending, and facilitating the reintegration of former 
combatants into society.
	• A faster recovery requires a coordinated and com-
prehensive policy approach, with priority given to 
reducing uncertainty and rebuilding the capital stock. 
Model-based analysis suggests that comprehensive 
policy packages—centered on lowering uncertainty 
and rebuilding capital—deliver stronger recover-
ies than piecemeal approaches, reflecting positive 
externalities, complementarities across policies, and 
economic agents’ expectations about the future. 
For example, reducing uncertainty alongside capital 
rebuilding can trigger reinforcing dynamics through 
expectations, capital inflows, wages, and return 
migration.
The chapter’s findings and implications for post-
conflict recovery are subject to three important 
caveats. First, since conflict environments are inher-
ently heterogeneous—reflecting differences in con-
flict drivers, economic legacies, and institutional and 
statistical capacity—effective policy design requires 
careful country-specific diagnosis. Second, recovery 
outcomes depend critically on political economy 
factors, including power-sharing arrangements, security 
guarantees, and civic rights (Mueller and Rauh 2024; 
Rohner 2025). These factors, often difficult to quan-
tify, lie beyond the scope of the chapter’s analysis but 
can shape the feasibility and effectiveness of recovery 
policies. Third, peace may remain fragile in some cases 
and the risk of relapse can constrain recovery dynam-
ics. In such cases, relapse into conflict may itself be 
endogenous to economic policies, underscoring the 
importance of keeping conflict prevention in mind 
when designing macroeconomic policies (Chami, 
Espinoza, and Montiel 2021; Mueller and Rauh 2022; 
Mueller and others 2024). Subject to these caveats, 
the chapter’s broad policy lessons remain informative 
for countries emerging from conflict, helping to sup-
port stronger and more durable recoveries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
72
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Macroeconomics of Conflict and 
Recovery: A Primer 
Wars affect conflict-site economies through multi-
ple, reinforcing channels on both the supply and the 
demand sides, with far-reaching implications for fiscal, 
monetary, and external sector outcomes. 
On the supply side, wars destroy productive capacity 
through damage to physical capital and reductions in 
labor supply from casualties and displacement. Part of 
the remaining scarce productive capacity may also be 
reallocated from civilian to military uses. This nega-
tive supply shock generally puts upward pressure on 
inflation (Keynes 1940). Wars further reduce the effi-
ciency with which capital and labor are employed. For 
instance, damage to infrastructure disrupts transporta-
tion, energy, and communications networks, increasing 
production costs, while disruptions to schooling, loss 
of work experience, and deteriorating health outcomes 
weaken human capital accumulation and productivity 
(Gorodnichenko, Kudlyak, and Şahin 2022). On the 
demand side, private consumption and investment 
typically decline as incomes fall and uncertainty 
increases. Household income losses, if seen as tem-
porary, may lead to dissaving, with economic effects 
similar to those from capital stock destruction (Collier 
1999). Public expenditure may also be diverted from 
growth-enhancing uses toward military spending. 
Together, these dynamics contribute to a contraction 
in domestic production and generate output losses.
The same forces can also place substantial pres-
sure on public finances as well as on the external 
and monetary sectors. Governments’ ability to raise 
tax revenue weakens as economic activity contracts 
and tax administration capacity deteriorates, whereas 
spending pressures may increase owing to military 
outlays, humanitarian needs, and essential infra-
structure repair. Fiscal financing constraints are often 
binding, particularly when access to capital markets 
is limited or nonexistent, and as markets price in 
conflict-related risk premiums (Rexer, Kapstein, and 
Rivera 2022). In response to mounting fiscal strains, 
wartime governments may resort to monetary financ-
ing, the accumulation of arrears, or, in extreme cases, 
debt default—putting further upward pressure on 
inflation. On the external side, export capacity may be 
impaired by disruptions to domestic production and 
trade relocation, as importers shift preferences away 
from exporters located in conflict zones (Korn and 
Stemmler 2025). These dynamics can contribute to 
foreign exchange shortages that—together with weaker 
domestic demand—constrain imports and, in some 
cases, lead to import rationing in favor of military and 
essential goods. In addition, external financing condi-
tions typically tighten amid uncertainty-driven capital 
outflows, which governments may attempt to contain 
through capital controls (Gobat and Kostial 2016). As 
a result, wartime economies often rely on a narrow set 
of external financing sources, including countercyclical 
inflows such as remittances and aid. Taken together, 
fiscal pressures, external imbalances, and supply disrup-
tions can interact in a feedback loop, placing consid-
erable strain on exchange rates—thereby leading to 
depreciation in flexible regimes or devaluation in fixed 
regimes, with further upward pressure on inflation—as 
well as on reserve buffers. Wartime authorities may 
attempt to contain domestic inflation and pressures on 
the external sector through policy rate hikes.
Macroeconomic performance in the aftermath of 
war and in the transition to lasting peace is shaped 
by the extent of production capacity destruction, 
institutional erosion, and policy choices made during 
recovery. On the supply side, neoclassical growth 
models predict a gradual return of the capital stock 
toward its steady state once hostilities cease, implying 
that investment is elevated during the early recov-
ery phase. This process can have positive spillovers 
to wages and employment, encouraging the return 
of displaced workers, supporting labor supply, and 
fostering the recovery. In practice, however, economic 
recovery may be slow (see, for example, Chen, Loayza, 
and Reynal-Querol 2008; Mueller, Piemontese, and 
Tapsoba 2017). For instance, persistent political and 
economic uncertainty despite peace can continue to 
depress expected returns on investment, sustain capital 
outflows, and constrain both investment and labor 
supply. On the demand side, consumption typically 
recovers as incomes stabilize. Government spending, 
however, may be constrained by postwar fiscal vul-
nerabilities. Macroeconomic stabilization—aimed at 
containing inflation and avoiding excessive exchange 
rate appreciation—is critical to sustaining recovery, 
alongside debt restructuring to restore fiscal sustain-
ability and complementary reforms to rebuild institu-
tions. External support in the form of aid and capacity 
development is also vital to alleviate financing con-
straints and strengthen state capacity.
With these considerations in mind, the rest of the 
chapter examines how wartime and postwar dynamics 
play out in the data, drawing on global evidence since 
the end of WWII. The policy discussions focus on 
drawing lessons to support postconflict recovery.
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
73
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Macroeconomic Dynamics during 
Conflicts
Definitions and Key Facts 
This chapter relies on existing datasets together with 
a newly constructed database to provide comprehensive 
coverage of the geographic locations of conflicts during 
1946–2024. The database is constructed by leveraging 
large language models to enhance the geographic coding 
of conflict events and using text analysis of annual 
reports from the United Nations Security Council.2 
Based on the database, countries’ exposure to conflict is 
further classified into three groups, following Federle and 
others (2026). Conflict-site economies are countries expe-
riencing military action on their own territory. Belligerent 
economies are parties to a conflict, but their territory is 
not the conflict site. Third countries are countries that 
are not parties to the conflict but are indirectly exposed 
through a common land border with a conflict site or 
through trade linkages. Conflicts in conflict-site econ-
omies are further categorized along three dimensions. 
First, the type of actor involved can differ: Conflicts can 
be between states (recent ones include conflicts between 
Sudan and South Sudan, Ethiopia and Eritrea, India 
and Pakistan, and Iran and Israel), or they can be within 
states (including, for instance, civil wars, colonial wars, 
and nonstate conflicts). Second, their intensity can be 
minor (defined as those involving 25–999 battle-­related 
deaths) or major (those with 1,000 or more battle-related 
deaths). Third, the duration of conflicts can be short 
(two years or less) or long (more than two years).
A notable observation regarding post-WWII con-
flicts is that the majority have involved within-state 
actors (Figure 3.2). By contrast, conflicts between 
states have been relatively infrequent and broadly stable 
in incidence over time. Given the chapter’s focus on 
macroeconomic dynamics, the analysis further excludes 
events unlikely to generate economy-wide effects—such 
as isolated skirmishes, terrorist attacks, or fragmented 
violence with low casualty counts—based on a system-
atic coding of individual events. Accordingly, the rest of 
the chapter focuses on a subset of conflicts more likely 
to affect macroeconomic outcomes. These conflicts are 
illustrated by the black line in Figure 3.2.
Several observations emerge from the refined 
database. Disaggregating conflict episodes by intensity 
2See Online Annex 3.1 for further details on data sources, the 
large language model–based data construction, and definitions 
of variables. All online annexes are available at www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO.
shows that the sustained rise in conflicts has been 
driven by an increase in minor conflicts since the 
early 1960s, a period that broadly coincides with 
the emergence of many newly independent states 
(Figure 3.3). By contrast, the incidence of major con-
flicts has remained broadly stable over time, although 
the frequency of such conflicts has increased in recent 
years. Further evidence indicates that within-state 
conflicts account for the majority of both minor and 
major episodes, whereas between-state conflicts tend 
to be predominantly major. Conflict duration also 
varies with intensity: Historically, minor conflicts are 
typically shorter lived, whereas major conflicts tend to 
be more protracted, especially in commodity-exporting 
countries. Conflicts are unevenly distributed across 
regions. Asia and the Pacific; the Middle East, North 
Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; and sub-Saharan 
Africa have consistently accounted for most conflict 
episodes, with the latter two regions alone representing 
a substantial share of global conflicts.
Macroeconomic Effects
This subsection quantifies the macroeconomic 
effects of conflicts, focusing on the average effect in an 
average conflict-site economy, as well as spillovers to 
Within
states
Between
states
Intrastate
Intrastate with foreign intervention
Colonial
Interstate
Used in analysis
Nonstate
Figure 3.2.  Global Post–World War II Conflicts
(Number of conflicts)
0
80
20
40
60
Sources: UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset version 25.1; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows the number of active conflicts per year, aggregated by conflict 
type. Nonstate conflicts involve organized nongovernment actors and are identified 
based on the IMF staff’s construction using text analysis of annual reports from the 
United Nations Security Council. The black line indicates the subset of conflicts of focus 
in the chapter’s analysis: those deemed more likely to affect macroeconomic outcomes 
based on a systematic reading and coding of individual events. See Online Annex 3.1 
for details on the data construction. PRIO = Peace Research Institute Oslo; UCDP = 
Uppsala Conflict Data Program.
60
70
80
90
10
20 24
1946
2000
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
74
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
belligerent and third economies. Two complementary 
approaches are used. The first is a cross-country 
empirical analysis that employs local projections 
difference-in-differences (LP-DiD) methodology 
(Dube and others 2025). The framework traces the 
evolution of outcome variables following conflict onset 
by comparing affected countries with a control group 
of countries not experiencing conflict.3 Second, an 
empirical analysis using data from surveys of individ-
uals aged 50 and older is used to assess the long-term 
scarring effects of conflict on health outcomes.
The cross-country results indicate that conflicts 
impose large and persistent economic costs on 
conflict-site economies, with losses that deepen over 
time (Figure 3.4). On average, output in conflict-site 
economies declines sharply at conflict onset, by 
approximately 3 percent, and continues to decline in 
subsequent years, reaching cumulative losses of about 
7 percent within five years. Losses are evident across 
all sectors and persist even after a decade (see Online 
Annex 3.2). Estimated output costs from conflicts 
exceed those typically associated with financial crises—
including banking, currency, and debt crises—and 
those induced by severe natural disasters.4 Adverse 
effects are robust across various conflict characteris-
tics, although losses are somewhat greater for major, 
shorter, and within-state conflicts.5 That said, even 
lower-intensity conflicts are associated with statistically 
significant declines in output at onset that are compara-
ble in magnitude to losses induced by currency crises.
The economic costs of conflicts extend beyond 
conflict-site economies. Focusing on major conflicts, 
point estimates for belligerent economies are negative 
on average but not statistically significant, potentially 
reflecting relative protection from the most destruc-
tive channels of conflicts and offsetting effects from 
higher military spending (Figure 3.5).6 Third countries 
3The identification strategy relies on the assumption that conflict 
onset is exogenous to contemporaneous business cycle conditions. 
Robustness checks based on a narrative classification of the primary 
motives underlying each conflict indicate that economic dynam-
ics for conflicts not triggered by economic reasons do not differ 
systematically from those for other conflicts (see Online Annex 3.2). 
Online Annex 3.2 also reports robustness checks to alternative 
sample restrictions, clean control definitions, and conflict measures 
based on battle-related deaths.
4Estimates for financial crises and severe natural disasters based on 
the chapter’s LP-DiD framework may not be directly comparable with 
those obtained using other methodologies. Nonetheless, the magnitudes 
reported here are broadly in line with some findings in the literature. See 
Kuvshinov and Zimmermann (2019) for sovereign defaults; Devereux 
and Dwyer (2016) for banking crises; Hong and Tornell (2005) for cur-
rency crises; Cavallo and others (2013) for natural disasters; and Cerra 
and Saxena (2008) and Mueller (2012) for comparisons between civil 
wars and banking and currency crises. Economic costs of conflicts may 
also depend on war outcomes (see Federle and others 2026).
5The greater losses associated with shorter conflicts likely reflect 
the fact that these conflicts are more destructive at the outset, 
whereas in longer conflicts, economies may gradually adapt to pro-
longed conflict conditions.
6Additional evidence indeed reveals that government spending 
tends to increase in belligerent economies following conflict onset. 
And as shown in Chapter 2, such spending expansions are associated 
with positive output effects.
Asia and Pacific
SSA
LAC
CCA
MENAP
Europe
North America
Minor conflict
Major conflict
Minor conflict
Major conflict
Figure 3.3.  Characteristics of Post–World War II Conflicts
(Number of conflicts, unless noted otherwise)
1. Conflicts by Intensity
2. Conflicts by Intensity and Duration
(K-density)
Sources: UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset version 25.1; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels show the distribution of conflicts by intensity, duration, and 
geographic region, based on the subset of conflicts emphasized in the chapter’s 
analysis: those deemed more likely to affect macroeconomic outcomes following a 
systematic reading and coding of individual events. A conflict is classified as major if 
in any year battle-related deaths exceed 1,000, and as minor otherwise. In panel 2, 
the k-density, analogously to a histogram, shows the distribution of major and minor 
conflict duration in years. See Online Annex 3.1 for details on the data construction. 
CCA = Caucasus and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENAP = 
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; PRIO = Peace Research Institute 
Oslo; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa; UCDP = Uppsala Conflict Data Program. 
3. Conflicts by Geographic Regions
0
10
20
30
40
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0
10
20
30
40
50
1946
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95 2000 05
10
15
20 24
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Duration in years
1946
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95 2000 05
10
15
20 24
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
75
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
experience negative output effects of about 1 percent 
or less during the first two years following conflict 
onset, with losses gradually dissipating thereafter, 
likely as trade routes adjust, firms reorient supply 
chains, and policy responses help absorb initial shocks 
(Qureshi 2013). Although these spillovers are consider-
ably smaller than the large and sustained output losses 
borne by conflict-site economies, they underscore that 
major conflicts impose nontrivial economic costs well 
beyond the countries where hostilities occur.
Estimates also point to significant macroeconomic 
trade-offs in conflict-site economies, consistent with 
the transmission channels outlined earlier in the 
chapter. Output declines reflect sustained contrac-
tions in both investment and private consumption, 
whereas government consumption remains broadly 
stable (Figure 3.6, panel 1). The muted response of 
government consumption reflects a compositional shift 
toward defense spending, consistent with evidence of 
military outlays rising at the onset of conflict (Online 
Annex 3.2). Nonetheless, fiscal positions weaken, with 
public debt increasing in the initial years of conflict 
(Figure 3.6, panel 2). In the external sector, imports 
contract sharply, but exports decline even more 
substantially, resulting in a deterioration of the trade 
ratio. Consistent with these dynamics, further evidence 
shows that the trade balance relative to prewar GDP 
widens, though this widening is confined to the first 
four years of a conflict, pointing to import compression 
in subsequent years to accommodate reserve scarcity. 
Heightened uncertainty also triggers capital outflows, 
with both foreign direct investment and portfolio flows 
declining, constraining wartime governments to relying 
on aid and, in some cases, remittances to finance trade 
Figure 3.4.  Economic Costs of Conflicts
(Percent)
1. Impact on Output
−10
2
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
2. Comparison with Other Shocks
−12
2
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
Conflict
Banking
crisis
Currency
crisis
Sovereign
debt crisis
Natural
disasters
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
3. Heterogeneity by Conflict Intensity, Duration, and Type
−14
2
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
−12
By intensity
By duration
By type
Years after conflict onset
Years after conflict onset
Years after conflict onset
All
conflicts
Minor
Major
Short
Long
Between
states
Within
states
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels report local projections difference-in-differences (LP-DiD) estimates 
of the effects of conflicts (and other shocks, in panel 2) on output cumulatively up to 
five years (shown on the horizontal axes in each panel) after conflict onset. In panel 1, 
the line denotes point estimates, and the shaded area denotes 90 percent confidence 
intervals. In panels 2 and 3, bars denote point estimates, and whiskers indicate 
90 percent confidence intervals. See Online Annex 3.2 for details.
Figure 3.5.  Output Cost Spillovers from Major Conflicts
(Percent)
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
Belligerent economies
Neighboring economies
Trade partners
Years after conflict onset
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows local projections difference-in-differences (LP-DiD) estimates 
of the spillover effects of major conflicts on output in belligerent economies and third 
countries (neighbors and trading partners) up to five years (shown on the horizontal 
axis) after conflict onset. Trade partners are defined as countries whose share of 
imports from conflict-site economies exceeds the 90th percentile of the distribution. 
Bars denote point estimates, and whiskers indicate 90 percent confidence intervals. 
See Online Annex 3.2 for details.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
76
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
deficits.7 Government further responds by introduc-
ing capital controls (Figure 3.6, panel 3). Despite 
these measures, war dynamics contribute to sustained 
exchange rate depreciation (or devaluation), reserve 
losses, and inflationary pressures. Prices, for instance, 
rise steadily, with the increase reaching approximately 
35 percent five years after conflict onset, to which mon-
etary authorities respond by increasing the short-term 
nominal policy rate.8
Box 3.1 illustrates how these trade-offs played out 
in Ukraine following Russia’s 2022 invasion. It shows 
that the war triggered a dramatic collapse of Ukraine’s 
economy. Initial efforts to contain the war shock 
required extraordinary fiscal, monetary, and financial 
measures, including budget reprioritization toward 
defense spending, monetary financing, capital controls, 
and temporary tax and prudential regulatory adjust-
ments. Developments in Russia also highlight wartime 
dynamics: Initial resilience, supported by a favorable 
terms-of-trade shock and a rapid shift to a war footing, 
gave way to rising inflation, binding labor and capacity 
constraints, and sharp monetary tightening, with 
growth slowing markedly by late 2024 (Dabrowski 
2025; Hilgenstock and Ribakova 2025).
Major conflicts also generate scarring effects on 
both the macroeconomy and individuals. At the 
macroeconomic level, capital stock, employment, and 
productivity experience significant declines: Conflicts 
are associated with approximately 4 percent lower 
capital stock and 3 percent lower employment in 
conflict-site economies five years after conflict onset 
(Figure 3.7, panel 1). Total factor productivity also 
declines in initial years, with wide confidence bands 
around point estimates in the medium term, indicat-
ing substantial cross-country variation. Beyond these 
macroeconomic scars, conflict is associated with a 
marked increase in human deaths, especially in the 
first few years (Figure 3.7, panel 2), as well as sizable 
forced displacement (Boxes 3.1 and 3.3). Surviving 
individuals exposed to wartime also experience adverse 
long-term health consequences. Individual-level data 
7Concomitantly, gross national savings decline by more than 
investment, consistent with the accounting identity governing 
domestic investment and domestic and foreign savings, and uncer-
tainty related to economic and political developments increases (see 
Online Annex 3.2).
8Online Annex Table 3.2.3 documents additional wartime trade-
offs, with fiscal authorities cutting social spending to accommodate 
deteriorating fiscal positions. Not surprisingly, institutional quality 
deteriorates and informality increases. Existing evidence also shows 
that wars can have sizable effects on asset prices, sovereign risk pre-
miums, and financial contagion (Chapter 2 of the April 2025 Global 
Financial Stability Report).
Figure 3.6.  Macroeconomic Trade-Offs of Major Conflicts
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
1. Demand-Side Components of Output
−35
15
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
Investment
Private
consumption
Public
consumption
Imports
Exports
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
2. Macroeconomic Vulnerabilities
−60
80
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
−150
200
−100
−50
0
50
100
150
Real
government
debt
Remittances
ODA
Exports-to-
imports
ratio
FDI
liabilities
(right scale)
Portfolio
debt
liabilities
(right scale)
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
1 3 5
3. Macroeconomic Vulnerabilities (continued)
(Change in index, left scale; percent, right scale)
−0.10
0.06
−0.08
−0.06
−0.04
−0.02
0
0.02
0.04
−100
60
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
CPI
Financial
openness
(left scale)
Exchange rate
Reserve assets
Years after conflict onset
Years after conflict onset
Years after conflict onset
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure reports local projections difference-in-differences (LP-DiD) estimates 
of the effects of major conflicts in conflict-site economies on a set of macroeconomic 
variables up to five years (shown on the horizontal axis) after conflict onset. Bars denote 
point estimates, and whiskers indicate 90 percent confidence intervals. See Online 
Annex 3.2 for details. CPI = consumer price index; FDI = foreign direct investment; 
ODA = official development assistance.
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
77
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
from a sample of 41 countries indicate that individuals 
who experience war during their lifetime are likely to 
age in worse health (Figure 3.7, panel 3). War exposure 
reduces composite health measures, as well as measured 
cognitive abilities and self-reported physical abilities and 
mental health. These results are consistent with gener-
ational effects of war documented in previous studies, 
including adverse impacts on education, fertility, and 
health outcomes (see Rohner 2025 for a review).
Taken together, these findings show that major con-
flicts generate large macroeconomic costs and difficult 
trade-offs for conflict-site economies, while transmit-
ting negative spillovers to other countries. The costs of 
major conflict extend well beyond short-term macro-
economic disruption, with enduring consequences for 
both economic potential and human well-being. This 
raises the broader question of how economies stabilize 
and recover once conflict ends—a question examined 
in the next section.
Macroeconomic Dynamics after Conflicts
This section examines the macroeconomic dynam-
ics following conflict termination in conflict-site 
economies. It adopts three complementary analytical 
approaches—combining cross-country, micro-level, 
and model-based analyses—to assess how economies 
stabilize and recover in the aftermath of war.
First, at the macroeconomic level, the LP-DiD 
framework is used to estimate the postconflict dynamics 
of key macroeconomic outcomes, focusing on output, 
inflation, and the main components of a country’s 
production function: capital, employment, and pro-
ductivity.9 This approach characterizes average post-
conflict trajectories; it does not, however, identify the 
conditions associated with successful output recovery. 
To address this question, complementary cross-country 
analysis and case studies focus on recovery episodes to 
examine the policy correlates of stronger recoveries.10 
Second, to complement the country-level analysis 
on the role of policies during recovery, help address 
9A conflict is defined as “terminated” when battle-related deaths 
fall below the chapter’s baseline threshold of 25 deaths per calendar 
year and remain below that level for at least five consecutive years. 
The LP-DiD analysis traces the evolution of macroeconomic 
outcomes over the first five years of postconflict peace relative to 
those during the same period in a control group of countries not 
experiencing conflict, with observations for countries exposed to 
conflict excluded. The chapter further distinguishes between “non-
fragile” postconflict episodes, in which peace lasts at least five years, 
and “fragile” episodes, in which conflict restarts within five years. 
Robustness checks using a 10-year window to define “nonfragile” 
and “fragile” postconflict recoveries yield broadly similar results.
10In both sets of analyses, the identification strategy again assumes 
that conflict termination is exogenous to contemporaneous business 
cycle conditions; accordingly, the estimates should be interpreted 
as correlations. In addition, countries’ initial conditions or policies 
undertaken during conflict may also shape subsequent postconflict 
macroeconomic dynamics.
Figure 3.7.  Scarring Effects of Major Conflicts
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
1. Macroeconomic Scarring
−8
1
−7
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
2. Impact on Number of Deaths
−4
6
−2
0
2
4
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 reports local projections difference-in-differences (LP-DiD) estimates 
of the effect of major conflicts on production factors up to five years (shown on the 
horizontal axis) after conflict onset. Panel 2 shows the effect of major conflicts on 
mortality using the same approach. Panel 3 reports coefficients from ordinary least 
squares regressions of standardized health indicators (mean 0, standard deviation 1) 
on the number of years an individual lived in conflict. “Cognitive PC” is the principal 
component of verbal fluency, orientation, memory, and basic numeracy. “Physical 
PC” is the principal component of activities of daily living (ADLs), instrumental ADLs, 
pain frequency, and hearing ability. “Psych. well-being” is psychological well-being. 
“Composite health” averages all health measures. Bars denote point estimates, and 
whiskers indicate 90 percent confidence intervals. See Online Annexes 3.2 and 3.3 
for details.
1
2
3
4
5
3. Scarring Effects on Older Individuals’ Health Outcomes
(Coefficient on years lived in conflict)
Capital stock
Total factor productivity
Employment
Years after conflict onset
Years after conflict onset
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
−0.03
−0.02
−0.01
0
0.01
Composite health
Cognitive PC
Physical PC
Psych. well-being
Measured
Self-reported
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
78
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
identification challenges, and better understand trans-
mission mechanisms, micro-level analyses focus on the 
role of aid and governance reforms, using data at the 
project and subnational levels, and firm dynamics. At 
the project level, the analysis uses a global dataset of 
aid-financed development projects approved between 
1956 and 2017 and evaluated through 2019 to 
examine whether projects implemented during post-
conflict peace episodes were more successful than those 
implemented at other times, and how outcomes vary. 
At the subnational level, newly constructed geocoded 
aid data provide spatial evidence on the role of aid and 
local governance in supporting postconflict recovery at 
the district level. At the firm level, the analysis assesses 
how firms’ capital, labor, and productivity evolve in 
the aftermath of conflict, accounting for heterogeneous 
recovery patterns across sectors and firm characteristics. 
Finally, the chapter turns to model-based simulations 
to assess the role of policies in a general equilibrium 
setting, using an open-economy model with a realistic 
demographic structure. 
Macro-Level Evidence 
Several findings emerge from the cross-country 
analysis. First, in many postconflict cases, peace proves 
fragile: In about 40 percent of post-WWII postcon-
flict episodes, countries relapse into conflict within 
five years (Figure 3.8, panel 1).11 Beyond this horizon, 
peace becomes somewhat more durable. A simple ex 
post comparison between macroeconomic outcomes in 
countries that relapse into conflict within five years and 
those in countries that do not shows that, in the former, 
internal stability—proxied by growth and the level and 
volatility of inflation—tends to be weaker, real exchange 
rates tend to appreciate, fiscal deficits and uncertainty 
are higher, and aid is lower, but public expenditure is 
also typically lower (Figure 3.8, panel 2). These stylized 
facts point to important complementarities between 
maintaining peace and sound economic policies. They 
also suggest that, during postconflict periods, efforts to 
improve countries’ fiscal positions should not come at 
the expense of cuts to productive expenditure. These 
patterns are broadly consistent with a large body of 
literature showing that stronger economic conditions, 
sounder fiscal positions, and sustained international 
engagement can bolster state capacity to deliver essential 
services, increase the opportunity cost of conflict, and 
11Relapse risk is higher for within-state conflicts than for between-
state conflicts, likely reflecting differences in the credibility of peace 
agreements and the strength of enforcement mechanisms.
reduce the risk of falling into a conflict trap (Rohner 
and Thoenig 2021; Mueller and others 2024; Moscona 
2025; Rohner 2025; Miksjuk and others 2026).12
12The literature on aid and conflict, however, has been marked by 
considerable debate, with two broad perspectives. One view argues 
that foreign aid expands governments’ access to financial resources, 
potentially increasing rents and incentives for rebel activity (Nunn 
and Qian 2014). The alternative view posits that aid relaxes gov-
ernments’ budget constraints, fosters their ability to provide public 
goods, and can therefore reduce the risk of conflict (Grossman 1991; 
De Ree and Nillesen 2009). Recent evidence exploiting quasi-­
random variation in the assignment of World Bank project leaders 
with differing levels of managerial ability finds that stronger project 
management reduces conflict in aid-receiving subnational regions, 
highlighting the role of aid effectiveness in lowering the likelihood of 
violence (Moscona 2025).
Peace continues
Conflict restarts
Fragile
Nonfragile
Figure 3.8.  Peace Duration and Macroeconomic Correlates of 
Fragile Peace
(Percent)
1. Peace Duration
0
20
40
60
80
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Years after conflict termination
2. Macroeconomic Correlates of Fragile Peace
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Real
GDP
growth
Inflation Inflation
volatility
REER
growth
Uncertainty
index
Gov.
deficit-
to-GDP
ratio
Aid-to-
GDP
ratio
Gov.
expend.-
to-GDP
ratio
(right scale)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the share of postconflict episodes in which economies remain 
at peace or relapse into conflict over a 10-year horizon during the period 1946–2015, 
with the first year of peace normalized to 100 percent. Panel 2 reports the sample 
average of key macroeconomic variables in fragile and nonfragile episodes. Fragile 
episodes refer to conflict terminations followed by a relapse into conflict within five 
years, whereas nonfragile episodes are those in which peace persists for at least five 
years. Gov. expend. = government expenditure; REER = real effective exchange rate.
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
79
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Second, recovery is conditional on peace. When 
peace is fragile, output does not recover, indicating 
that conflict relapse sharply undermines recovery pros-
pects (Figure 3.9, panel 1). By contrast, when peace 
is sustained, output rebounds, but recovery is slow 
and uneven across countries. Output rises gradually, 
reaching about 3.9 percent five years after conflict 
ends, with only about half of the observed output loss 
recovered five years after conflict onset.13 Uncertainty 
13In level terms, the recovery is more modest because it starts from 
a substantially lower output base at the onset of recovery. When 
disaggregated by conflict type, recoveries are more subdued following 
within-state conflicts than after between-state conflicts. Recoveries 
also tend to stall in commodity-exporting countries, underscoring 
the importance of diversifying away from overreliance on resource 
extraction.
around this estimate is substantial, with wide con-
fidence intervals at longer horizons, highlighting 
pronounced cross-country heterogeneity in recovery 
paths. The modest output rebound may be accompa-
nied by increasing prices (Figure 3.9, panel 2), suggest-
ing that demand recovers faster than supply, although 
the effect is not statistically distinguishable from zero.
Third, supply-side dynamics help explain the slow 
and uneven output recovery following sustained peace 
(Figure 3.9, panel 3). On average, postconflict recov-
eries in capital stock and productivity do not differ 
significantly from those observed in countries that have 
not experienced conflict. This muted response likely 
reflects lingering uncertainty, which makes investors 
more cautious.14 It may also reflect binding postcon-
flict financing constraints faced by domestic firms, a 
mechanism that is explored in more detail later in the 
chapter using firm-level data. By contrast, labor input 
recovers more rapidly, as workers are reallocated from 
military to civilian activities and refugees gradually 
return (Box 3.3 provides further analysis of refugee 
flows following conflict onset and termination).15 
These patterns suggest that post-WWII postconflict 
output rebounds typically have been driven by labor 
dynamics, while persistent shortfalls in capital accumu-
lation and productivity have weighed on the recovery.
Given the subdued and uneven nature of postconflict 
recovery, an important question is whether economic 
policies can foster stronger recoveries. To answer this 
question, the analysis examines the extent to which 
policy variables are correlated with the distribution of 
growth outcomes during each of the first five years of 
postconflict recovery. Specifically, the analysis considers 
a set of policy outcome variables—capturing macroeco-
nomic stability, financing and international assistance, 
and inclusive policies—and relates these variables to 
the percentile distribution of growth within each time 
horizon. The results indicate that sound policies are 
associated with better recovery outcomes (Figure 3.10). 
Countries that achieve macroeconomic stabilization—
that is, low and stable inflation and a stable real effective 
exchange rate—experience stronger recovery perfor-
mance. Similarly, financing and international assistance 
also matter: Postconflict debt restructuring and greater 
engagement in capacity development are both positively 
14Online Annex Table 3.4.1 shows that uncertainty does not 
decline significantly during postconflict episodes.
15Even though labor starts to recover after conflicts, the process 
can be protracted, with persistent structural challenges, such as high 
unemployment and underemployment, continuing well into the 
postconflict period (Stewart 2015).
Fragile
Nonfragile
Figure 3.9.  Macroeconomic Dynamics after Conflicts
(Percent)
1. Impact on Output
−4
8
−2
0
2
4
6
3. Impact on Production Factors
−4
5
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels report local projections difference-in-differences (LP-DiD) estimates 
of the effects of conflict termination on selected macroeconomic outcomes in 
postconflict-site economies up to five years after termination. Conflict termination is 
defined as battle-related deaths falling below the chapter’s baseline threshold of 25 
per calendar year and remaining below that level for at least five consecutive years. 
Fragile denotes conflict terminations followed by a relapse within five years, whereas 
nonfragile cases are those in which peace persists for at least five years. Bars denote 
point estimates, and whiskers indicate 90 percent confidence intervals. See Online 
Annex 3.4 for details. CPI = consumer price index.
1
3
5
2. Impact on CPI
−15
25
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
1
3
5
Capital stock
Total factor productivity
Employment
Years after conflict termination
Years after conflict termination
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
80
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
correlated with stronger recoveries. Inclusive policies also 
play a role, as increases in social spending are associated 
with more robust postconflict growth.16
Case studies from selected rapid recoveries further 
illustrate how stronger recovery has been paired with 
stabilization efforts and international assistance. The 
chapter considers six specific conflict cases: Bosnia and 
Herzegovina (1992–95), Cambodia (1989–98), Côte 
d’Ivoire (2010–11), Nepal (1996–2006), Rwanda 
(1990–2001), and Sri Lanka (1983–2009); see Online 
Annex Table 3.5.2 for more details. Average annual 
output growth during the first five postconflict 
years was strong in these countries, varying between 
4.5 percent (in Nepal) and 24.5 percent (in Bosnia 
and Herzegovina). In these cases, macroeconomic 
stabilization was key: The level and volatility of 
inflation were brought down significantly—by 
double digits in Cambodia—and excessive exchange 
rate appreciation was largely avoided, in many cases 
16Two important policy dimensions are intentionally omitted 
from this cross-country analysis because of identification challenges: 
international support through aid, and domestic institutions. The 
role of these dimensions is examined later in the chapter.
despite strong aid flows that would typically generate 
exchange rate appreciation (known in the literature as 
“aid-related Dutch disease”), with adverse effects on 
the competitiveness of the export sector (IMF 2005). 
It should be noted, however, that maintaining a stable 
real exchange rate in the postconflict period may not 
be universally appropriate. In some cases, domestic 
currencies may be significantly undervalued in real 
terms relative to levels consistent with longer-term 
fundamentals, implying that a real appreciation 
toward equilibrium should be expected. In Côte 
d’Ivoire and Rwanda, rapid restoration of supply, 
credible nominal anchors, and fiscal adjustment were 
key to macroeconomic stabilization (Box 3.2). In 
most cases, aid-related Dutch disease was mitigated 
either through absorb-and-spend strategies, in which 
monetary authorities accommodated higher import 
demand needed for reconstruction and the govern-
ment increased its nonaid fiscal deficit, or through 
absorption without spending, in which foreign 
exchange inflows were absorbed without a correspond-
ing fiscal expansion.17 These experiences underscore 
the importance of coordination between fiscal and 
monetary authorities in managing aid surges when 
they arise. In all cases except Nepal, debt restruc-
turing, yielding sizable debt reductions, occurred in 
the first five years to help restore fiscal sustainability, 
and IMF-supported programs reinforced authorities’ 
stabilization efforts.18 International assistance through 
aid flows, along with remittances in some cases, was 
particularly sizable to support recovery, especially 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda, where aid 
inflows averaged about 20 percent of GDP per year 
during the first five years of recovery. This role of aid 
is explored further later in the chapter.
Stabilization efforts and international assistance were 
also supported by complementary major domestic 
17In accounting terms, an absorb-and-spend strategy implies 
increases in both a country’s nonaid current account deficit and 
its nonaid overall fiscal deficit. This typically reflects situations in 
which the country’s government increases investment in imported 
goods and aid finances the associated increase in net imports, with 
the aid supply of foreign currency netted out (Hussain, Berg, and 
Aiyar 2009). Even when aid is spent on domestically produced 
goods, higher aggregate demand may still spill over into imports. By 
contrast, absorption without spending is more common when debt 
reduction is a priority and unsterilized liquidity injections can pose 
risks to rebuilding macroeconomic stability.
18Many of the countries studied benefited from comprehensive 
debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. In 
addition, restructuring with external private creditors in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina resulted in a cumulative reduction of about 70 percent 
in the nominal value of the country’s outstanding debt.
Figure 3.10.  Correlates of Postconflict Recovery
(Coefficients)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows policy correlates of the distribution of growth outcomes over the 
first five years of postconflict recovery. The dependent variable is the percentile of the 
growth distribution at each horizon (t = 1–5 years). Regressions control for postconflict 
episode and horizon fixed effects. “Low inflation,” “stable inflation,” and “stable REER” 
are indicator variables equal to 1 if the respective measure falls below the sample mean, 
based on inflation levels, inflation volatility, and REER volatility. “Debt restructuring” 
equals 1 if a restructuring occurs. “Capacity development” is measured by the log number 
of participants in IMF training. Bars denote point estimates, and whiskers indicate 90 
percent confidence intervals. See Online Annex 3.5 for details. REER = real effective 
exchange rate.
Social spending
Capacity development
Debt restructuring
Stable REER
Stable inflation
Low inflation
Macroeconomic
stability
Financing and
international
assistance
Inclusive
policies
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
81
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
institutional reforms. In Côte d’Ivoire, Rwanda, and 
Sri Lanka, significant improvements in governance 
were achieved, with governance scores increasing by 
40–60 percent. In Rwanda, commitment to institu-
tion building and anti-corruption reforms restored 
trust and the legitimacy of public institutions: Initia-
tives included implementing a zero-tolerance policy 
regarding corruption, establishing an efficient and 
transparent justice system, and adopting a credible 
public investment strategy (Box 3.2). Similar efforts 
were made in other areas by most countries examined, 
including efforts to reduce the state’s direct ownership 
of productive assets and improve capacity to collect, 
analyze, and disseminate high-quality data. These two 
important areas are often disrupted during conflict but 
are critical to achieving competitive conditions for the 
private sector and guiding data-driven policies during 
recovery. Across recovery cases, peace dividends were 
also evident: Military spending decreased significantly, 
creating fiscal space for nonmilitary expenditures 
and the expansion of social spending to foster inclu-
sion. In some cases, peacekeeping missions (Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, Côte d’Ivoire) and broader peace-­
building efforts, including justice and political provi-
sions, complemented institutional reforms. In Rwanda, 
for instance, these included the reintegration of former 
combatants into society and government. 
Overall, although no two countries’ postconflict 
paths may be identical, the macro-level evidence points 
to common lessons: Credible macroeconomic stabili-
zation, debt restructuring, external support, and strong 
domestic policy efforts are central to successful post-
conflict recovery. The next subsection complements the 
analysis by drawing on micro-level data to examine the 
role of aid and domestic institutions and shed light on 
firm-level dynamics during recovery.
Micro-Level Evidence 
Micro-level evidence from project and subna-
tional analyses indicates that aid-funded develop-
ment projects can support postconflict recovery, but 
their effectiveness depends critically on context and 
implementation quality (Figure 3.11).19 On average, 
19A large literature examines aid effectiveness and offers mixed 
findings (see, for instance, Doucouliagos and Paldam 2009). The 
analysis presented here complements this literature by focusing on 
aid effectiveness in postconflict settings, in which financing con-
straints are particularly binding, and by exploiting novel project-level 
and subnational data. See Online Annexes 3.6 and 3.7 for method-
ological details.
projects implemented during postconflict peace 
episodes perform better than those implemented 
in countries that have not experienced conflict, a 
result that suggests postconflict situations repre-
sent a window of opportunity given the scarcity of 
resources and rebuilding needs (Chauvet, Collier, and 
Figure 3.11.  Role of Aid and Local Governance
(Regression estimates, coefficients)
1. Project Outcome after Conflicts
−0.4
0.6
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
2. Time-Varying Effects on Project Outcome
−0.4
0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 1 and 2 show the effect of postconflict peace on project outcomes, 
measured on a 1–6 Likert scale, using a difference-in-differences approach. Panel 3 
shows the marginal postconflict effect, conditional on aid, on nighttime light intensity 
for administrative regions at the second subnational levels (ADM2). Data on project 
outcomes are drawn from Honig, Lall, and Parks (2023); subnational project data from 
Bomprezzi and others (2024); nighttime light intensity data from Li and others (2020); 
and subnational governance data from Crombach and Smits (2024). Markers denote 
point estimates; whiskers show 90 percent confidence intervals. See Online Annexes 
3.6 and 3.7 for details. Edu.-health = education and health; Infra. = infrastructure; 
Prod. = productive sectors.
3. Subnational Growth, Aid, and Local Governance after Conflicts
0
0.4
0.1
0.2
0.3
Baseline
Super-
vision
Prod.
Infra.
Low
High
Edu.-health
Public investment
scale-up
Project sectors
Years after conflict termination
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Governance
Baseline
Low
High
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
82
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Duponchel 2010).20 Effectiveness, however, varies. 
Project success is more likely when supervision quality 
is high and for projects in education, health, and 
infrastructure. Projects targeting the private sector 
on average tend to perform poorly, with the poor 
performance likely reflecting lingering uncertainty, 
suggesting such projects may require enhanced super-
vision and careful sequencing. Project effectiveness is 
also high when implementation occurs outside periods 
of rapid public investment scale-up: When projects 
are implemented during large investment surges, 
estimated effects remain positive but are less precisely 
measured, pointing to the role of absorptive capacity 
constraints in shaping diverse outcomes (Presbitero 
2016). The timing of projects with respect to the end 
of conflicts also matters: Performance improves grad-
ually as peace lasts. The pattern suggests that, during 
the first few years after a conflict ends, the absorptive 
capacity of aid projects may not be greater than in 
normal times, but it then increases significantly (see 
also Chauvet, Collier, and Duponchel 2010). Subna-
tional evidence further shows that aid in postconflict 
settings is positively associated with local economic 
recovery, but the recovery conditional on aid is sig-
nificantly higher when domestic efforts lead to major 
improvements in governance (see also Burnside and 
Dollar 2000). When governance remains weak, both 
the gains from aid and the pace of the unconditional 
recovery itself are more muted. 
Firm-level evidence provides further insight into the 
subdued recovery of capital and productivity following 
conflict termination, with substantial heterogeneity 
across sectors and firms (Figure 3.12). On average, 
surviving firms expand employment modestly after 
conflict ends, but capital stocks remain weak and 
productivity shows limited improvement. This pattern 
points to substitution toward labor amid difficulties 
in rebuilding capital, reflecting persistent uncertainty 
and likely financial constraints. Adjustment dynam-
ics vary across sectors and firm characteristics. Firms 
in capital-intensive sectors, those that are exporters, 
and those with stronger balance sheets record gains in 
both employment and productivity, consistent with 
20It is plausible that projects implemented in postconflict settings 
would have lower expectations to begin with, compared with those 
for projects implemented in countries at peace. Project outcome data 
may also suffer from potential subjective rating bias. To mitigate 
these concerns, the analysis includes a rich set of fixed effects—at the 
country, year, donor, sector-approval year, and sector-evaluation year 
levels—to address unobserved confounders related to local conditions. 
The results are robust to focusing exclusively on investment projects.
adaptive use of existing capital, high marginal returns 
to incremental capital, and better access to external 
markets. By contrast, firms in labor-intensive sectors 
and nonexporters primarily expand employment, with 
capital stocks remaining well below preconflict levels. 
Financially constrained firms face especially persistent 
capital shortfalls. These results point to a recovery 
Capital
Total factor productivity
Labor
Capital
Total factor productivity
Labor
Figure 3.12.  Firm Dynamics after Conflicts
(Percentage change)
1. Baseline Estimates
2. Heterogeneity by Capital and Labor Intensity
3. Heterogeneity by Firm Characteristics
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels show ordinary least squares estimates of the effects of postconflict 
peace on firm dynamics. The dependent variables are firm-level capital, labor, and total 
factor productivity (TFP, measured as quantity-based TFP, or TFPQ), all in logarithms. The 
key explanatory variable is a postconflict peace dummy equal to 1 during the five years 
following a conflict episode within a 20-kilometer radius of a firm’s location. Depending 
on the specification, regressions control for firm age, size, leverage, and export status, 
and include firm, country-year, and sector-year fixed effects. Firm-level data come from 
Orbis. Bars denote point estimates, and whiskers show 90 percent confidence intervals. 
See Online Annex 3.8 for details.
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
−0.2
−0.3
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Capital
Labor
Total factor productivity
Capital intensive
Labor intensive
Low
High
No
Yes
Net worth
Exporter
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
83
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
driven by stronger firms through partial factor reallo-
cation, whereas weaker but potentially viable firms can 
experience persistent capital scarring, highlighting the 
importance of policies that relax credit constraints and 
support capital rebuilding in the aftermath of conflict.
Model-Based Evidence 
The chapter uses an extension of an open-economy 
overlapping-generations model (Auclert and others 
2024) with frictional international capital markets 
to calibrate the effects of conflict shocks and assess 
the general equilibrium implications of different 
postconflict recovery scenarios. The model is cali-
brated to an average low-income country (see Online 
Annex 3.9 for details). Consistent with this chapter’s 
empirical findings, conflicts affect the economy through 
several key propagation channels, and aggregate magni-
tudes are aligned with the empirical evidence:
	• Human losses. Shocks from human losses capture the 
persistent adverse effects of conflict on human capi-
tal accumulation and population dynamics, includ-
ing casualties, forced displacement, long-lasting 
health impacts, and reduced fertility. Incorporating 
the channels through which these shocks operate 
allows the model to assess the macroeconomic impli-
cations of reintegrating displaced populations during 
the recovery phase. Whereas demographic shocks to 
the working-age population tend to exert pro-
nounced but transitory effects on economic activity, 
conflict-related disruptions can inflict persistent 
scarring on younger cohorts, with implications for 
long-term growth trajectories (Figure 3.13).
	• Physical capital destruction. Conflict can inflict severe 
localized losses on physical capital. Model simu-
lations indicate that capital destruction accounts 
for a sizable share of the early output decline. Yet, 
without additional shocks to investment, such as 
heightened uncertainty or financial constraints, as 
documented in the empirical analysis and discussed 
later in the chapter, the capital destruction channel 
alone tends to fade over time, as the higher marginal 
product of capital stimulates investment.21
	• Country risk premiums and uncertainty. Investment 
often remains depressed in postconflict econo-
mies, particularly in developing economies that 
21Examples of countries undergoing rapid reconstruction of 
physical capital after large destruction include Germany, Japan, and 
Vietnam (Davis and Weinstein 2002; Brakman, Garretsen, and 
Schramm 2004).
rely on foreign capital—including foreign direct 
investment—to finance investment and face elevated 
perceptions of economic and political risk (Le and 
Zak 2006; Rexer, Kapstein, and Rivera 2022). In 
addition, domestic households grow reluctant to 
invest amid economic policy uncertainty (Di Maio 
and Sunde 2025), fears of conflict relapses, or expro-
priation risk (Collier and Gunning 1995; Brochet, 
Mueller, and Rauh 2025). Model simulations reveal 
how the resulting two-pronged confidence channel 
accounts for capital flight at conflict onset, push-
ing interest rates higher, followed by a prolonged 
investment slump.22 The recovery phase presents 
its own challenges: Absent stabilization, foreign 
investors respond inelastically, constraining capi-
tal inflows needed to finance reconstruction. This 
sluggish investor response prolongs the adjustment 
period and delays the return to precrisis investment 
levels. Frictions in capital markets play a contrasting 
role, as more-open economies are more vulnerable to 
capital flight at conflict onset but tend to rebound 
faster once confidence is restored.
22In the model, higher country risk premiums dampen capital 
inflows, consistent with Gourinchas and Rey (2014). The degree of 
financial openness in a country governs the responsiveness of foreign 
demand for domestic assets. Damaged financial sectors can also play 
an important role in hindering investments and capital allocation in 
postconflict settings (Addison and others 2005).
Domestic confidence
Capital destruction
WAP
Country risk
Non-WAP
Combined conflict shock
Figure 3.13.  Contribution to Changes in Output after Conflict 
Shock
(Deviation from baseline scenario, percentage points)
−9
0
−8
−7
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows model-based simulations of the effects of conflict on output 
at different horizons (in years, shown on the horizontal axis). Shaded areas denote 
deviations from the baseline when an economy is hit by each shock—country risk, 
human losses, and capital destruction—either in isolation or jointly (as reflected by 
the combined shock). The representative economy is calibrated to match average 
output growth, debt-to-GDP, and tax-to-GDP ratios of low-income countries. See 
Online Annex 3.9 for details. WAP = working-age population.
Years after conflict onset
1
5
9
13
17
21
24
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
84
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
How can policies help restore economic activity 
and rebuild productive capacity after conflict? Model 
simulations consider four policy layers: restoring mac-
roeconomic stability, mobilizing financing, rebuilding 
state capacity through increases in public investment 
efficiency, and addressing protracted losses to human 
capital. A set of alternative scenarios is used to assess 
the general equilibrium effects of such policies.
	• Macroeconomic stabilization. Well-coordinated 
domestic economic policies, including those imple-
mented under IMF-supported programs, anchored 
in credible and sustained peace can be critical for 
restoring confidence and laying the foundations for 
recovery, both as a direct outcome of the policies 
and through a signaling effect. A key obstacle to a 
rapid rebound is elevated perceived country risk, 
which lowers the effective rate of return on invest-
ment in a country. Empirical evidence suggests 
that macroeconomic stabilization achieved under 
IMF-supported programs can help reduce country 
risk premiums (Gehring and Lang 2020). The first 
scenario assumes that the wedges generated by the 
two-pronged confidence shocks associated with 
conflict gradually converge to their preconflict levels 
over eight years.
	• Financing. Financing postconflict reconstruc-
tion typically requires a combination of domestic 
revenue mobilization (that is, efforts to increase 
government revenues through improved tax policy 
and administration), borrowing, and expenditure 
reallocation. Recovery outcomes depend critically on 
the composition of this financing mix. In practice, 
many conflict-affected economies are constrained 
by extremely tight fiscal space, with tax revenues 
averaging about 15 percent of GDP, and often lack 
market access, limiting their ability to borrow. In 
such a context, concessional financing can play a 
key role in supporting recovery alongside domestic 
revenue efforts. Motivated by evidence from the 
case studies, a second alternative scenario assumes 
domestic efforts to gradually increase the tax-to-
GDP ratio by 3 percentage points over 15 years, 
combined with additional donor aid averaging about 
0.5 percent of GDP per year during the first 5 years 
of postconflict recovery.
	• Increasing public investment efficiency. Countries 
differ markedly in their capacity to translate public 
investment outlays into effective public infrastruc-
ture, such as schools and roads. Simulations using 
a measure proposed in the October 2025 Fiscal 
Monitor show that increasing public investment 
efficiency to the median level for emerging market 
and developing economies magnifies the impact of 
a tax-funded recovery plan. In practice, many fragile 
and conflict-affected countries have benefited from 
capacity development efforts that helped strengthen 
public investment management and increase its effi-
ciency over time (Gores and Suc 2024). In a third 
alternative scenario, public investment efficiency 
increases by 10 percentage points relative to the 
average level reported in the October 2025 Fiscal 
Monitor, boosting the output return of tax-funded 
recovery by about 1.4 percentage points, consistent 
with the estimates published in October.
	• Policies to alleviate protracted losses of human capital. 
Policies that encourage return migration can 
support economic recovery, as returning popu-
lations bring back human capital and help spur 
demand for domestic assets. Policy conditions in 
refugees’ countries of origin play an important role 
in shaping return decisions (Box 3.3). Increased 
housing availability, enhanced security, better access 
to basic services—including water, education, and 
health care—and policies that support labor market 
reintegration are all positively associated with return 
intentions. In a fourth alternative scenario, displaced 
populations are assumed to return gradually over a 
four-year period.
Model simulations show that combining pol-
icies from these four policy layers can support 
recovery (Figure 3.14). Taken in isolation, however, 
individual policies are less efficient at fully offsetting 
conflict-related output losses, indicating that a com-
prehensive policy approach is preferable to a piecemeal 
one. The results further illustrate that a coordinated 
and comprehensive policy package that puts a pri-
ority on reductions in uncertainty and rebuilding of 
capital stock accelerates recovery beyond what would 
be achieved by the sum of the individual policies 
in the package, reflecting positive externalities and 
complementarities across policies, as well as improved 
expectations.23 For example, policies that jointly reduce 
uncertainty and rebuild capital can improve economic 
agents’ expectations about the future, relax borrowing 
23The presence of positive complementarities across policies is 
not universal, because policy interactions can exhibit threshold 
effects: For instance, scaling up public investment reduces sovereign 
risk when public investment quality is high but increases risk when 
quality is low (Adarov and Panizza 2026). This suggests that the 
effectiveness of coordinated policy packages may depend critically on 
institutional capacity and implementation quality. 
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
85
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
constraints, and, as such, facilitate greater capital 
inflows, raise wages, and further encourage the return 
of displaced workers and refugees; this virtuous cycle is 
more powerful the more open an economy is.24
Summary and Policy Recommendations
Following a period of relative calm after the Cold 
War ended, the number of conflicts worldwide has 
increased in recent years, reaching levels not seen 
since WWII. Beyond their devastating human toll 
this chapter shows, wars impose large and persistent 
economic costs. Output losses in conflict-site econo-
mies are deep and long-lasting, exceeding those typi-
cally associated with financial crises or severe natural 
disasters. Wars also generate acute macroeconomic 
trade-offs—through fiscal strains, external imbalances, 
and inflationary pressures—and leave durable scars on 
a country’s macroeconomy and individuals. These eco-
nomic consequences are not confined within borders: 
Neighboring countries and trading partners of conflict-­
site economies also bear nonnegligible spillovers, 
underscoring the international costs of conflict.
24Gorodnichenko and Obstfeld (2026) similarly propose a 
rebuilding strategy that leverages a virtuous cycle involving capital 
deepening, repatriation of war refugees, and productivity improve-
ment in the case of Ukraine.
When conflict ends and gives way to a durable 
peace, economic recovery is possible, but it is neither 
automatic nor rapid. On average, output rebounds, 
yet the pace of recovery remains modest relative to 
wartime losses and varies widely across countries. Post-
war recoveries since the end of WWII have been driven 
primarily by labor dynamics, as workers shift back 
to civilian activities and refugees gradually return. By 
contrast, capital accumulation and productivity often 
remain subdued, reflecting lingering uncertainty and 
persistent financing constraints. However, when peace 
proves fragile and conflict reemerges, economic activity 
typically fails to recover, highlighting the central role of 
sustained peace in restoring growth.
Policy choices play a decisive role in shaping 
postconflict outcomes. Recoveries tend to be stronger 
when early and decisive debt restructuring is com-
bined with macroeconomic stabilization, anchored 
in low and stable inflation and a stable exchange 
rate—and supported by timely international assis-
tance, including capacity development and aid. In 
many successful cases, stabilization has been achieved 
through rapid restoration of supply, credible nom-
inal anchors, and fiscal adjustment, often under 
IMF-supported programs. In episodes characterized 
by large aid inflows, effective coordination between 
fiscal and monetary authorities has proved particularly 
important for managing aid surges without under-
mining macroeconomic stability. These stabilization 
efforts have been most effective when complemented 
by domestic reforms to rebuild state capacity and 
improve governance, for instance, to restore adminis-
trative capacity to collect taxes or strengthen anti-­
corruption measures. Successful recoveries have also 
been accompanied by a peace dividend, in which 
reductions in military spending created fiscal space for 
nonmilitary and social expenditures, alongside policies 
to address human capital losses, including measures to 
support refugees’ return and integration.
Moreover, successful recoveries hinge on a com-
prehensive policy package, with a primary focus on 
reducing uncertainty and rebuilding the capital stock 
during the early period of the recoveries because of 
policy complementarities and expectations about the 
future. Taken together, the chapter’s findings under-
score that macroeconomic stabilization, sizable debt 
restructuring, international support, and complemen-
tary domestic reforms are mutually reinforcing pillars 
of durable postconflict recovery, but their effectiveness 
ultimately depends on the durability of peace.
Tax-financed reconstruction
Aid package
Interaction effect
Combined recovery
Confidence restoration
Population recovery
Combined conflict shock
Figure 3.14.  Output Dividends from Recovery Policies
(Deviation from combined shock, percentage points)
−8
4
−6
−4
−2
0
2
Years after conflict onset
1
5
9
2
6
10
3
7
11
4
8
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows model-based simulations of the effect of recovery policies on 
output up to 19 years (shown on the horizontal axis) after conflict onset. “Combined 
recovery” denotes the joint effect of the recovery policies. “Interaction effect” reflects 
the output gains from policy externalities, complementarities across policies, and 
improved expectations. “Tax-financed reconstruction” raises public spending by 
3 percentage points over 15 years. “Aid package” amounts to 0.5 percent of GDP over 
five years. “Confidence restoration” fully undoes the confidence shocks. “Population 
recovery” assumes a gradual return of refugees. See Online Annex 3.9 for details.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
86
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
This box focuses on Ukraine’s economic crisis 
management and subsequent stabilization following 
Russia’s invasion on February 24, 2022. The invasion 
triggered a dramatic collapse of Ukraine’s economy, 
with output plunging by more than one-third in the 
second quarter of that year (Figure 3.1.1). Widespread 
combat, infrastructure destruction, trade disruptions, 
and large-scale emigration created acute demand-­
supply imbalances, fueling inflation and widening 
the country’s trade deficit. Martial law was intro-
duced upon the invasion, with immediate priorities 
to mobilize military-age men, maintain public order 
and core state functions, and reinforce public confi-
dence. Sound prewar fundamentals and policymaking 
institutions—strengthened over time through reforms, 
including those under IMF-supported programs—
enabled a swift policy response to preserve macroeco-
nomic stability in two phases.
Phase 1 (2022): Economic Crisis Management. In this 
phase, public spending was rapidly redirected toward 
defense while social spending was protected. Acute 
financing needs were bridged with temporary mone-
tary financing, IMF emergency financing, European 
Union (EU) macrofinancial assistance, and in-kind 
defense support, alongside debt-service standstills, 
creating critical fiscal space. To preserve reserves and 
stabilize expectations, the National Bank of Ukraine 
(NBU) introduced sweeping foreign exchange controls 
on outflows and pegged the exchange rate, subse-
quently devaluing the currency in July following a 
1,500-basis-point policy rate hike. Business conti-
nuity was preserved through rapid digitalization and 
blackout-resilient banking solutions (Power Banking). 
Despite large-scale attacks on energy infrastructure, 
swift repairs—supported by external aid—and the 
adoption of backup generators sustained economic 
activity.
Phase 2 (2023 onward): Stabilization and Growth. 
With a four-year IMF Extended Fund Facility (EFF) 
program in place beginning in March 2023 and 
$130 billion in external financing secured for the 
program period, policymakers moved in this phase 
from crisis management to stabilization. Fiscal policy 
became more orderly, underpinned by nondefense 
budget discipline and domestic revenue mobilization, 
including the reversal of some initial wartime tax 
The authors of this box are Sidra Rehman and Andrea 
Manera.
relief, strengthened tax and customs administration, 
and selective tax increases. Monetary financing was 
fully phased out. The NBU transitioned to a man-
aged exchange rate, adopting a conditions-based 
strategy to phase out foreign exchange controls. In 
addition to extended standstills, a comprehensive 
debt-restructuring strategy was developed. As front 
lines stabilized, growth resumed, with the second quar-
ter of 2023 registering 19.3 percent growth year over 
year, driven by household and firm wartime adapta-
tion, revived exports, and an improving labor market 
as net internal forced displacement eased. Inflation 
also eased amid the cessation of monetary financing, 
receding supply shocks, and a favorable harvest.
Ukraine’s crisis preparedness, shaped by managing 
wartime conditions after the 2014 annexation of 
Crimea, and sound initial conditions were critical for 
crisis management. Stabilization hinged on the author-
ities’ commitment to an ambitious reform framework 
supported by the EFF and large-scale concessional 
financing, including the EU’s Ukraine Facility, as 
well as in-kind support. The reform agenda, covering 
revenue mobilization, public financial management, 
governance and anti-corruption measures, and finan-
cial sector infrastructure, has helped lay the foundation 
for a postwar economy.
Invasion;
martial law;
FX peg
imposed;
RFI disbursed
Increased aerial
attacks; Power
Banking introduced;
cessation of
monetary financing;
RFI (FSW)
EFF
approved;
first $2.7 billion
disbursed
Black Sea
corridor
operational
EU’s
Ukraine
facility
entered
into force
Inflation
Growth
Figure 3.1.1.  Real GDP Growth and Inflation
(Percent, year over year)
−40
50
−20
−30
−10
0
10
30
20
40
2020:Q1 21:Q1
22:Q1
23:Q1
24:Q1
25:Q1 25:Q4
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EFF = IMF Extended Fund Facility; EU = European Union; 
FSW = IMF Food Shock Window;  FX = foreign exchange; 
RFI = IMF Rapid Financing Instrument.
Box 3.1. Wartime Economic Management in Ukraine 
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
87
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
This box uses the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in 
Rwanda and the 2010–11 postelectoral crisis in Côte 
d’Ivoire to highlight that early macroeconomic stabi-
lization, international support, credible institutional 
reforms, and domestic revenue mobilization were key 
to durable recovery in both of these cases. 
Both countries experienced deep initial disrup-
tions but stabilized quickly and returned to strong 
postconflict growth. Rwanda experienced an abrupt 
and near-total collapse of state capacity. Violence was 
widespread, forced displacement was massive, and eco-
nomic activity virtually ceased. Côte d’Ivoire’s crisis was 
shorter and more geographically contained. Neverthe-
less, it was severe enough to disrupt production, public 
administration, and investor confidence. At the end of 
the genocide in 1994, Rwanda’s real GDP contracted 
by 42 percent, inflation surged to 42 percent, and 
public debt increased to 171 percent of GDP, from 
60 percent of GDP in 1993. Five years later, economic 
growth recovered to about 3 percent and accelerated to 
between 6 percent and 9 percent annually in the fol-
lowing years, while inflation returned to 2 percent, and 
public debt declined to 78 percent of GDP. In Côte 
d’Ivoire, output contracted by about 5 percent during 
the crisis, whereas inflation rose from 1.2 percent 
in 2010 to 4.9 percent in 2011 before returning to 
an average of about 1.4 percent three years later. 
The real effective exchange rate remained stable, and 
public debt increased from 46 percent in 2009 to 
about 50 percent of GDP in 2011. Within five years, 
economic growth accelerated to about 7 percent, and 
public debt declined to 31 percent of GDP.
In both cases, recovery was anchored by the rapid 
restoration of supply, credible nominal anchors, and 
substantial external support. In Rwanda, inflation 
declined as donor-financed imports alleviated short-
ages and agricultural production recovered. For Côte 
d’Ivoire, membership in the West African Economic 
and Monetary Union provided a strong and credible 
The authors of this box are Patrick-Nelson Essiane and Maria 
Gelrud.
nominal anchor, facilitating rapid price stabilization. 
Fiscal imbalances were initially addressed through 
emergency grants and strict expenditure controls, 
followed by comprehensive debt relief, through the 
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative program 
in Rwanda and through arrears clearance combined 
with that program and the Multilateral Debt Relief 
Initiative in Côte d’Ivoire, creating fiscal space for 
reconstruction and social spending. IMF-supported 
programs in both countries underpinned macroeco-
nomic stabilization and fiscal adjustment, catalyzing 
donor confidence and sustained external financing. In 
Rwanda, net inflows of official development assistance 
surged to about 95 percent of gross national income 
in 1994 and remained elevated—at 15–20 percent of 
gross national income—while private capital inflows 
were modest, with foreign direct investment increasing 
gradually from near zero to 2–3.5 percent of GDP by 
2007. Dutch disease pressures were contained because 
aid financed a large share of essential imports, and 
the country’s post-1995 flexible exchange rate regime 
absorbed external shocks.
Domestic resource mobilization was critical. Rwanda 
broadened its tax base, established the Rwanda 
Revenue Authority, and introduced a value-added tax. 
Côte d’Ivoire increased tax compliance and digitalized 
revenue collection. Following those reforms, the tax-
to-GDP ratio increased from 9 percent to 13 percent 
in Rwanda and from 10 percent to 13 percent in Côte 
d’Ivoire. Political will and credibility were also key. 
Rwanda’s well-aligned group of policymakers and com-
mitment to institution building and anti-corruption 
measures helped rebuild trust and public sector 
legitimacy. Key initiatives included a zero-tolerance 
policy regarding corruption, strengthening the justice 
system, adopting a credible public investment strategy, 
and reintegrating former combatants into society and 
government (Hill, Khadan, and Selcuk 2025; October 
2025 Regional Economic Outlook: Middle East and 
Central Asia, Chapter 2). Côte d’Ivoire’s rapid nor-
malization and program-backed reforms supported 
investment and growth.
Box 3.2. Dealing with Postconflict Stabilization: Lessons from African Experiences
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
88
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Armed conflicts generate severe human costs. In 
addition to casualties and injuries, millions of people 
are forced to flee their homes during conflicts. In 
2024, about 25 million refugees—roughly 80 percent 
of the global refugee population—originated from 
active conflict-site economies.1 But refugee return is 
not automatic once the conflict ends. As shown in 
the chapter, policies that foster postconflict return 
migration can help recovery, as returnees bring back 
human capital and spur domestic demand. This box 
examines refugee movements during and after conflicts 
and draws policy lessons for easing return.
Cross-country data point to sizable and persistent 
refugee outflows following conflict onset (Figure 3.3.1, 
panel 1) (see also Mueller, Piemontese, and Tapsoba 
2017; Chapter 2 of the April 2024 Regional Economic 
Outlook: Middle East and Central Asia; and Chapter 2 
of the October 2025 Regional Economic Outlook: 
Middle East and Central Asia). Five years after the 
onset of a major conflict, cumulative refugee outflows 
from the conflict-site economy are about 95 percent 
higher than in the year preceding the conflict. When 
conflicts end and sustained peace takes hold, refugee 
returns to their country of origin gradually increase, 
reaching about 60 percent five years after conflict ter-
mination. A comparison of postconflict inflows with 
earlier outflows suggests, however, that return is often 
incomplete even after several years of peace.
Recent intention surveys by the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees covering about 
17,000 refugees from Nigeria, South Sudan, and 
Ukraine help explain the drivers of return intentions, 
which, conditional on the end of conflict, vary across 
socioeconomic characteristics. Older individuals, 
refugees in host countries neighboring their country of 
origin, and those with close family members in their 
country of origin report higher likelihoods of return. 
By contrast, refugees who are employed in host coun-
tries tend to express lower levels of return intentions.
Policy conditions in refugees’ country of origin 
also shape return decisions. Increased housing 
availability, enhanced security, better access to basic 
services—including water, education, and health 
care—and policies supporting labor market reintegra-
tion are positively associated with return intentions 
The authors of this box are Hippolyte Balima and Evgenia 
Weaver.
1Calculations are based on data on refugees from the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the chapter’s 
conflict data.
(Figure 3.3.1, panel 2). A decomposition analysis 
suggests that policy-related factors explain about 
54 percent of refugees’ stated intentions to return to 
their countries of origin, whereas individual socioeco-
nomic characteristics account for about 20 percent.
Thus, policies that promote postconflict security, 
expand housing availability, facilitate reintegration into 
labor markets, and rebuild basic services are critical for 
encouraging return and supporting durable recovery in 
postconflict economies. 
Box 3.3. Policies for Refugees’ Return and Integration
Conflict onset
Conflict termination
Figure 3.3.1.  Refugee Flows during and after 
Conflict, and Return Intentions
1. Refugee Dynamics
(Percent)
0
150
50
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years after conflict onset/termination
Housing
Security
Work,
sup. reint.
Bas. serv.
edu./heal.
2. Correlates of Return Intention
(Likelihood, 0–1)
0
0.4
0.1
0.2
0.3
Sources: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) Intention Surveys for refugees from Nigeria 
(September 2021), South Sudan (November 2021), and Ukraine 
(August 2024); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows local projections difference-in-differences 
estimates of refugee stocks following conflict onset and (with 
an opposite sign) termination (similar patterns are observed 
using data on refugee flows and returnees). Panel 2’s regression 
controls for socioeconomic characteristics and fixed effects 
for country of origin, country (or region) of asylum, and legal 
status. Lines and markers denote point estimates; shaded areas 
and whiskers show 90 percent confidence intervals. Bas. serv. 
edu./heal. = basic services, education, and health; Work, sup. 
reint. = work and support for reintegration.
CHAPTER 3  THE MACROECONOMICS OF CONFLICTS AND RECOVERY
89
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
References
Adarov, Amat, and Ugo Panizza. 2026. “Public Investment 
Quality and Sovereign Risk.” Journal of International Money 
and Finance 161: 103503.
Addison, Tony, Alemayehu Geda, Philippe Le Billon, and S 
Mansoob Murshed. 2005. “Reconstructing and Reforming 
the Financial System in Conflict and ‘Post-Conflict’ 
Economies.” Journal of Development Studies 41 (4): 703–18.
Auclert, Adrien, Hannes Malmberg, Frederic Martenet, and 
Matthew Rognlie. 2024. “Demographics, Wealth, and Global 
Imbalances in the Twenty-First Century.” NBER Working 
Paper 29161, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Benmelech, Efraim, and João Monteiro. 2025. “The Economic 
Consequences of War.” NBER Working Paper 34389, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel. 2010. “Civil War.” 
Journal of Economic Literature 48 (1): 3–57.
Bomprezzi, Pietro, Axel Dreher, Andreas Fuchs, Teresa Hailer, 
Andreas Kammerlander, Lennart Kaplan, Silvia Marchesi, and 
others. 2024. “Wedded to Prosperity? Informal Influence and 
Regional Favoritism.” CESifo Working Paper 10969, Center 
for Economic Studies and ifo Institute, Munich.
Brakman, Steven, Harry Garretsen, and Marc Schramm. 2004. 
“The Strategic Bombing of German Cities during World 
War II and Its Impact on City Growth.” Journal of Economic 
Geography 4 (2): 201–18.
Brochet, Sophie, Hannes Mueller, and Christopher Rauh. 2025. 
“Uncovering Economic Policy Uncertainty during Conflict.” 
Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 2551, Faculty of 
Economics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
Burnside, Craig, and David Dollar. 2000. “Aid, Policies, and 
Growth.” American Economic Review 90 (4): 847–68.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2022. “Measuring 
Geopolitical Risk.” American Economic Review 112 (4): 
1194–225. 
Cavallo, Eduardo, Sebastian Galiani, Ilan Noy, and Juan Pantano. 
2013. “Catastrophic Natural Disasters and Economic 
Growth.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (5): 1549–61.
Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena. 2008. “Growth 
Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery.” American 
Economic Review 98 (1): 439–57.
Chami, Ralph, Raphael Espinoza, and Peter Montiel, eds. 2021. 
Macroeconomic Policy in Fragile States. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Chauvet, Lisa, Paul Collier, and Marguerite Duponchel. 
2010. “What Explains Aid Project Success in Post-Conflict 
Situations?” World Bank Working Paper 5418, World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 
Chen, Siyan, Norman V. Loayza, and Marta Reynal-Querol. 
2008. “The Aftermath of Civil War.” World Bank Economic 
Review 22 (1): 63–85.
Chupilkin, Maxim, and Zsóka Kóczán. 2022. “The Economic 
Consequences of War: Estimates Using Synthetic 
Controls.” EBRD Working Paper 271, European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development, London. 
Collier, Paul. 1999. “On the Economic Consequences of Civil 
War.” Oxford Economic Papers 51 (1): 168–83.
Collier, Paul, and Jan Willem Gunning. 1995. “War, Peace and 
Private Portfolios.” World Development 23 (2): 233–41.
Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler. 2007. “Civil War.” In 
Handbook of Defense Economics, vol. 2, edited by Keith 
Hartley and Todd Sandler, 711–39. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Crombach, Lamar, and Jeroen Smits. 2024. “The Subnational 
Corruption Database: Grand and Petty Corruption in 1,473 
Regions of 178 Countries, 1995–2022.” Scientific Data 11 
(1): art. 686.
Dabrowski, Marek. 2025. “How Resilient Is Russia’s Economy 
after Four Years of War?” Working Paper 32/2025, Bruegel, 
Brussels.
Davis, Donald, and David Weinstein. 2002. “Bones, Bombs, 
and Break Points: The Geography of Economic Activity.” 
American Economic Review 92 (5): 1269–89.
De Ree, Joppe, and Eleonora Nillesen. 2009. “Aiding Violence 
or Peace? The Impact of Foreign Aid on the Risk of Civil 
Conflict in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Development 
Economics 88 (2): 301–13.
Devereux, John, and Gerald Dwyer. 2016. “What Determines 
Output Losses after Banking Crises?” Journal of International 
Money and Finance 69: 69–94.
Di Maio, Michele, and Uwe Sunde. 2025. “Conflict and 
Investment: A Review across Health, Fertility, Education, and 
Economic Activity.” Economic Policy 40 (124): 973–1013.
Doucouliagos, Chris, and Martin Paldam. 2009. “The Aid 
Effectiveness Literature: The Sad Results of 40 Years of 
Research.” Journal of Economic Surveys 23 (3): 433–61.
Dube, Arindrajit, Daniele Girardi, Òscar Jordà, and Alan 
M. Taylor. 2025. “A Local Projections Approach to 
Difference-in-Differences.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 40 
(7): 741–58.
Federle, Jonathan, André Meier, Gernot J. Müller, Willi 
Mutschler, and Moritz Schularick. 2026. “The Price of War.” 
American Economic Review 116: 791–827.
Gehring, Kai, and Valentin Lang. 2020. “Stigma or Cushion? 
IMF Programs and Sovereign Creditworthiness.” Journal of 
Development Economics 146: 102507.
Gobat, Jeanne, and Kristina Kostial. 2016. “Syria’s Conflict 
Economy.” IMF Working Paper 16/123, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Gores, Laura A., and Gwenaelle Suc. 2024. “Togo: 
Public Investment Management Assessment—PIMA 
and Climate PIMA.” High-Level Summary Technical 
Assistance Report 2024/054, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. 
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Marianna Kudlyak, and Ayşegül Şahin. 
2022. “The Effect of the War on Human Capital in Ukraine 
and the Path for Rebuilding.” IZA Policy Paper 185, Institute 
of Labor Economics, Bonn, Germany. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
90
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2026. “You Only 
Live Twice: Financial Inflows and Growth in a Westward­
Facing Ukraine.” PIIE Working Paper 26-1, Peterson Institute 
for International Economics, Washington, DC.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Hélène Rey. 2014. “External 
Adjustment, Global Imbalances, Valuation Effects.” In 
Handbook of International Economics 1 (4): 585–645. 
Grossman, Herschell. 1991. “A General Equilibrium Model of 
Insurrections.” American Economic Review 81 (4): 912–21.
Hilgenstock, Benjamin, and Elina Ribakova. 2025. 
“Russia’s Wartime Economic Boom Wanes as 
Recession Risks Rise.” PIIE Charts, July 24, 2025. 
https://www.piie.com/research/piie-charts/2025/
russias-wartime-economic-boom-wanes-recession-risks-rise.
Hill, Samuel, Jeetendra Khadan, and Peter Selcuk. 2025. “Fragile 
and Conflict-Affected Situations: Intertwined Crises, Multiple 
Vulnerabilities.” Policy Research Working Paper 11210, 
World Bank, Washington, DC.
Hong, Kiseok, and Aaron Tornell. 2005. “Recovery from a 
Currency Crisis: Some Stylized Facts.” Journal of Development 
Economics 76 (1): 71–96.
Honig, Dan, Ranjit Lall, and Bradley C. Parks. 2023. “When 
Does Transparency Improve Institutional Performance? 
Evidence from 20,000 Projects in 183 Countries.” American 
Journal of Political Science 67 (4): 1096–116.
Hussain, Mumtaz, Andrew Berg, and Shekhar Aiyar. 2009. 
“The Macroeconomic Management of Increased Aid: Policy 
Lessons from Recent Experience.” Review of Development 
Economics 13 (3): 491–509. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2005. “The 
Macroeconomics of Managing Increased Aid Inflows: 
Experiences of Low-Income Countries and Policy Implica-
tions.” International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1940. How to Pay for the War. London: 
Macmillan and Co. Limited.
Korn, Tobias, and Henry Stemmler. 2025. “The Persistence of 
Trade Relocation from Civil Conflict.” Journal of Development 
Economics 172: 103376.
Kuvshinov, Dmitry, and Kaspar Zimmermann. 2019. 
“Sovereigns Going Bust: Estimating the Cost of Default.” 
European Economic Review 119 (8): 1–21.
Le, Quan Vu, and Paul J. Zak. 2006. “Political Risk and Capital 
Flight.” Journal of International Money and Finance 25 (2): 
308–29.
Li, Xuecao, Yuyu Zhou, Min Zhao, and Xia Zhao. 2020. “A 
Harmonized Global Nighttime Light Dataset 1992–2018.” 
Scientific Data 7 (1): 168.
Miksjuk, Alexei, Paul M. Bisca, Jocelyn Boussard, John-Paul 
Fanning, Romina Kazandjian, Yipei Zhang, Lavinia Zhao, and 
others. 2026. “Macroeconomic Challenges of Fragility and 
Policies for Stability and Growth.” IMF Departmental Paper 
26/003, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Moscona, Jacob. 2025. “The Management of Aid and Conflict 
in Africa.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 17 (4): 
228–59.
Mueller, Hannes. 2012. “Growth Dynamics: The Myth of 
Economic Recovery: Comment.” American Economic Review 
102 (7): 3774–77.
Mueller, Hannes, Lavinia Piemontese, and Augustin Tapsoba. 
2017. “Recovery from Conflict: Lessons of Success.” World 
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7970, Washington DC.
Mueller, Hannes, and Christopher Rauh. 2022. “The Hard 
Problem of Prediction for Conflict Prevention.” Journal of the 
European Economic Association 20 (6): 2440–67.
Mueller, Hannes, and Christopher Rauh. 2024. “Building 
Bridges to Peace: A Quantitative Evaluation of Power-Sharing 
Agreements.” Economic Policy 39 (118): 411–67.
Mueller, Hannes, Christopher Rauh, Benjamin R. Seimon, 
and Raphael A. Espinoza. 2024. “The Urgency of Conflict 
Prevention—A Macroeconomic Perspective.” IMF 
Working Paper 24/256, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington DC.
Nunn, Nathan, and Nancy Qian. 2014. “US Food Aid and Civil 
Conflict.” American Economic Review 104 (6): 1630–66.
Presbitero, Andrea. 2016. “Too Much and Too Fast? Public 
Investment Scaling-Up and Absorptive Capacity.” Journal of 
Development Economics 120: 17–31.
Qureshi, Mahvash Saeed. 2013. “Trade and Thy Neighbor’s 
War.” Journal of Development Economics 105 (C): 178–95.
Rexer, Jonah M., Ethan B. Kapstein, and Andrés F. Rivera. 
2022. “Pricing Conflict Risk: Evidence from Sovereign 
Bonds.” ESOC Working Paper 33, Empirical Studies of 
Conflict, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
Rohner, Dominic. 2025. “Armed Conflict: Causes, 
Consequences, Policies.” CEPR Discussion Paper 20491, 
Centre for Economic and Policy Research, London.
Rohner, Dominic, and Mathias Thoenig. 2021. “The Elusive 
Peace Dividend of Development Policy: From War Traps to 
Macro Complementarities.” Annual Review of Economics 13 
(1): 111–31.
Stewart, Frances. 2015. “Employment in Conflict and Post­
Conflict Situations.” Think Piece, Human Development 
Report Office, United Nations Development Programme, 
New York.
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
91
T
he Statistical Appendix presents historical 
data as well as projections. It comprises 
eight sections: Assumptions, What’s New, 
Data and Conventions, Country Notes, 
Classification of Economies, General Features and 
Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook 
Classification, Key Data Documentation, and Statisti-
cal Tables.
The first section summarizes the assumptions 
underlying the estimates and projections for 2026–27. 
The second section briefly describes the changes to the 
database and statistical tables since the October 2025 
World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section 
offers a general description of the data and the conven-
tions used for calculating country group composites. 
The fourth section presents selected key information 
for each country. The fifth section summarizes the clas-
sification of economies in the various groups presented 
in the WEO, and the sixth section explains that classi-
fication in further detail. The seventh section provides 
information on methods and reporting standards for 
the member countries’ national account and govern-
ment finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical 
tables. Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statisti-
cal Appendix B is available online at www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO.
Data in these tables have been compiled based on 
information available through April 1, 2026, but may 
not reflect the latest published data in all cases. For the 
date of the last data update for each economy, refer to 
the notes provided in the online WEO database. The 
figures for 2026–27 are shown with the same degree 
of precision as the historical figures solely for conve-
nience; because they are projections, the same degree 
of accuracy is not to be inferred.
Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econ-
omies are assumed to remain constant at their average 
levels measured during February 10, 2026–March 10, 
2026. For 2026 and 2027, these assumptions imply 
average US dollar–special drawing right conversion 
rates of 1.376 and 1.378, US dollar–euro conversion 
rates of 1.179 and 1.177, and yen–US dollar conver-
sion rates of 154.7 and 153.5, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $82.22 
a barrel in 2026 and $75.97 a barrel in 2027.
National authorities’ established policies are assumed 
to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific 
policy assumptions underlying the projections for 
selected economies.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the 
three-month government bond yield for the United States 
will average 3.5 percent in 2026 and 3.3 percent in 
2027, that for the euro area will average 2.0 percent 
in 2026 and in 2027, and that for Japan will average 
0.9 percent in 2026 and 1.4 percent in 2027. Further, 
it is assumed that the 10-year government bond yield for 
the United States will average 4.0 percent in 2026 and 
3.8 percent in 2027, that for the euro area will average 
2.8 percent in 2026 and 3.0 percent in 2027, and 
that for Japan will average 2.3 percent in 2026 and 
2.4 percent in 2027.
As a reminder, in regard to the introduction of the 
euro, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between 
the euro and currencies of the member countries 
adopting the euro are as shown in the accompanying 
table. Unless noted otherwise, these fixed conversion 
rates were decided by the Council of the European 
Union effective as of January 1, 1999. See Box 5.4 of 
the October 1998 WEO as well for details on how the 
conversion rates were established.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
92
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
What’s New
	• On January 1, 2026, Bulgaria became the 
21st country to join the euro area. Data for Bulgaria 
are now included in aggregates for the euro area and 
for advanced economies and relevant subgroups.
	• For Yemen, the revised data reflect the territory 
under control of the Internationally Recognized 
Government (IRG).
Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 197 economies form the 
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are 
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department 
and regional departments, with the latter regularly 
updating country projections based on consistent 
global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the 
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions, 
international organizations are also involved in statis-
tical issues, with the objective of harmonizing meth-
odologies for the compilation of national statistics, 
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, 
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the 
production of economic statistics. The WEO database 
reflects information from both national source agencies 
and international organizations.
Most countries’ macroeconomic data as presented 
in the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version 
of the System of National Accounts (SNA 2008). The 
IMF’s sector statistical standards—the sixth edition of 
the Balance of Payments and International Investment 
Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Finan-
cial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide, and the 
Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM 
2014)—have been aligned with the SNA 2008. These 
standards reflect the IMF’s special interest in countries’ 
external positions, monetary developments, financial 
sector stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The 
process of adapting country data to the new stan-
dards begins when revised versions of the manuals are 
released. However, full concordance with the most 
recent versions of the manuals is ultimately dependent 
on the provision by national statistical compilers of 
revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are 
only partly adapted to the most recent versions of these 
manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, conversion 
to the updated standards will have only a small impact 
on major balances and aggregates. Many other coun-
tries have partly adopted the latest standards and will 
continue implementation over a number of years.1 
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the 
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF 
staff estimates. While attempts are made to align data 
on gross and net debt with the definitions in the 
GFSM 2014, because of data limitations or specific 
country circumstances, these data can sometimes 
deviate from the formal definitions. Although every 
effort is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant 
and internationally comparable, differences in both 
sectoral and instrument coverage mean that the data 
are not universally comparable. As more information 
becomes available, changes in either data sources or 
instrument coverage can give rise to data revisions 
that are sometimes substantial. For clarification on the 
deviations in sectoral or instrument coverage, refer to 
the metadata for the online WEO database.
1Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European 
System of National and Regional Accounts 2010, and a few 
countries use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A 
similar adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. 
Refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards to which each 
country adheres.
1 euro
=
13.7603
Austrian schillings
=
40.3399
Belgian francs
=
1.95583
Bulgarian lev1
=
7.53450
Croatian kuna2
=
0.585274
Cyprus pound3
=
1.95583
Deutsche marks
=
15.6466
Estonian krooni4
=
5.94573
Finnish markkaa
=
6.55957
French francs
=
340.750
Greek drachmas5
=
0.787564
Irish pound
=
1,936.27
Italian lire
=
0.702804
Latvian lat6
=
3.45280
Lithuanian litas7
=
40.3399
Luxembourg francs
=
0.42930
Maltese lira3
=
2.20371
Netherlands guilders
=
200.482
Portuguese escudos
=
30.1260
Slovak koruna8
=
239.640
Slovenian tolars9
=
166.386
Spanish pesetas
1 Established on January 1, 2026.
2 Established on January 1, 2023.
3 Established on January 1, 2008.
4 Established on January 1, 2011.
5 Established on January 1, 2001.
6 Established on January 1, 2014.
7 Established on January 1, 2015.
8 Established on January 1, 2009.
9 Established on January 1, 2007.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
93
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are 
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual 
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages 
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates 
of change.2 Arithmetically weighted averages are used 
for all data for the emerging market and developing 
economies group—except data on inflation and money 
growth, for which geometric averages are used. The 
following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, 
interest rates, and growth rates of monetary aggre-
gates are weighted by GDP converted to US dollars 
at market exchange rates (averaged over the preceding 
three years) as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic 
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted 
by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share 
of total world or group GDP.3 For the aggregation 
of inflation in advanced economies (and subgroups), 
annual rates are simple percent changes from the 
previous years; for the aggregation of world inflation 
and inflation in emerging market and developing 
economies (and subgroups), annual rates are based on 
logarithmic differences. 
Composites for real GDP per capita in 
purchasing-power-parity terms are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to international dollars 
in the years indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors 
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepan-
cies in transactions within the area. Unadjusted annual 
GDP data are used for the euro area and for the major-
ity of individual countries, except Cyprus, Ireland, 
Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-adjusted 
data. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 
1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
2Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and com-
modity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of 
change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based 
on the simple arithmetic average.
3See Box A2 in the Statistical Appendix of the October 2024 
WEO for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based 
weights as well as Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO, “Revised 
Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 WEO Update, 
Appendix 1.1 of the April 2008 WEO, Box A2 of the April 
2004 WEO, Box A1 of the May 2000 WEO, and Annex IV of 
the May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne 
Schulze-Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the 
World Economic Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic 
Outlook (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, December 
1993), 106–23.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver-
age market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment 
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group 
labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are 
sums of individual country data after conversion to 
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the 
years indicated for balance of payments data and at 
end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denomi-
nated in currencies other than US dollars. 
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes 
and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent 
changes for individual countries weighted by the US 
dollar value of exports or imports as a share of total 
world or group exports or imports (in the preceding 
year). 
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are 
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group 
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of 
a few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the 
economies with exceptional reporting periods for 
national accounts and government finance data. 
For some countries, the figures for 2025 and earlier 
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; 
Table G lists the date of the latest actual outturns for 
the indicators in the national accounts, prices, gov-
ernment finance, and balance of payments for each 
country.
Country Notes
Afghanistan: Data for 2021–25 are reported for 
selected indicators, with estimates for fiscal data. 
GDP growth for 2025 is an estimate. Projections for 
2026–31 are omitted because of an unusually high 
degree of uncertainty, given that the IMF has paused 
its engagement with Afghanistan owing to a lack of 
clarity within the international community regarding 
the recognition of a government in the country. Data 
reported in the WEO include a structural break in 
2021 as a result of the change from calendar year to 
solar year reporting; the actual reported GDP growth 
rate for solar year 2021 is –20.7 percent.
Algeria: Total government expenditure and net 
lending/borrowing include net lending by the govern-
ment, which mostly reflects support to the pension 
system and other public sector entities.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
94
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Argentina: The official national consumer price 
index (CPI) starts in December 2016. For earlier peri-
ods, CPI data for Argentina reflect the Greater Buenos 
Aires Area CPI (prior to December 2013); the national 
CPI (IPCNu, December 2013 to October 2015); the 
City of Buenos Aires CPI (November 2015 to April 
2016); and the Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (May 
2016 to December 2016). Given limited comparability 
of these series because of differences in geographic cov-
erage, weights, sampling, and methodology, the WEO 
does not report average CPI inflation for 2014–16 
and end-of-period inflation for 2015–16. In addition, 
Argentina discontinued the publication of labor market 
data starting in the fourth quarter of 2015, and new 
series became available starting in the second quarter 
of 2016. 
Benin: Fiscal and debt data from 2021 through 
2024 have been revised. Revised data were prepared in 
collaboration with the authorities, who have confirmed 
the accuracy and completeness of the data revisions, 
pending official publication.
Bolivia: Projections for 2027–31 have been omitted 
owing to significant uncertainty regarding the eco-
nomic outlook.
Costa Rica: The central government definition was 
expanded as of January 1, 2021, to include 51 public 
entities in accordance with Law 9524. Data back to 
2019 are adjusted for comparability.
Dominican Republic: The fiscal series have the 
following coverage: Public debt, debt service, and 
the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the 
consolidated public sector (which includes the central 
government, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector, 
and the central bank); the remaining fiscal series are 
for the central government.
Ecuador: Fiscal projections for 2026–31 are excluded 
from publication because of ongoing program 
discussions.
Eritrea: Data and projections for 2020–31 are 
excluded from the database because of constraints in 
data reporting.
India: Real GDP growth rates are calculated in 
accordance with national accounts with base year 
2022/23.
Iran, Islamic Republic of: Historical figures for 
nominal GDP in US dollars are computed using the 
official exchange rate up to 2017. From 2018 onward, 
the NIMA (the country’s domestic Forex Management 
Integrated System) transfer rate is used to convert 
nominal rial GDP figures to US dollars. The IMF staff 
has assessed that the NIMA transfer rate better reflects 
the transaction-value-weighted exchange rate in the 
economy over that period of time.
Israel: Projections are based on the assumption that 
the latest conflict persists for several weeks, followed by 
a recovery as hostilities ease.
Lebanon: Fiscal and national accounts data for 
2022–25, as well as debt data for 2023–25, are IMF 
staff estimates. Estimates and projections for 2026–31 
are omitted owing to an unusually high degree of 
uncertainty.
Libya: Actual data and projections are subject to 
high uncertainty due to frequent data revisions by the 
authorities. Fiscal and debt data for 2025 are IMF staff 
estimates based on information from the Central Bank 
of Libya. National accounts data for 2020–25 are IMF 
staff estimates.
Nigeria: National accounts data have been revised 
and rebased, with 2019 as the new base year. This 
replaces the 2010 benchmark and aligns national 
accounts statistics with updated international stan-
dards, including the SNA 2008, BPM6, and GFSM 
2014. The rebasing entailed broader sectoral and data 
coverage capturing previously unrecorded activities 
such as the digital economy, parts of the informal 
economy (particularly in the agriculture sector), pen-
sion and health insurance schemes, social insurance 
trust funds, household firms, quarrying and other 
minerals and modular oil refining. In addition to 
dedicated sectoral studies, the rebasing drew on more 
comprehensive data coverage of major statistical oper-
ations such as the National Commercial Census and 
Survey of Businesses and Industries to ensure adequate 
capturing of formal enterprises, National Agricultural 
Sample Census, and 2019 and 2023 Nigeria’s Living 
Standard Surveys for adequate coverage of the infor-
mal sector of the economy for enhanced coverage of 
inclusive growth. The rebasing exercise resulted in an 
upward revision of the nominal GDP for 2019 by 
40.8 percent.
Sierra Leone: Although the currency was rede-
nominated on July 1, 2022, local currency data are 
expressed in the old leone for the April 2026 WEO.
Sri Lanka: Data and projections for 2025–31 are 
excluded from publication owing to ongoing discus-
sions on restructuring of sovereign debt.
Sudan: Projections reflect the IMF staff’s analysis 
based on the assumption that the ongoing conflict will 
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
95
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
terminate by the end of 2026 and that reengagement 
and reconstruction will commence shortly thereafter. 
Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9; data 
for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
Syria: Data are excluded from 2011 onward because 
of a lack of adequate data.
Timor-Leste: Published data for real GDP refer to 
non-oil real GDP, while published data for nominal 
GDP refer to total nominal GDP. Non-oil GDP and 
total GDP are equal for both real and nominal GDP 
from 2026 onward.
Turkmenistan: Real GDP data are IMF staff 
estimates compiled in line with international meth-
odologies (SNA), using official estimates and sources 
as well as United Nations and World Bank databases. 
Estimates of and projections for the fiscal balance 
exclude receipts from domestic bond issuances as 
well as those from privatization operations, in line 
with GFSM 2014. The authorities’ official estimates 
for fiscal accounts, which are compiled using domes-
tic statistical methodologies, include bond issuance 
and privatization proceeds as part of government 
revenues.
Ukraine: SNA 2008 National Accounts data are 
available from 2000 on an annual basis. The data 
exclude Crimea, Sevastopol, and occupied territo-
ries in Donetsk and Luhansk from 2014–21. From 
2022 onward, data exclude areas that are occupied or 
affected by ongoing military actions for the duration of 
such occupation or actions. Data before 2000 are IMF 
staff estimates based on SNA 1993 data provided by 
the State Statistics Service of Ukraine.
Uruguay: In December 2020, the authorities began 
reporting national accounts data according to the SNA 
2008, with base year 2016. The new series begin in 
2016. Data prior to 2016 reflect the IMF staff’s best 
effort to preserve previously reported data and avoid 
structural breaks.
Starting in October 2018, Uruguay’s public pension 
system received transfers in the context of Law 19,590 
of 2017, which compensates people affected by the 
creation of the country’s mixed pension system. These 
funds are recorded as revenues, consistent with the 
IMF’s methodology. See IMF Country Report 19/64 
for further details.4 The disclaimer about the public 
4Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Coun-
try Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 
February 2019).
pension system applies only to the revenues and net 
lending/borrowing series.
The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was 
changed from consolidated public sector to nonfinan-
cial public sector with the October 2019 WEO. In 
Uruguay, nonfinancial public sector coverage includes 
the central government, local government, social 
security funds, nonfinancial public corporations, and 
Banco de Seguros del Estado. Historical data were 
also revised accordingly. Under this narrower fiscal 
perimeter—which excludes the central bank—assets 
and liabilities held by the nonfinancial public sector, 
for which the counterpart is the central bank, are not 
netted out in debt figures. In this context, capitaliza-
tion bonds issued in the past by the government to the 
central bank are now part of the nonfinancial public 
sector debt. 
Venezuela: Projecting the economic outlook, 
including assessing past and current economic 
developments used as the basis for the projections, is 
rendered difficult by the lack of discussions with the 
authorities (the most recent Article IV consultation 
took place in 2004), incomplete metadata for limited 
reported statistics, and difficulties in reconciling 
reported indicators with economic developments. 
The fiscal accounts include the budgetary central 
government; social security; FOGADE (the country’s 
deposit insurance institution); and a reduced set of 
public enterprises, including Petróleos de Venezuela, 
S.A. Following some methodological upgrades to 
achieve a more robust nominal GDP, historical data 
and indicators expressed as a percentage of GDP 
have been revised from 2012 onward. For most 
indicators, data for 2018–25 are IMF staff estimates. 
The effects of hyperinflation, the paucity of reported 
data, and uncertainty mean that the IMF staff’s 
estimated and projected macroeconomic indicators 
should be interpreted with caution. Venezuela’s 
consumer prices are excluded from all WEO group 
composites.
West Bank and Gaza: Estimates and projections for 
2025–31 are excluded from publication owing to the 
unusually high degree of uncertainty. The latest actual 
annual data for consumer prices, population, and 
government finances are for 2025. Annual data for the 
unemployment rate are available up to 2022.
Yemen: The revised data reflect the territory under 
control of the Internationally Recognized Government 
(IRG).
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
96
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Zimbabwe: The Zimbabwe authorities redenom-
inated their national accounts statistics mid-2025 
following the introduction on April 5, 2024, of a new 
national currency, the Zimbabwe gold, replacing the 
Zimbabwe dollar. The use of the Zimbabwe dollar 
ceased on April 30, 2024.
Classification of Economies
Summary of the Economy Classification
The economy classification in the WEO divides the 
world into two major groups: advanced economies 
and emerging market and developing economies.5 This 
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic 
or otherwise, and has evolved over time. The objective 
is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably mean-
ingful method of organizing data. Table A provides an 
overview of the classification, showing the number of 
economies in each group by region and summarizing 
some key indicators of their relative size (GDP valued 
at purchasing power parity, total exports of goods and 
services, and population). 
Some economies remain outside the classification 
and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba 
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are 
examples of economies that are not IMF members, and 
the IMF therefore does not monitor them.
General Features and Composition of 
Groups in the World Economic Outlook 
Classification
Advanced Economies
Table B lists the 43 advanced economies. The seven 
largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange 
rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, France, 
Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute 
the subgroup of major advanced economies, often 
referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of the 
euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Com-
posite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover 
the current members for all years, even though the 
membership has increased over time.
5As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always 
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by interna-
tional law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are 
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate 
and independent basis.
Table C lists the member countries of the European 
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced 
economies in the WEO.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing 
economies (154) comprises all those that are not classi-
fied as advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and 
developing economies employed in the WEO are 
emerging and developing Asia; emerging and develop-
ing Europe (sometimes also referred to as “central and 
eastern Europe”); Latin America and the Caribbean; 
Middle East and Central Asia (which comprises the 
regional subgroups Caucasus and Central Asia; and 
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan); 
and sub-Saharan Africa.
Emerging market and developing economies are also 
classified according to analytical criteria that reflect 
the composition of export earnings and a distinction 
between net creditor and net debtor economies. Tables 
D and E show the detailed composition of emerging 
market and developing economies in the regional and 
analytical groups. 
The analytical criterion source of export earnings 
distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard 
International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and 
nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products 
(SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized 
into one of these groups if their main source of export 
earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on aver-
age between 2020 and 2024.
The financial and income criteria focus on net 
creditor economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted 
poor countries (HIPCs), low-income developing coun-
tries (LIDCs), and emerging market and middle-income 
economies (EMMIEs). Economies are categorized as net 
debtors when their latest net international investment 
position, where available, was less than zero or their 
current account balance accumulations from 1972 
(or earliest available data) to 2024 were negative. Net 
debtor economies are further differentiated based on 
experience with debt servicing.6 
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are 
or have been considered by the IMF and the World 
6During 2020–24, 41 economies incurred external payments 
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling 
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or 
rescheduling during 2020–24.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
97
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Bank for participation in their debt initiative known as 
the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external 
debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustain-
able” level in a reasonably short period of time.7 Many 
of these countries have already benefited from debt 
relief and have graduated from the initiative.
7See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and 
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The 
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita 
income levels below a certain threshold (based on 
$2,700 in 2017 as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas 
method and updated following new information in 
early 2024), structural features consistent with limited 
development and structural transformation, and exter-
nal financial linkages insufficiently close for them to be 
widely seen as emerging market economies.
The EMMIEs are emerging market and developing 
economies not classified as LIDCs.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
98
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods 
and Services, and Population, 20251
(Percent of total for group or world)
Number of 
Economies
GDP1
Exports of Goods and 
Services
Population
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced Economies
43
100.0
39.4
100.0
61.4
100.0
13.9
United States
37.1
14.6
16.1
9.9
30.7
4.3
Euro Area
21
29.0
11.4
41.0
25.2
32.2
4.5
Germany
7.5
2.9
9.6
5.9
7.5
1.0
France
5.5
2.2
5.3
3.2
6.2
0.9
Italy
4.5
1.8
3.9
2.4
5.3
0.7
Spain
3.4
1.3
3.3
2.0
4.5
0.6
Japan
8.5
3.3
4.5
2.8
11.1
1.5
United Kingdom
5.5
2.2
5.7
3.5
6.2
0.9
Canada
3.4
1.3
3.4
2.1
3.7
0.5
Other Advanced Economies
18
16.6
6.5
29.2
17.9
16.0
2.2
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
7
71.9
28.3
48.5
29.8
70.8
9.8
Emerging 
Market and
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging Market and Developing Economies 
Regional Groups
154
100.0
60.1
100.0
38.8
100.0
86.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
30
57.5
34.8
50.9
19.6
55.0
47.4
China
32.4
19.6
30.4
11.7
20.3
17.5
India
13.5
8.2
6.5
2.5
21.2
18.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
14
12.5
7.6
14.4
5.5
5.1
4.4
Russia
5.7
3.4
3.5
1.3
2.1
1.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
33
11.7
7.1
14.0
5.4
9.4
8.1
Brazil
3.9
2.4
3.0
1.2
3.1
2.7
Mexico
2.7
1.6
5.5
2.1
1.9
1.7
Middle East and Central Asia
32
12.3
7.5
16.4
6.3
13.1
11.3
Saudi Arabia
2.1
1.3
2.8
1.1
0.5
0.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
45
5.9
3.6
4.4
1.7
17.3
14.9
Nigeria
1.8
1.1
0.5
0.2
3.4
3.0
South Africa
0.8
0.5
1.0
0.4
0.9
0.8
Analytical Groups2
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
25
10.3
6.2
15.4
5.9
9.4
8.1
Nonfuel
127
89.7
54.3
84.6
32.6
90.5
77.9
Of which, Primary Products 
35
3.6
2.2
4.6
1.8
9.1
7.8
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies 
115
48.1
29.1
41.4
16.0
67.0
57.7
Of which, Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2020–24
41
5.5
3.4
4.0
1.6
13.2
11.4
Other Groups2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
95
92.5
56.0
95.5
36.8
76.7
66.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
58
7.5
4.5
4.5
1.7
23.3
20.0
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
39
2.9
1.8
2.6
1.0
13.3
11.5
1 GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those for which 
data are included in the group aggregates.
2 West Bank and Gaza is omitted from group composites for source of export earnings and Syria is omitted from group composites across all Analytical and Other 
Groups because of insufficient data.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
99
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
France
Luxembourg
Belgium
Germany
Malta
Bulgaria
Greece
The Netherlands
Croatia
Ireland
Portugal
Cyprus
Italy
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Finland
Lithuania
Spain 
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
United States
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Andorra
Israel
Puerto Rico
Australia
Korea
San Marino
Czech Republic
Liechtenstein
Singapore
Denmark
Macao SAR2
Sweden
Hong Kong SAR1
New Zealand
Switzerland
Iceland
Norway
Taiwan Province of China
1 On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
2 On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
Table C. European Union
Austria
France
Malta
Belgium
Germany
The Netherlands
Bulgaria
Greece
Poland
Croatia
Hungary
Portugal
Cyprus
Ireland
Romania
Czech Republic
Italy
Slovak Republic
Denmark
Latvia
Slovenia
Estonia
Lithuania
Spain 
Finland
Luxembourg
Sweden
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
100
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings1
Fuel
Nonfuel Primary Products
Emerging and Developing Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Kiribati
Timor-Leste2
Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
Latin America and the Caribbean
Ecuador
Bolivia
Guyana
Chile
Venezuela
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Middle East and Central Asia
Algeria
Afghanistan
Azerbaijan
Mauritania
Bahrain
Somalia
Iran
Sudan
Iraq
Tajikistan
Kazakhstan
Yemen
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Chad
Botswana
Republic of Congo
Burkina Faso
Equatorial Guinea
Burundi
Gabon
Central African Republic
Nigeria
Democratic Republic of the Congo
South Sudan
Eritrea
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe
1 Emerging and developing Europe is omitted from the table because no economies in the group have fuel or nonfuel primary products as the main source of 
export earnings.
2 Gas and oil production for Timor-Leste ceased in 2025.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
101
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
*
Bhutan
*
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
•
Cambodia
*
*
China
•
•
Fiji
*
•
India
*
•
Indonesia
*
•
Kiribati
•
*
Lao P.D.R.
*
*
Malaysia
•
•
Maldives
*
•
Marshall Islands
•
•
Micronesia
•
•
Mongolia
*
•
Myanmar
*
*
Nauru
•
•
Nepal
•
*
Palau
*
•
Papua New Guinea
*
*
Philippines
*
•
Samoa
*
•
Solomon Islands
*
*
Sri Lanka
*
•
Thailand
•
•
Timor-Leste
•
*
Tonga
*
•
Tuvalu
•
•
Vanuatu
*
•
Vietnam
•
•
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
•
Belarus
*
•
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
•
Bulgaria
*
•
Hungary
*
•
Kosovo
*
•
Moldova
*
*
Montenegro
*
•
North Macedonia
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Poland
*
•
Romania
*
•
Russia
•
•
Serbia
*
•
Türkiye
*
•
Ukraine
*
•
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
•
Argentina
•
•
Aruba
*
•
The Bahamas
*
•
Barbados
*
•
Belize
*
•
Bolivia
*
•
•
Brazil
*
•
Chile
*
•
Colombia
*
•
Costa Rica
*
•
Dominica
*
•
Dominican Republic
*
•
Ecuador
*
•
El Salvador
*
•
Grenada
*
•
Guatemala
*
•
Guyana
•
•
•
Haiti
*
•
*
Honduras
*
•
*
Jamaica
*
•
Mexico
*
•
Nicaragua
*
•
*
Panama
*
•
Paraguay
*
•
Peru
*
•
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
•
St. Lucia
*
•
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
*
•
Suriname
*
•
Trinidad and Tobago
•
•
Uruguay
*
•
Venezuela
•
•
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and 
Per Capita Income Classification
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
102
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and  
Per Capita Income Classification (continued)
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
•
•
*
Algeria
•
•
Armenia
*
•
Azerbaijan
•
•
Bahrain
•
•
Djibouti
*
*
Egypt
*
•
Georgia
*
•
Iran
•
•
Iraq
•
•
Jordan
*
•
Kazakhstan
*
•
Kuwait
•
•
Kyrgyz Republic
*
*
Lebanon
*
•
Libya
•
•
Mauritania
*
•
*
Morocco
*
•
Oman
*
•
Pakistan
*
•
Qatar
•
•
Saudi Arabia
•
•
Somalia
*
•
*
Sudan
*
*
*
Syria4
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
*
*
Tunisia
*
•
Turkmenistan
•
•
United Arab Emirates
•
•
Uzbekistan
•
*
West Bank and Gaza
*
•
Yemen
*
*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
*
•
Benin
*
•
*
Botswana
•
•
Burkina Faso
*
•
*
Burundi
*
•
*
Cabo Verde
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Cameroon
*
•
*
Central African Republic
*
•
*
Chad
*
•
*
Comoros
*
•
*
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
*
•
*
Republic of Congo
*
•
*
Côte d’Ivoire
*
•
*
Equatorial Guinea
•
•
Eritrea
•
*
*
Eswatini
•
•
Ethiopia
*
•
*
Gabon
•
•
The Gambia
*
•
*
Ghana
*
•
*
Guinea
*
•
*
Guinea-Bissau
*
•
*
Kenya
*
*
Lesotho
*
*
Liberia
*
•
*
Madagascar
*
•
*
Malawi
*
•
*
Mali
*
•
*
Mauritius
•
•
Mozambique
*
•
*
Namibia
*
•
Niger
*
•
*
Nigeria
*
*
Rwanda
*
•
*
São Tomé and Príncipe
*
•
*
Senegal
*
•
*
Seychelles
*
•
Sierra Leone
*
•
*
South Africa
•
•
South Sudan
*
*
Tanzania
*
•
*
Togo
*
•
*
Uganda
*
•
*
Zambia
*
•
*
Zimbabwe
*
*
1 Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor). 
2 Dot (star) indicates that the country has (has not) reached the initiative’s completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the initiative’s decision point.
3 Dot (star) indicates that the country is classified as an emerging market and middle-income economy (low-income developing country).
4 Syria is omitted from group composites for net external position and per capita income classification for lack of a fully developed database.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
103
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1 
National Accounts
Government Finance
Afghanistan
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
The Bahamas
Jul/Jun
Bangladesh
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Barbados
Apr/Mar
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Apr/Mar
Dominica
Jul/Jun
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Apr/Mar
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Fiji
Aug/Jul
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
Apr/Mar
India
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Apr/Mar
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Jul/Jun
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Apr/Mar
St. Lucia
Apr/Mar
Thailand
Oct/Sep
Tonga
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Trinidad and Tobago
Oct/Sep
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region
1 Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
104
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
NSO
2024/25
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2025/26
Albania
Albanian lek
IMF staff
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2020
NSO
2025
Algeria
Algerian dinar
NSO
2024
2001
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
Andorra
Euro
NSO
2025
2010
. . .
NSO
2025
Angola
Angolan kwanza
NSO
2024
2015
ESA 1995
NSO
2025
Antigua and Barbuda
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
CB
2024
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Argentina
Argentine peso
NSO
2025
2004
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Armenia
Armenian dram
NSO
2025
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Aruba
Aruban florin
NSO
2023
2013
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2025
Australia
Australian dollar
NSO 
2025
2023
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2025
Austria
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan manat
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 2008
From 1994
NSO
2025
The Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Bahrain
Bahrain dinar
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Bangladesh
Bangladesh taka
NSO
2024/25
2015/16
SNA 2008
Other
2024/25
Barbados
Barbados dollar
NSO
2024
2023
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
NSO
2024
2022
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
Belgium
Euro
CB
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
CB
2025
Belize
Belize dollar
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Benin
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Bhutan
Bhutanese ngultrum
NSO
2023/24
2016/17
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
NSO
2025
2017
SNA 2008
From 2017
NSO
2025
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bosnian convertible 
marka
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 2021
NSO
2025
Botswana
Botswana pula
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Brazil
Brazilian real
NSO
2025
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Brunei Darussalam
Brunei dollar
MoF
2024
2010
SNA 2008
MoF
2025
Bulgaria
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 2020
NSO
2025
Burkina Faso
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2024
Burundi
Burundi franc
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verdean escudo
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2011
NSO
2024
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Cameroon
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
From 2016
NSO
2025
Canada
Canadian dollar
NSO
2025
2017
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2025
Central African 
Republic
CFA franc
NSO
2019
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Chad
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2017
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
Chile
Chilean peso
CB
2025
2018
SNA 2008
From 2003
NSO
2025
China
Chinese yuan
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Colombia
Colombian peso
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2025
Comoros
Comorian franc
NSO
2024
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
Congolese franc
NSO
2023
2005
SNA 1993
From 2005
NSO
2025
Republic of Congo
CFA franc
NSO
2022
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
105
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Afghanistan
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 6
Albania
IMF staff
2025
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Algeria
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Andorra
NSO
2024
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
NSO
. . .
BPM 6
Angola
MoF
2025
2014
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2025
BPM 6
Antigua and Barbuda
MoF
2025
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2025
BPM 6
Argentina
MEP
2025
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Armenia
MoF
2025
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Aruba
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Australia
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Austria
NSO
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Azerbaijan
MoF
2025
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
The Bahamas
MoF
2024/25
2014
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Bahrain
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Bangladesh
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
Barbados
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Belarus
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Belgium
CB
2024
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Belize
MoF
2025
1986
CG,MPC
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Benin
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Bhutan
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 6
Bolivia
MoF
2025
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Botswana
MoF
2023/24
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Brazil
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2025
BPM 6
Brunei Darussalam
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
MoF
2024
BPM 6
Bulgaria
MoF
2025
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Burkina Faso
MoF
2024
2001
CG
. . .
CB
2023
BPM 6
Burundi
MoF
2024
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Cabo Verde
MoF
2024
2001
CG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Cambodia
MoF
2025
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Cameroon
MoF
2024
2001
CG
Mixed
MoF
2024
BPM 6
Canada
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Central African 
Republic
MoF
2025
2001
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Chad
MoF
2024
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2022
BPM 6
Chile
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
China
MoF
2024
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
GAD
2025
BPM 6
Colombia
MoF
2025
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
. . .
CB
2025
BPM 6
Comoros
MoF
2024
1986
CG
. . .
CB and IMF staff
2024
BPM 5
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
MoF
2023
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2023
BPM 6
Republic of Congo
MoF
2024
2001
CG
A
CB
2022
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
106
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colón
CB
2025
2022
SNA 2008
From 2022
CB
2025
Côte d'Ivoire
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2024
Croatia
Euro
NSO
2025
2021
ESA 2010
NSO
2025
Cyprus
Euro
Other
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
Other
2025
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
Denmark
Danish krone
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
Djibouti
Djibouti franc
NSO
2024
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Dominica
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2024
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
CB
2025
2018
SNA 2008
From 2018
CB
2025
Ecuador
US dollar
CB
2025
2018
SNA 2008
From 2018
NSO
2025
Egypt
Egyptian pound
MEP
2024/25
2021/22
SNA 2008
Other
2024/25
El Salvador
US dollar
CB
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Equatorial Guinea
CFA franc
MEP
2024
2006
SNA 1993
MEP
2024
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
Other
2019
2011
SNA 1993
Other
2019
Estonia
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
Eswatini
Swazi lilangeni
NSO
2024
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
NSO
2024/25
2015/16
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Fiji
Fijian dollar
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Finland
Euro
NSO
2024
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
France
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
Gabon
CFA franc
MEP
2024
2001
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
The Gambia
Gambian dalasi
NSO
2023
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Georgia
Georgian lari
NSO
2025
2019
SNA 2008
From 1996
NSO
2025
Germany
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1991
NSO
2025
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
NSO
2024
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Greece
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
Grenada
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2025
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Guatemala
Guatemalan quetzal
CB
2024
2013
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2025
Guinea
Guinean franc
NSO
2024
2019
SNA 2008
From 2019
NSO
2025
Guinea-Bissau
CFA franc
NSO
2023
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2024
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
NSO
2025
20126
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Haiti
Haitian gourde
NSO
2024/25
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
Honduras
Honduran lempira
CB
2024
2000
SNA 1993
CB
2025
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong dollar
NSO
2025
2023
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2025
Hungary
Hungarian forint
NSO
2025
2021
ESA 2010
From 2021
NSO
2025
Iceland
Icelandic króna
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2020
NSO
2025
India
Indian rupee
NSO
2024/25
2022/23
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
NSO
2025
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Iran
Iranian rial
CB
2024/25
2021/22
SNA 2008
CB
2024/25
Iraq
Iraqi dinar 
NSO
2025
2007
. . .
NSO
2025
Ireland
Euro
NSO
2025
2023
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
107
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Costa Rica
Other
2024
1986
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Côte d'Ivoire
MoF
2025
1986
CG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Croatia
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Cyprus
Other
2025
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Czech Republic
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Denmark
NSO
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Djibouti
MoF
2024
1986
CG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Dominica
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Dominican Republic
MoF
2025
2014
CG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Ecuador
MoF
2025
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Egypt
MoF
2024/25
. . .
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 5
El Salvador
Other
2025
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Equatorial Guinea
MEP
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 5
Eritrea
Other
2019
2001
CG
C
Other
2019
BPM 5
Estonia
MoF
2024
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Eswatini
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Ethiopia
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 5
Fiji
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Finland
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
France
NSO
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Gabon
IMF staff
2024
2001
CG
A
IMF staff
2023
BPM 6
The Gambia
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2023
BPM 6
Georgia
MoF
2025
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Germany
NSO
2025
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Ghana
MoF
2024
2001
CG
CB
CB
2024
BPM 6
Greece
NSO
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS,SG
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Grenada
MoF
2024
. . .
CG
CB
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Guatemala
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Guinea
MoF
2025
2014
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Guinea-Bissau
MoF
2024
2001
CG
CB
CB
2023
BPM 6
Guyana
MoF
2025
1986
CG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Haiti
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 5
Honduras
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 5
Hong Kong SAR
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Hungary
MEP
2025
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Iceland
NSO
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
India
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG,SG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
Indonesia
MoF
2025
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Iran
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 5
Iraq
MoF
2025
2001
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Ireland
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
108
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Israel
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2025
2020
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2025
Italy
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Japan
Japanese yen
Other
2025
2020
SNA 2008
From 1980
Other
2025
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
NSO
2024
2023
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2024
Kenya
Kenyan shilling
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Kiribati
Australian dollar
NSO
2024
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Korea
South Korean won
CB
2025
2020
SNA 2008
From before 
1980
NSO
2025
Kosovo
Euro
NSO
2025
2016
ESA 2010
NSO
2025
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz som
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2024
Lao P.D.R.
Lao kip
NSO
2025
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Latvia
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
Other
2025
Lebanon
Lebanese pound
NSO
2021
2019
SNA 2008
From 2019
NSO
2025
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
NSO
2024/25
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Liberia
US dollar
IMF staff
2025
2018
SNA 1993
Other
2025
Libya
Libyan dinar
MEP
2019
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Liechtenstein
Swiss franc
NSO
2023
2013
ESA 2010
NSO
2025
Lithuania
Euro
NSO
2025
2021
ESA 2010
From 2005
NSO
2025
Luxembourg
Euro
NSO
2024
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
Macao SAR
Macanese pataca
NSO
2025
2023
SNA 2008
From 2023
NSO
2025
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
NSO
2024
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
NSO
2024
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MoF
2024
2019
SNA 2008
CB
2025
Mali
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Malta
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2025
Marshall Islands
US dollar
NSO
2023/24
2014/15
SNA 2008
NSO
2023/24
Mauritania
New Mauritanian 
ouguiya
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
From 2014
NSO
2025
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
From 1999
NSO
2025
Mexico
Mexican peso
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Micronesia
US dollar
NSO
2023/24
2003/04
SNA 2008
NSO
2023/24
Moldova
Moldovan leu
NSO
2025
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Mongolia
Mongolian tögrög  
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Montenegro
Euro
NSO
2025
2006
ESA 2010
NSO
2025
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2024
Mozambique
Mozambican metical
NSO
2023
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Myanmar
Myanmar kyat
Other
2021/22
2015/16
. . .
Other
2023/24
Namibia
Namibian dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Nauru
Australian dollar
Other
2020/21
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2023/24
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NSO
2024/25
2010/11
SNA 2008
CB
2024/25
The Netherlands
Euro
NSO
2025
2021
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NSO
2025
20096
SNA 2008
From 1987
IMF staff
2025
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
109
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Israel
NSO
2025
2014
CG,LG,SS
. . .
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Italy
NSO
2025
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Jamaica
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Japan
Other
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
MoF
2025
BPM 6
Jordan
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kazakhstan
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kenya
MoF
2025
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kiribati
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Korea
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Kosovo
MoF
2024
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Kuwait
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kyrgyz Republic
MoF
2024
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Lao P.D.R.
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Latvia
MoF
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Lebanon
MoF
2025
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 5
Lesotho
MoF
2024/25
2014
CG,LG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
Liberia
MoF
2025
2001
CG
A
CB
2025
BPM 5
Libya
CB
2025
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Liechtenstein
NSO
2023
2014
SG
A
IMF staff
2022
BPM 6
Lithuania
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Luxembourg
MoF
2025
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Macao SAR
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SS
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Madagascar
MoF
2025
1986
CG
CB
CB
2025
BPM 6
Malawi
MoF
2025
2014
CG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Malaysia
MoF
2025
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Maldives
MoF
2025
1986
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Mali
MoF
2024
2001
CG
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Malta
Other
2024
2001
CG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Marshall Islands
MoF
2023/24
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2023/24
BPM 6
Mauritania
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Mauritius
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Mexico
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Micronesia
MoF
2022/23
2001
CG,SG
A
NSO
2022/23
BPM 6
Moldova
MoF
2025
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Mongolia
MoF
2025
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Montenegro
MoF
2025
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Morocco
MEP
2024
2001
CG
A
GAD
2024
BPM 6
Mozambique
MoF
2023
2001
CG,SG, LG
. . .
CB
2022
BPM 6
Myanmar
Other
2019/20
2014
CG
C
IMF staff
2021/22
BPM 6
Namibia
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Nauru
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
IMF staff
2024/25
BPM 6
Nepal
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
The Netherlands
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
New Zealand
NSO
2025
2014
CG, LG
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
110
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan córdoba
CB
2025
2006
SNA 2008
From 2006
CB
2025
Niger
CFA franc
NSO
2022
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NSO
2024
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
North Macedonia
Macedonian denar
NSO
2025
2005
ESA 2010
NSO
2025
Norway
Norwegian krone
NSO
2025
2023
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
Oman
Omani rial
NSO
2025
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Pakistan
Pakistan rupee
NSO
2024/25
2015/16
SNA 2008
From 2016
NSO
2024/25
Palau
US dollar
MoF
2023/24
2018/19
SNA 1993
MoF
2025
Panama
US dollar
NSO
2025
2018
SNA 1993
From 2018
NSO
2025
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea 
kina
Other
2024
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Paraguay
Paraguayan guaraní
CB
2024
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2025
Peru
Peruvian sol
CB
2025
2007
SNA 2008
CB
2025
Philippines
Philippine peso
NSO
2025
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Poland
Polish zloty
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
Portugal
Euro
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2025
Puerto Rico
US dollar
NSO
2023/24
2017
. . .
NSO
2024
Qatar
Qatari riyal
NSO
2023
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Romania
Romanian leu
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2025
Russia
Russian ruble
NSO
2025
2021
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2025
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
NSO
2024
2024
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Samoa
Samoan tala
NSO
2024/25
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
San Marino
Euro
NSO
2023
2007
ESA 2010
NSO
2024
São Tomé and Príncipe São Tomé and 
Príncipe dobra
NSO
2024
2008
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
NSO
2025
2023
SNA 2008
From 2024
NSO
2025
Senegal
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Serbia
Serbian dinar
NSO
2025
2021
ESA 2010
From 2021
NSO
2025
Seychelles
Seychelles rupee
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean leone
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2024
Singapore
Singapore dollar
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2025
Slovak Republic
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1997
NSO
2025
Slovenia
Euro
NSO
2025
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2025
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands 
dollar
NSO
2024
2012
SNA 1993
CB
2025
Somalia
US dollar
NSO
2024
2022
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
South Africa
South African rand
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
South Sudan
South Sudanese 
pound
IMF staff
2024
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Spain
Euro
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
Other
2025
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
St. Kitts and Nevis
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2024
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
111
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Nicaragua
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Niger
MoF
2024
1986
CG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Nigeria
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
North Macedonia
MoF
2025
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Norway
Other
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Oman
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Pakistan
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
Palau
MoF
2023/24
2001
CG
A
MoF
2023/24
BPM 6
Panama
MoF
2025
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Papua New Guinea
MoF
2025
2014
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Paraguay
MoF
2025
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Peru
MoF
2025
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 5
Philippines
MoF
2025
2014
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Poland
MoF
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Portugal
NSO
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Puerto Rico
Other
2023/24
2001
CG
A
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Romania
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Russia
MoF
2025
2014
CG,SG,SS
. . .
CB
2025
BPM 6
Rwanda
MoF
2024/25
2014
CG
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Samoa
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
A
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
San Marino
MoF
2024
2001
CG
A
Other
. . .
BPM 6
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
MoF
2025
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Saudi Arabia
MoF
2025
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Senegal
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2024
BPM 6
Serbia
MoF
2025
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Seychelles
MoF
2025
2001
CG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Sierra Leone
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Singapore
NSO
2024/25
2014
CG
C
NSO
2025
BPM 6
Slovak Republic
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Slovenia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Solomon Islands
CB
2024
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Somalia
MoF
2025
2001
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 5
South Africa
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
South Sudan
MoF
2024
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Spain
MoF
2025
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Sri Lanka
MoF
2025
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
St. Kitts and Nevis
MoF
2024
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
112
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
St. Lucia
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Sudan
Sudanese pound
NSO
2019
1982
. . .
NSO
2025
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Sweden
Swedish krona
NSO
2024
2024
ESA 2010
From 1993
NSO
2025
Switzerland
Swiss franc
NSO
2025
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
Syria
Syrian pound
NSO
2010
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2011
Taiwan Province of 
China
New Taiwan dollar
NSO
2025
2021
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Tajikistan
Tajik somoni
NSO
2023
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Tanzania
Tanzanian shilling
NSO
2023
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2023
Thailand
Thai baht
Other
2025
2002
SNA 1993
From 1993
MOC
2025
Timor-Leste
US dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Togo
CFA franc
NSO
2023
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Tonga
Tongan pa’anga
CB
2023/24
2016/17
SNA 2008
CB
2024/25
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and Tobago 
dollar
NSO
2024
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
NSO
2025
2015
SNA 2008
From 2009
NSO
2025
Türkiye
Turkish lira
NSO
2025
2009
ESA 2010
From 2009
NSO
2025
Turkmenistan
New Turkmen manat
IMF staff
2024
2023
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2024
Tuvalu
Australian dollar
Other
2024
2016
SNA 2008
Other
2024
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
CB
2025
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
NSO
2024
2021
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2025
United Arab Emirates
U.A.E. dirham
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
United Kingdom
British pound
NSO
2025
2022
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2025
United States
US dollar
NSO
2025
2017
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2025
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
CB
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Uzbekistan
Uzbek som
NSO
2024
2020
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
NSO
2024
2024
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolívar
CB
2018
1997
SNA 1993
CB
2025
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
NSO
2025
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2025
West Bank and Gaza
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Yemen
Yemeni rial
IMF staff
2024
2015
. . .
IMF staff
2025
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe gold
NSO
2024
2023
SNA 2008
NSO
2025
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
113
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
St. Lucia
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Sudan
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Suriname
MoF
2023
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2025
BPM6
Sweden
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Switzerland
MoF
2025
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Syria
MoF
2009
1986
CG
C
CB
2009
BPM 5
Taiwan Province of 
China
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Tajikistan
MoF
2023
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Tanzania
MoF
2023
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Thailand
MoF
2023/24
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Timor-Leste
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Togo
MoF
2025
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Tonga
MoF
2023/24
2014
CG
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 6
Trinidad and Tobago
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Tunisia
MoF
2025
1986
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Türkiye
MoF
2025
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2025
BPM 6
Turkmenistan
MoF
2024
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Tuvalu
MoF
2025
. . .
CG
C
IMF staff
2023
BPM 6
Uganda
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2025
BPM 6
Ukraine
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
United Arab Emirates
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
United Kingdom
NSO
2025
2014
CG,LG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
United States
MEP
2025
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Uruguay
MoF
2025
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Uzbekistan
MoF
2025
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB and MEP
2024
BPM 6
Vanuatu
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Venezuela
MoF
2017
2001
NFPC,other
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Vietnam
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
West Bank and Gaza
MoF
2025
2001
CG
Mixed
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Yemen
MoF
2025
2001
CG,LG
C
IMF staff
2024
BPM 6
Zambia
MoF
2025
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Zimbabwe
MoF
2025
1986
CG
C
CB and MoF
2024
BPM 6
Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CFA = Communaute Financière Africaine (African Financial Community); CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National 
Accounts; SAR = Special Administrative Region; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1 CB = central bank; GAD = General Administration Department; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury;  
NSO = National Statistics Office.
2 National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to calculate 
the index. 
3 Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers 
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4 CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; SG = state government;  
SS = social security fund.
5 Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting. 
6 Base year deflator is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
114
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for Selected 
Economies
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in 
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally 
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for 
differences between the national authorities and the 
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions 
and projected fiscal outturns. When no official bud-
get has been announced, projections incorporate 
policy measures judged likely to be implemented. 
The medium-term fiscal projections are similarly 
based on a judgment about policies’ most likely 
path. For cases in which the IMF staff has insuffi-
cient information to assess the authorities’ budget 
intentions and prospects for policy implementation, 
an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed 
unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions 
used in regard to selected economies follow. (See 
also Tables B5 through B9 in the online section 
of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net 
lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the avail-
able information regarding budget outturn, budget 
plans, and IMF-supported program targets for the 
federal government; on fiscal measures announced 
by the authorities; and on the IMF staff’s macroeco-
nomic projections. The interest bill excludes interest 
payments of zero-coupon bonds issued prior to 
December 2025, which are recorded below the line.
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on 
data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 
the FY2025/26 budgets published by the 
Commonwealth Government and the FY2024/25 
budgets published by the state/territory 
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a 
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed 
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the 
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output 
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, 
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition 
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include 
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in 
interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluctu-
ations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of structural 
balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of potential GDP 
and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of the 
October 1993 World Economic Outlook.) Estimates of the output 
gap and of the structural balance are subject to significant mar-
gins of uncertainty. Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus 
financial assets corresponding to debt instruments.
governments, and the IMF staff’s estimates and 
projections.
Austria: The IMF staff’s fiscal projections are 
based on the authorities’ latest medium-term plans, 
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic 
assumptions and assuming some moderate expen-
diture restraint over the medium term, in line with 
historical patterns.
Belgium: Projections are based on the 
2026 Budgetary Plan, the Belgian Monitoring 
Committee’s reports, and other available 
information on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with 
adjustments for the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections reflect current and 
expected policies.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts 
from Budget 2025 and the latest provincial budget 
updates. The IMF staff makes some adjustments 
to these forecasts, including those for differences 
in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff’s 
forecast also incorporates the most recent data 
releases from Statistics Canada’s National Economic 
Accounts, including quarterly federal, provincial, 
and territorial budgetary outturns.
Chile: Fiscal projections are based on the authori-
ties’ budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF 
staff’s macroeconomic projections.
China: The IMF staff’s fiscal projections incor-
porate the 2025 budget as well as estimates of 
off-budget financing.
Colombia: Fiscal projections are based on the 
authorities’ policies and projections reflected in the 
2025–36 Medium-Term Fiscal Framework and in 
the 2026 Financing Plan, adjusted to reflect the 
IMF staff’s macroeconomic assumptions.
Denmark: Estimates for the current year are 
aligned with the latest official budget numbers, 
adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff’s 
macroeconomic assumptions. Beyond the current 
year, the projections incorporate key features of 
the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the 
authorities’ latest budget. Structural balances are 
net of temporary fluctuations in some revenues 
(for example, North Sea revenue, pension yield tax 
revenue) and one-offs (COVID-19–related one-offs 
are, however, included).
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
115
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Box A1 (continued)
France: Projections for 2026 onward are based on 
the 2026 budget and other measures in the authori-
ties’ 2023–27 multiannual budget programming bill 
and fiscal plans, adjusted for differences in assump-
tions on macroeconomic and financial variables and 
consistent with the 0.5 percent of GDP minimum 
structural adjustment under the EU’s Excessive 
Deficit Procedure.
Germany: Fiscal projections are based on the 
IMF staff’s macroeconomic framework and assume 
a gradual increase in infrastructure and defense 
spending over the medium term, in line with the 
authorities’ stated intentions. The projections also 
assume that additional fiscal room generated by 
reforms to Germany’s fiscal rule (the “debt brake”) 
in March 2025 is mostly used.
Greece: Data since 2010 reflect adjustments in 
line with the primary balance definition under the 
enhanced surveillance framework for Greece.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: 
Projections are based on the authorities’ 
medium-term fiscal projections for expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF staff’s 
projections for the macroeconomic framework and 
fiscal policy plans announced in the 2026 budget.
India: Projections are based on available 
information on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with 
adjustments for the IMF staff’s assumptions. 
General government data cover only central and 
state governments. State government data are 
incorporated with a lag of up to two years; general 
government data are thus finalized well after central 
government data. IMF and Indian presentations 
differ, particularly regarding disinvestment and 
license auction proceeds, net versus gross recording 
of revenues in certain minor categories, and some 
public sector lending. Starting with FY2020/21 
data, expenditure also includes the off-budget 
component of food subsidies, consistent with the 
revised treatment of food subsidies in the budget. 
In FY2020/21 the IMF staff adjusted expenditure 
to take out payments for FY2019/20 food subsidies, 
which FY2020/21 official figures include.
Indonesia: The IMF staff’s projections are based 
on the latest budget, extrapolating using projected 
nominal GDP (and its components as needed) with 
application of judgment to reflect the authorities’ 
spending and revenue policies over the medium 
term.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the 
country’s Budget 2026.
Israel: Fiscal projections are for the general 
government and take into account the draft 
2026 budget approved by the Knesset in the first 
reading on March 17, 2026.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the Draft Budgetary Plan 2026, 
the 2025 Public Finance Document, the fiscal 
plans included in the government’s Medium-Term 
Fiscal-Structural Plan 2025–2029, and the updated 
national accounts.
Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures the 
government has already announced, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Korea: The forecast incorporates the authorities’ 
annual budget, any supplementary budget, any 
proposed new budget, the medium-term fiscal plan, 
and the IMF staff’s estimates.
Mexico: The 2020 public sector borrowing 
requirements estimated by the IMF staff adjust for 
some statistical discrepancies between above-the-
line and below-the-line numbers. Fiscal projections 
for 2026 are informed by the estimates in Criterios 
2026; projections for 2026 onward assume contin-
ued compliance with rules established in the Federal 
Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law.
The Netherlands: Fiscal projections are IMF 
staff forecasts based on the 2026 budget; coalition 
agreement policies will be reflected after the 
2026 Spring Memorandum.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the 
Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2025 and 
Budget Policy Statement 2026.
Portugal: The projections for the current year are 
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted 
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast. 
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption 
of unchanged policies. Projections for 2026 reflect 
information available in the 2026 budget proposal. 
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are informed by 
the Certified Fiscal Plan for the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico, which was prepared in 
October 2024, certified by the Financial Oversight 
and Management Board.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
116
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Box A1 (continued)
Russia: The fiscal rule was suspended in March 
2022 by the government in response to the 
sanctions imposed after the invasion of Ukraine, 
allowing for windfall oil and gas revenues above 
benchmark to be used to finance a larger deficit in 
2022 as well as savings accumulated in the Russian 
National Welfare Fund. The 2023–25 budget was 
based on a modified rule with a two-year transition 
period that set the benchmark oil and gas revenues 
fixed in rubles at Rub 8 trillion, compared with 
a fixed benchmark oil price at $40 a barrel under 
the 2019 fiscal rule. During the transition period 
higher deficits than prescribed by the rule were 
allowed with additional financing coming from 
earlier saved windfall revenues. However, in late 
September 2023, the Ministry of Finance proposed 
reverting to the earlier version of the fiscal rule 
from 2024 onward to determine the price of oil and 
gas revenues but set the benchmark oil price at $60 
a barrel. The new rule, effective in the 2025 budget, 
allows higher oil and gas revenues to be spent, 
but it simultaneously targets a smaller primary 
structural deficit.
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff’s reference fiscal 
projections are based primarily on its interpretation 
of government policies as outlined in the 2026 
budget and recent official announcements. 
Export oil revenues are based on WEO database 
reference oil price assumptions and the IMF staff’s 
understanding of oil production adjustments 
under the OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries, including Russia and other 
non-OPEC oil exporters) agreement and those 
unilaterally announced by Saudi Arabia.
Singapore: FY2025 projections are based on 
revised figures based on budget execution through 
the end of 2025. FY2026 projections are based on 
the budget released on February 12, 2026.
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions are informed 
by the 2026 budget. Nontax revenue excludes 
transactions in financial assets and liabilities, as they 
involve primarily revenues associated with the realized 
exchange rate valuation gains from the holding 
of foreign currency deposits, sale of assets, and 
conceptually similar items. The Eskom debt relief is 
treated as a capital transfer above-the-line item.
Spain: Figures for 2021–28 reflect disbursements 
of grants and loans under the EU Recovery and 
Resilience Facility.
Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2025 are based on 
the authorities’ budget bill and have been updated 
with the authorities’ latest interim forecast. The 
impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal 
accounts is calculated using the 2014 Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 
study to take into account the output gap.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal 
policy is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances 
in line with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal 
rules.
Türkiye: The basis for the projections is the IMF-
defined fiscal balance, which excludes some revenue 
and expenditure items that are included in the 
authorities’ headline balance. 
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on 
the March 2026 forecast of the Office for Budget 
Responsibility (OBR) and the January 2026 
release on public sector finances from the Office 
for National Statistics (ONS). The IMF staff’s 
projections take the OBR forecast as a reference and 
overlay adjustments for differences in assumptions. 
Data are presented on a calendar year basis.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the 
February 2026 Congressional Budget Office baseline, 
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeconomic 
assumptions. Projections incorporate the effects of the 
One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA).
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the 
established policy framework in each economy. 
In most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative 
stance over the business cycle: Official interest rates 
will increase when economic indicators suggest 
that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or 
range; they will decrease when indicators suggest 
that inflation will not exceed the acceptable rate 
or range, that output growth is below its potential 
rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy is 
significant. With regard to interest rates, please refer 
to the “Assumptions” section at the beginning of 
the Statistical Appendix.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
117
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Box A1 (continued)
Argentina: Monetary projections are consistent 
with the overall macroeconomic framework, the 
fiscal and financing plans, and the monetary and 
foreign exchange policies.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are 
based on the IMF staff’s analysis and the expected 
inflation path.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with the convergence of inflation to 
target.
Canada: Projections reflect the gradual 
unwinding of monetary policy tightening 
by the Bank of Canada as inflation slowly 
returns to its midrange target of 2 percent by 
the end of 2026.
Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with attaining the inflation target.
China: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with inflation gradually rising and the 
output gap closing over the medium term.
Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg 
to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for 
euro area member countries are drawn from a 
suite of models (semi-structural, DSGE [dynamic 
stochastic general equilibrium], Taylor rule), 
market expectations, and European Central Bank 
Governing Council communications.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The 
IMF staff assumes that the currency board system 
will remain intact.
Hungary: The IMF staff’s estimates and 
projections are informed by expert judgment based 
on recent developments.
India: Monetary policy projections are consistent 
with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation 
target over the medium term.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in 
line with inflation within the central bank’s target 
band over the medium term.
Israel: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the IMF staff’s assessment of the most likely 
path for interest rates, considering the broader 
macroeconomic outlook, the Bank of Israel’s 
inflation forecasts, and market expectations.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are based on 
the IMF staff’s assessment of the most likely path 
for interest rates, considering the broader outlook, 
the Bank of Japan’s communications, and market 
expectations.
Korea: Projections assume that the policy rate 
will evolve in line with the Bank of Korea’s forward 
guidance.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with inflation converging to the central 
bank’s target over the projection period. 
New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on 
the IMF staff’s analysis and expected inflation path. 
Russia: Monetary policy projections assume 
that the Central Bank of the Russian Federation is 
adopting a tight monetary policy stance.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are 
based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg 
to the US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in 
line with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with maintaining inflation at a 3 percent 
target with a ±1 percentage point tolerance band 
over the medium term.
Sweden: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on IMF staff estimates. 
Switzerland: Monetary policy assumptions are 
based on the IMF staff’s assessment of the most 
likely path for interest rates, considering the broader 
macroeconomic outlook, the Swiss National Bank’s 
inflation forecasts, and market expectations.
Türkiye: The baseline assumes that the monetary 
policy stance will remain contractionary, in line 
with announced and observed policies.
United Kingdom: Monetary policy assumptions 
are based on the IMF staff’s assessment of the most 
likely path for interest rates, considering the broader 
macroeconomic outlook, model results, the Bank of 
England’s inflation forecasts and communications, 
and market expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal 
Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the 
federal funds target rate in line with the broader 
macroeconomic outlook.
List of Tables1
Output
A1. Summary of World Output
A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Inflation
A5. Summary of Inflation
A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Financial Policies
A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt
Foreign Trade
A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
Medium-Term Reference Forecast
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Reference Forecast
1When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
118
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
119
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
World
3.3
3.6
3.0
–2.7
6.7
3.8
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.1
3.2
3.1
Advanced Economies
1.3
2.3
1.9
–3.9
6.1
3.1
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.5
United States
1.6
3.0
2.6
–2.1
6.2
2.5
2.9
2.8
2.1
2.3
2.1
1.8
Euro Area
0.6
1.8
1.6
–6.0
6.4
3.6
0.4
0.9
1.4
1.1
1.2
1.1
Japan
0.5
0.8
–0.3
–4.3
3.6
1.3
0.7
–0.2
1.2
0.7
0.6
0.6
Other Advanced Economies2
2.2
2.5
1.8
–3.9
6.5
3.6
1.5
2.1
2.5
2.1
2.0
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
5.0
4.6
3.8
–1.8
7.0
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.4
3.9
4.2
4.0
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.2
6.4
5.4
–0.5
7.8
4.7
5.6
5.4
5.5
4.9
4.8
4.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.3
3.7
2.6
–1.7
7.2
0.5
3.6
3.8
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.0
1.1
0.2
–6.9
7.5
4.3
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.7
2.6
Middle East and Central Asia
3.8
2.5
2.1
–2.2
4.7
6.4
2.6
2.8
3.6
1.9
4.6
3.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.4
3.2
3.0
–3.1
3.9
4.4
3.8
4.2
4.5
4.3
4.4
4.7
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
3.5
0.7
0.6
–4.5
4.1
6.5
3.0
3.4
3.4
1.4
4.6
3.4
Nonfuel
5.2
5.2
4.2
–1.5
7.4
4.0
4.6
4.6
4.5
4.1
4.1
4.0
Of which, Primary Products
3.5
3.1
1.5
–5.1
6.8
2.8
1.4
2.2
3.2
2.9
3.2
3.4
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
4.4
4.5
3.3
–3.8
6.9
5.1
4.4
4.4
4.7
4.3
4.5
4.8
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2020–24
3.5
3.7
3.2
–0.7
4.0
0.9
3.2
3.0
4.5
4.0
4.5
4.7
Other Groups
European Union
0.9
2.3
2.0
–5.5
6.4
3.7
0.6
1.2
1.6
1.3
1.4
1.4
Middle East and North Africa
3.7
1.8
1.5
–2.5
4.5
6.7
2.5
2.3
3.2
1.1
4.8
3.6
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
5.0
4.6
3.7
–1.9
7.3
4.2
4.5
4.5
4.4
3.8
4.1
3.8
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.4
4.6
4.7
–1.4
3.9
4.9
4.2
4.2
4.8
4.8
4.9
5.2
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
1.3
2.8
2.1
–3.9
6.5
3.0
1.6
1.4
1.7
1.9
1.8
1.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.9
3.5
3.3
–3.5
5.0
4.6
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.3
3.5
3.3
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.2
3.1
2.7
–5.7
5.6
4.7
3.5
3.4
3.1
2.8
3.0
3.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.0
4.6
4.6
–0.4
5.0
4.4
4.3
4.3
4.9
4.2
4.5
4.6
Output per Capita3
Advanced Economies
0.8
1.9
1.5
–4.4
6.0
2.5
0.9
1.2
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.3
3.3
2.5
–3.2
5.9
3.2
3.4
3.4
3.4
3.4
3.1
2.9
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.6
3.7
2.7
–2.9
6.6
3.5
3.8
3.8
3.7
3.1
3.4
3.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
2.7
2.2
2.2
–3.8
1.4
2.7
1.8
1.8
2.5
4.3
2.7
3.0
World Growth Rate Based on Market               
Exchange Rates
2.4
3.2
2.6
–3.0
6.5
3.4
2.8
2.9
2.9
2.6
2.6
2.4
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
73,761
87,168
88,478
86,192
98,435
102,670
107,246
111,599
118,176
126,295
131,891
158,392
At Purchasing Power Parities
101,417
132,685
140,574
140,239
157,085
174,415
186,757
197,826
210,327
222,760
234,916
284,745
1 Real GDP.
2 Excludes euro area countries, Japan, and the United States.
3 Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
120
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Q4 over Q42
Average
Projections
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
2025:Q4
2026:Q4
2027:Q4
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
1.3
2.3
1.9
–3.9
6.1
3.1
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.5
1.9
1.5
1.9
United States
1.6
3.0
2.6
–2.1
6.2
2.5
2.9
2.8
2.1
2.3
2.1
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.1
Euro Area
0.6
1.8
1.6
–6.0
6.4
3.6
0.4
0.9
1.4
1.1
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.5
Germany
1.3
1.1
1.0
–4.1
3.9
1.8
–0.9
–0.5
0.2
0.8
1.2
0.6
0.4
0.7
1.3
France
0.8
1.6
2.1
–7.6
6.8
2.8
1.6
1.1
0.9
0.9
0.9
1.1
1.2
0.6
1.0
Italy
–0.6
0.8
0.4
–8.9
8.9
4.8
0.9
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.8
–0.2
1.8
Spain
0.3
2.4
2.0
–10.9
6.7
6.4
2.5
3.5
2.8
2.1
1.8
1.7
2.6
1.6
2.2
The Netherlands
0.9
2.3
2.3
–3.9
6.3
5.0
–0.6
1.1
1.9
1.2
1.4
1.2
1.7
1.1
1.5
Belgium
1.0
1.9
2.4
–4.8
6.3
4.0
1.7
1.1
1.0
0.7
1.1
1.3
1.0
0.6
1.5
Ireland
3.8
7.7
5.0
7.2
16.3
7.5
–2.5
2.6
12.3
2.5
2.4
2.3
3.0
4.7
2.9
Austria
0.9
2.5
1.8
–6.3
4.9
5.3
–0.8
–0.7
0.6
0.7
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.8
1.2
Portugal
0.0
2.9
2.7
–8.2
5.6
7.0
3.1
2.2
1.9
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.9
1.6
1.5
Greece
–2.9
2.1
2.3
–9.2
8.7
5.5
2.1
2.1
2.1
1.8
1.7
1.6
2.4
1.3
1.8
Finland
0.1
1.2
1.3
–2.5
2.7
0.8
–1.3
0.4
0.2
1.0
1.5
1.2
0.1
1.6
1.4
Bulgaria
1.6
2.3
3.8
–3.1
7.8
4.1
1.7
3.4
3.1
2.8
2.5
2.6
3.0
2.5
2.7
Slovak Republic
2.4
4.1
2.3
–2.6
5.7
0.5
2.1
1.9
0.8
0.6
1.6
1.8
0.9
0.8
2.4
Croatia
–0.1
2.9
3.1
–8.3
12.6
7.3
3.8
3.8
3.2
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.3
0.5
3.9
Lithuania
1.5
4.8
4.7
0.0
6.4
2.4
0.8
3.0
2.9
2.9
2.2
2.4
3.1
3.1
1.8
Slovenia
0.7
4.4
3.5
–4.1
8.4
2.7
2.4
1.7
1.1
2.0
2.1
2.1
1.6
1.5
2.7
Luxembourg
1.7
1.6
2.7
–0.5
6.9
–1.1
0.1
0.4
0.6
1.6
1.7
2.0
2.4
1.1
2.2
Latvia
–0.1
4.3
0.7
–3.5
6.9
1.9
–0.9
0.0
2.1
2.2
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.2
3.2
Estonia
0.8
3.7
3.7
–2.9
8.3
–1.2
–2.7
–0.1
0.6
1.4
1.9
1.7
0.8
2.1
1.8
Cyprus 
0.7
6.3
5.9
–3.2
11.4
8.3
3.6
3.9
3.8
3.0
3.0
3.0
4.5
2.2
4.4
Malta
5.4
7.2
4.1
–3.5
13.4
2.6
10.6
6.2
4.0
3.7
3.8
4.0
6.4
3.3
3.3
Japan
0.5
0.8
–0.3
–4.3
3.6
1.3
0.7
–0.2
1.2
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.5
1.0
0.7
United Kingdom
1.2
1.6
1.3
–10.0
8.5
5.1
0.3
1.1
1.3
0.8
1.3
1.4
1.0
1.0
1.9
Korea
3.3
3.2
2.3
–0.7
4.6
2.7
1.6
2.0
1.0
1.9
2.1
1.9
1.6
1.9
2.0
Canada
1.6
2.7
1.9
–5.0
6.0
4.7
2.0
2.0
1.7
1.5
1.9
1.8
0.7
2.3
1.5
Australia
2.6
2.8
2.0
–2.0
5.4
4.2
2.1
1.0
2.0
2.0
1.7
2.3
2.6
1.5
1.9
Taiwan Province of China
2.9
2.9
3.1
3.4
6.7
2.7
1.1
5.3
8.7
5.2
3.0
2.1
12.4
–0.8
5.7
Singapore
4.7
3.2
1.2
–3.6
10.1
4.0
1.5
5.3
5.0
3.5
2.7
2.5
6.7
0.4
3.6
Switzerland
1.5
3.4
1.1
–2.4
6.2
3.6
0.9
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.2
0.5
2.0
1.4
Sweden
1.5
1.8
2.6
–1.9
5.2
1.3
–0.2
1.0
1.5
2.0
1.9
1.8
2.0
1.7
1.5
Czech Republic
1.6
2.8
3.6
–5.3
4.0
2.8
0.0
1.3
2.5
2.2
2.2
1.8
2.6
2.1
2.2
Norway
1.4
1.1
1.5
–1.4
4.1
4.1
0.4
1.4
1.1
1.5
1.3
1.1
2.2
1.2
1.3
Hong Kong SAR
2.7
2.8
–1.7
–6.5
6.5
–3.7
3.2
2.6
3.5
2.4
2.4
2.2
3.8
4.4
–1.6
Israel
3.7
4.1
3.6
–1.8
9.3
6.4
2.1
1.0
2.9
3.5
4.4
3.4
4.2
4.3
3.0
Denmark
0.8
1.9
1.7
–1.8
6.5
0.4
0.6
3.5
2.9
2.0
1.6
1.5
3.0
0.5
2.7
New Zealand
2.1
3.3
3.0
–1.2
5.5
2.6
2.2
–0.3
0.2
2.1
2.4
2.2
1.3
2.5
2.5
Puerto Rico
–1.1
–4.4
1.7
–4.2
0.4
3.0
0.5
3.2
–0.8
–0.1
1.0
0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
4.9
6.4
–2.5
–54.4
22.5
–19.0
75.3
7.8
4.7
3.0
3.1
3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iceland
1.2
4.7
1.1
–6.6
5.2
8.9
5.0
–1.3
1.3
1.9
2.1
2.4
2.6
3.0
1.9
Liechtenstein
0.4
3.5
–2.2
–5.3
18.0
–4.8
3.4
–0.3
0.0
–0.4
0.4
1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Andorra
–1.4
1.6
2.0
–11.2
8.3
9.6
2.6
3.8
3.9
2.1
1.8
1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
San Marino
–2.9
1.5
2.0
–6.8
14.5
7.8
0.4
1.0
1.5
1.3
1.2
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.2
2.1
1.7
–4.2
6.0
2.8
1.8
1.7
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.7
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.2
2.4
2.1
–3.8
6.1
3.5
1.1
1.8
2.2
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.8
1.8
1.7
United States
1.5
3.1
2.6
–1.8
7.2
2.8
2.4
3.1
2.3
2.3
2.3
1.7
1.6
3.1
1.7
Euro Area
0.4
2.0
2.3
–5.6
5.2
4.0
0.0
0.6
2.1
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.9
0.9
1.8
Germany
1.3
2.0
1.5
–3.3
3.3
3.1
–0.9
0.2
1.8
1.5
1.4
0.8
1.3
0.9
1.4
France
0.9
1.4
2.1
–6.3
6.0
2.9
0.7
–0.1
1.4
0.4
0.7
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.9
Italy
–0.8
1.0
–0.2
–8.3
9.2
5.5
0.5
0.7
1.2
0.7
0.2
0.7
1.8
–1.3
3.0
Spain
–0.6
3.2
1.6
–9.0
7.0
4.1
1.6
3.4
3.7
2.9
1.9
1.6
3.7
1.9
2.0
Japan
0.5
0.8
0.1
–3.5
2.5
1.8
0.0
–0.2
1.5
1.1
0.8
0.7
1.3
1.3
0.8
United Kingdom
1.3
1.7
1.6
–11.1
9.2
4.9
0.4
1.6
2.0
1.3
1.5
1.3
1.6
1.0
2.2
Canada
1.8
2.7
1.1
–6.1
7.0
5.6
0.3
2.0
2.1
1.4
2.5
1.5
1.2
2.8
2.0
Other Advanced Economies3
2.5
2.7
1.8
–2.4
6.1
3.7
0.9
2.2
2.1
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.5
0.5
2.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.1
2.3
1.8
–3.8
6.4
3.2
1.3
1.8
2.0
1.7
1.7
1.4
1.5
2.1
1.6
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.
1 In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2 From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
121
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2008–17
2018–27
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.7
2.1
1.6
–5.4
6.1
4.3
1.6
1.8
2.0
1.7
1.7
United States
1.7
2.6
2.7
2.1
–2.5
8.8
3.0
2.6
2.9
2.6
2.2
2.2
Euro Area
0.5
1.0
1.5
1.4
–7.8
4.7
5.3
0.5
1.4
1.5
1.1
1.1
Germany
1.0
0.8
1.4
1.7
–6.8
2.0
6.5
–0.7
0.5
1.6
1.1
1.0
France
1.0
0.8
1.0
1.7
–6.5
5.3
3.3
0.8
1.0
0.5
0.7
0.9
Italy
–0.3
0.3
0.5
0.0
–10.6
5.8
5.3
0.5
1.2
1.1
0.3
0.3
Spain
–0.2
1.5
1.7
1.1
–12.1
7.1
4.9
1.8
3.1
3.4
2.7
2.2
Japan
0.5
0.1
0.2
–0.8
–5.0
1.9
2.3
0.1
–0.6
1.5
1.0
0.7
United Kingdom
1.4
0.6
2.1
1.1
–12.9
7.3
7.6
–0.4
–0.2
1.1
0.9
1.2
Canada
2.4
2.1
2.6
1.6
–6.3
5.8
6.7
2.3
2.2
2.3
1.2
2.9
Other Advanced Economies1
2.4
1.9
3.0
2.1
–5.2
4.6
4.6
2.4
1.9
1.9
2.1
2.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.3
1.7
1.9
1.4
–5.1
6.5
4.0
1.4
1.7
2.0
1.6
1.6
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
1.1
1.9
1.6
3.0
2.3
3.4
0.6
2.0
2.8
1.3
1.3
1.1
United States
0.3
1.7
1.4
3.9
3.0
0.5
–1.3
3.0
3.3
0.6
1.5
1.2
Euro Area
1.1
1.8
1.1
1.9
1.3
4.3
1.3
1.5
2.3
1.6
1.4
1.1
Germany
2.2
2.1
1.0
2.9
4.9
3.1
0.6
–0.2
2.6
1.3
2.6
1.9
France
1.5
1.2
0.8
1.1
–4.4
6.6
2.7
1.5
1.4
1.7
0.8
0.5
Italy
–0.4
0.5
0.0
–0.4
0.3
2.3
0.8
1.0
1.5
0.6
–0.4
–0.5
Spain
0.7
2.5
2.1
2.2
3.5
3.6
0.8
4.5
2.9
1.8
2.3
1.4
Japan
1.4
1.5
1.0
2.0
2.5
3.7
1.6
–0.2
1.6
1.0
1.0
1.3
United Kingdom
1.0
1.9
0.6
2.9
–6.0
13.0
0.1
2.1
2.9
1.7
1.7
1.3
Canada
1.6
2.6
3.1
1.1
1.3
5.6
2.9
2.4
3.8
2.4
2.4
1.4
Other Advanced Economies1
2.8
2.7
3.5
3.8
4.6
4.6
2.9
1.5
3.2
2.1
0.4
0.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.8
1.7
1.2
2.9
1.7
3.0
0.0
1.9
2.7
1.0
1.4
1.2
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
1.0
2.3
3.4
3.3
–3.0
6.2
2.3
2.5
1.0
2.7
2.8
2.3
United States
1.7
3.1
5.0
2.9
–0.8
5.6
1.9
3.8
3.5
2.7
3.8
2.9
Euro Area
–0.4
1.7
3.3
7.1
–5.6
3.7
2.1
2.5
–2.5
3.0
2.1
1.6
Germany
1.4
0.1
3.6
2.0
–3.0
0.8
–0.1
–2.0
–3.3
–0.2
1.7
2.0
France
0.1
1.2
3.4
4.3
–6.2
9.6
–0.2
0.8
–1.2
0.8
0.8
0.6
Italy
–2.6
3.8
3.3
1.6
–7.1
21.5
7.4
10.1
–3.1
3.5
1.8
1.3
Spain
–2.9
3.0
6.5
4.9
–8.9
2.6
4.2
5.9
3.6
6.3
4.0
1.7
Japan
0.1
0.5
1.3
1.7
–3.5
1.0
0.5
1.9
–0.6
0.9
1.1
0.6
United Kingdom
1.7
1.8
–0.2
1.8
–9.9
9.3
6.8
0.5
1.7
3.4
2.1
3.3
Canada
0.7
1.6
2.4
0.8
–3.8
8.8
0.0
–1.0
0.7
1.4
4.5
2.5
Other Advanced Economies1
2.3
2.2
2.2
0.9
–0.9
9.3
2.4
0.2
1.4
2.2
2.4
2.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.0
2.2
3.6
2.5
–3.0
6.2
2.0
2.6
1.2
2.1
2.8
2.3
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
122
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2008–17
2018–27
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.2
1.9
2.2
2.3
–3.5
5.6
3.1
1.8
1.8
2.1
1.9
1.7
United States
1.5
2.6
3.0
2.5
–1.4
6.9
2.2
2.9
3.1
2.4
2.4
2.2
Euro Area
0.4
1.3
1.8
2.7
–5.3
4.3
3.7
1.2
0.7
1.8
1.4
1.2
Germany
1.4
0.9
1.8
2.0
–3.4
2.0
3.6
–0.9
0.2
1.1
1.6
1.4
France
0.9
1.0
1.5
2.1
–5.9
6.6
2.3
1.0
0.6
0.8
0.8
0.7
Italy
–0.8
1.1
0.9
0.2
–7.8
8.0
4.8
2.7
0.3
1.5
0.5
0.4
Spain
–0.6
2.0
2.7
2.1
–8.4
5.4
3.9
3.2
3.1
3.7
2.9
1.9
Japan
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.4
–3.1
2.1
1.6
0.5
–0.2
1.2
1.6
0.8
United Kingdom
1.4
1.1
1.4
1.6
–11.0
8.8
5.9
0.3
0.8
1.7
1.3
1.6
Canada
1.8
2.0
2.7
1.3
–4.1
6.4
4.3
1.5
2.2
2.1
1.1
2.5
Other Advanced Economies1
2.5
2.1
2.4
2.0
–2.3
5.8
3.6
1.6
2.0
2.0
1.9
1.9
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.1
1.8
2.2
1.9
–3.4
5.9
2.8
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.7
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.1
–0.3
0.5
0.4
–0.7
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
United States
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.3
0.7
–0.5
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
Euro Area
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.4
–0.3
0.8
0.3
–1.1
–0.1
0.3
–0.1
0.0
Germany
–0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.1
1.2
–0.4
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.0
0.0
France
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.4
–0.6
0.5
–0.2
–0.7
0.6
–0.4
0.0
Italy
0.0
–0.1
0.1
–0.4
–0.5
1.1
0.7
–2.2
0.4
–0.3
0.2
–0.2
Spain
0.0
0.0
0.4
–0.4
–0.6
1.7
0.3
–1.8
0.7
0.1
0.0
0.0
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.2
–0.3
0.4
0.2
–0.4
–0.1
0.2
0.0
0.0
United Kingdom
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
0.3
0.0
Canada
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–0.7
1.1
1.3
–1.4
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
0.5
0.0
0.2
0.2
–0.1
0.3
0.2
–0.7
0.1
0.1
–0.1
0.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.4
0.5
–0.5
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.3
0.5
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
United States
0.1
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
–1.3
–0.4
0.5
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
Euro Area
0.3
0.0
–0.1
–0.6
–0.6
1.4
–0.2
0.4
0.3
–0.6
–0.2
0.0
Germany
0.1
–0.5
–0.6
–0.4
–1.1
0.8
–1.1
–0.1
–0.7
–1.5
–0.8
–0.2
France
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.0
–1.3
0.7
–0.1
0.9
1.2
–0.5
0.5
0.1
Italy
0.2
–0.1
–0.1
0.7
–0.9
0.0
–0.5
0.5
0.1
–0.6
–0.1
0.3
Spain
1.1
0.0
–0.7
0.3
–2.2
–0.3
2.5
1.1
0.3
–0.7
–0.7
0.0
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.4
–0.8
1.1
–0.4
0.6
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
United Kingdom
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
–0.4
1.3
–0.8
0.2
–0.2
–0.5
–0.9
–0.6
–0.2
Canada
–0.3
–0.1
0.0
0.8
0.3
–1.7
–0.9
1.7
0.1
–0.4
0.1
–0.6
Other Advanced Economies1
0.3
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.4
–0.7
1.0
0.7
1.0
1.0
0.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.4
–0.5
–0.4
0.5
–0.2
–0.4
–0.1
–0.2
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2 Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
123
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.2
6.4
5.4
–0.5
7.8
4.7
5.6
5.4
5.5
4.9
4.8
4.5
Bangladesh
6.2
7.3
7.9
3.4
6.9
7.1
5.8
4.2
3.5
4.7
4.3
6.1
Bhutan
7.0
2.8
4.6
–2.5
–3.3
4.8
4.9
6.1
7.1
7.5
6.3
5.6
Brunei Darussalam
–0.5
0.1
3.9
1.1
–1.6
–1.6
1.1
4.1
0.6
2.6
2.6
2.9
Cambodia
7.3
8.7
7.9
–3.0
2.9
5.5
5.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
4.7
5.5
China
8.3
6.8
6.1
2.3
8.6
3.1
5.4
5.0
5.0
4.4
4.0
3.3
Fiji
2.9
3.8
7.6
–17.2
–4.4
17.7
9.4
3.5
3.2
2.4
2.7
3.4
India1
6.7
6.5
3.9
–5.8
9.7
7.6
7.2
7.1
7.6
6.5
6.5
6.5
Indonesia
5.6
5.2
5.0
–2.1
3.7
5.3
5.0
5.0
5.1
5.0
5.1
5.2
Kiribati
3.8
3.5
3.3
–1.5
8.6
5.0
3.3
4.6
4.3
3.1
2.4
2.1
Lao P.D.R.
7.6
6.2
4.7
–0.4
2.1
2.3
3.7
4.3
4.8
4.0
4.0
3.0
Malaysia
4.7
4.8
4.4
–5.5
3.3
9.0
3.5
5.1
5.2
4.7
4.3
4.3
Maldives
5.0
8.6
6.9
–32.9
37.5
13.8
5.1
3.1
5.0
3.0
4.6
4.0
Marshall Islands
1.0
5.5
10.5
–2.8
2.1
–0.7
–5.3
3.0
2.5
3.7
2.0
1.6
Micronesia
0.4
0.5
3.4
–2.0
3.1
–3.1
1.1
2.3
1.1
0.7
1.1
0.7
Mongolia
7.0
7.7
5.6
–4.6
1.6
5.0
7.4
5.1
6.8
5.3
5.3
5.0
Myanmar
6.4
6.3
6.6
–9.0
–12.0
4.0
1.0
–1.0
–2.0
3.0
3.0
1.8
Nauru
7.0
–1.2
8.5
2.0
7.2
0.1
–0.3
1.4
2.2
2.1
2.0
2.0
Nepal
4.6
7.6
6.7
–2.4
4.8
5.6
2.0
3.7
4.6
3.0
4.6
5.0
Palau
0.0
–0.4
0.3
–6.0
–11.9
–0.5
1.2
12.0
6.3
3.3
2.8
2.0
Papua New Guinea
5.5
–0.3
4.5
–3.2
–0.5
5.7
3.8
3.9
5.6
3.8
3.8
3.1
Philippines
5.7
6.3
6.1
–9.5
5.7
7.6
5.5
5.7
4.4
4.1
5.8
6.0
Samoa
1.9
–0.6
4.5
–3.1
–5.1
2.3
15.2
4.8
4.2
3.2
2.8
2.0
Solomon Islands
4.5
2.7
1.7
–3.4
–0.2
–2.6
2.8
3.0
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
Sri Lanka1
6.1
2.3
–0.2
–4.6
4.2
–7.3
–2.3
5.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Thailand
3.1
4.2
2.1
–6.1
1.6
2.7
2.2
2.9
2.4
1.5
2.1
2.5
Timor-Leste1
5.1
–0.5
2.7
–8.5
3.0
4.0
2.4
4.3
4.5
4.1
3.8
3.2
Tonga
2.1
0.5
–0.3
1.8
–0.9
–2.1
2.8
1.7
2.8
2.3
1.3
1.3
Tuvalu
2.5
1.7
13.4
–3.3
0.1
–11.8
4.0
3.1
2.2
2.5
2.4
1.6
Vanuatu
3.2
2.5
3.3
–5.7
–1.2
5.6
5.8
3.8
3.1
3.5
3.2
2.5
Vietnam
6.2
7.5
7.4
2.9
2.6
8.5
5.1
7.0
8.0
7.1
6.7
5.4
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.3
3.7
2.6
–1.7
7.2
0.5
3.6
3.8
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.3
Albania
3.1
3.7
2.1
–3.3
9.0
4.8
4.0
4.0
3.7
3.4
3.2
3.2
Belarus
2.4
3.1
1.4
–0.7
2.3
–4.5
4.1
4.3
1.3
1.2
1.0
0.9
Bosnia and Herzegovina
1.7
3.8
2.9
–3.0
7.4
4.2
2.0
3.2
2.0
2.2
2.7
3.0
Hungary
1.2
5.6
5.1
–4.3
7.2
4.2
–0.8
0.6
0.4
1.7
2.0
2.5
Kosovo
4.5
3.4
4.8
–5.3
10.7
4.3
4.1
4.6
3.6
3.3
3.8
4.0
Moldova
3.5
4.1
3.6
–8.3
13.9
–4.6
1.2
0.3
2.4
1.9
3.2
3.5
Montenegro
1.9
4.7
4.4
–15.0
13.0
7.7
6.5
3.2
2.7
2.8
2.7
3.0
North Macedonia
2.5
2.9
3.9
–4.7
4.5
2.8
2.6
3.0
3.5
3.1
3.0
3.0
Poland
3.4
6.2
4.6
–2.0
6.9
5.3
0.2
3.0
3.6
3.3
2.4
2.5
Romania
2.4
5.4
4.0
–3.6
5.6
4.2
2.3
0.9
0.7
0.7
2.5
3.1
Russia 
1.2
2.8
2.2
–2.7
5.9
–1.4
4.1
4.9
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.0
Serbia
0.8
4.6
4.8
–1.0
7.9
2.7
3.7
3.9
2.0
2.8
3.5
3.5
Türkiye
4.9
3.5
1.3
1.8
11.8
5.4
5.0
3.3
3.6
3.4
3.5
4.0
Ukraine1
–2.1
3.5
3.2
–3.8
3.4
–28.8
5.5
3.2
1.8
2.0
3.5
3.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.0
1.1
0.2
–6.9
7.5
4.3
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.7
2.6
Antigua and Barbuda
–1.0
6.7
3.2
–18.9
8.2
8.5
3.9
2.5
3.0
2.6
2.4
2.5
Argentina
1.6
–2.6
–2.0
–9.9
10.4
6.0
–1.9
–1.3
4.4
3.5
4.0
3.0
Aruba
0.5
3.2
1.2
–23.9
14.7
10.6
8.9
7.6
5.6
2.3
2.0
1.3
The Bahamas
0.2
2.4
–0.8
–20.1
17.6
10.9
3.0
3.4
2.8
2.1
1.9
1.5
Barbados
–0.7
–0.3
0.2
–17.4
8.0
15.9
1.8
3.4
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.0
Belize
1.2
0.8
4.3
–13.5
18.0
9.3
0.5
3.5
2.7
2.2
2.1
2.0
Bolivia1
5.1
2.9
1.5
–12.7
10.0
3.7
2.5
–1.1
–1.2
–3.3
. . .
. . .
Brazil
1.6
1.8
1.2
–3.3
4.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
2.3
1.9
2.0
2.5
Chile
3.1
4.0
0.6
–6.1
11.3
2.2
0.5
2.6
2.3
2.4
2.6
2.3
Colombia
3.6
2.6
3.2
–7.2
10.8
7.3
0.8
1.5
2.6
2.3
2.5
2.8
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
124
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
2.0
1.1
0.2
–6.9
7.5
4.3
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.7
2.6
Costa Rica
3.6
2.9
2.7
–4.1
8.2
5.5
4.8
4.1
4.6
3.6
3.6
3.5
Dominica
0.2
3.5
5.5
–16.6
6.9
5.6
4.7
3.5
4.5
3.1
2.8
2.0
Dominican Republic
4.8
7.1
4.9
–7.9
14.0
5.2
2.2
5.0
2.1
3.7
4.4
5.0
Ecuador
4.2
1.0
0.2
–9.2
9.4
5.9
1.8
–1.9
3.7
2.5
2.5
3.0
El Salvador
2.0
2.4
2.4
–7.9
11.9
3.0
3.5
2.6
3.7
3.3
3.0
3.0
Grenada
1.7
4.4
0.7
–13.8
4.7
7.3
4.5
2.4
4.4
3.1
3.1
2.7
Guatemala
3.2
3.4
4.0
–1.8
8.0
4.2
3.5
3.7
4.1
3.9
4.0
3.9
Guyana
3.4
4.4
5.4
43.5
20.1
63.3
33.8
43.8
19.3
16.2
19.7
1.1
Haiti
2.1
1.7
–1.7
–3.3
–1.8
–1.7
–1.9
–4.2
–2.7
–1.7
0.5
1.5
Honduras
3.2
3.8
2.6
–9.0
12.6
4.1
3.6
3.6
3.7
3.3
3.7
3.8
Jamaica
0.2
2.5
1.8
–8.3
5.7
6.4
2.7
–0.5
–0.1
–1.2
3.1
1.5
Mexico
1.6
2.0
–0.4
–8.4
6.0
3.7
3.1
1.4
0.6
1.6
2.2
2.0
Nicaragua
4.1
–3.4
–2.9
–2.2
10.5
3.6
4.4
3.6
4.9
3.8
3.8
3.5
Panama
6.6
3.9
3.1
–17.8
16.5
11.0
7.2
2.7
4.4
3.8
4.5
4.5
Paraguay
4.6
3.2
–0.4
–0.8
4.0
0.0
5.3
4.7
6.0
4.2
3.5
3.5
Peru
4.9
4.0
2.2
–10.9
13.4
2.8
–0.4
3.5
3.4
2.8
2.8
2.8
St. Kitts and Nevis
2.1
0.3
2.4
–15.2
0.6
10.5
4.6
1.7
1.5
2.0
2.5
2.5
St. Lucia
1.4
2.9
–0.7
–23.8
11.3
20.6
3.3
4.7
1.7
2.0
1.7
1.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
0.7
3.2
0.7
–4.8
2.1
5.0
4.5
4.5
3.4
3.0
2.7
2.7
Suriname
1.7
4.9
1.2
–16.0
–2.4
2.4
2.4
1.7
1.5
3.9
4.4
2.9
Trinidad and Tobago
0.0
–0.9
0.5
–8.8
–0.7
0.9
1.5
2.5
0.8
0.8
3.0
1.8
Uruguay1
3.9
0.2
0.9
–7.4
5.8
4.6
0.8
3.3
1.8
1.8
2.6
2.2
Venezuela1
–3.4
–19.7
–27.7
–30.0
1.0
8.0
4.0
5.3
1.5
4.0
6.0
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
3.8
2.5
2.1
–2.2
4.7
6.4
2.6
2.8
3.6
1.9
4.6
3.8
Afghanistan1
6.6
1.2
3.9
–2.4
–14.5
–6.2
2.3
1.9
3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
2.9
1.4
0.9
–5.0
3.8
3.6
4.1
3.7
3.8
3.8
2.9
2.6
Armenia
2.3
5.2
7.6
–7.1
5.8
12.6
8.3
5.9
7.2
5.3
5.5
5.0
Azerbaijan
3.3
1.5
2.5
–4.2
5.6
4.7
1.4
4.2
1.4
2.2
2.5
2.5
Bahrain
4.0
2.1
2.1
–5.9
4.4
6.2
3.9
2.9
3.1
–0.5
4.5
3.3
Djibouti
5.6
4.8
5.5
1.2
4.4
5.2
6.8
7.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
5.5
Egypt
4.0
5.3
5.5
3.6
3.3
6.7
3.8
2.4
4.4
4.2
4.8
4.8
Georgia
4.1
6.1
5.4
–6.3
10.6
11.0
7.8
9.7
7.5
5.3
5.0
5.0
Iran
2.0
–3.7
–2.4
4.4
4.1
4.4
5.3
3.7
–1.5
–6.1
3.2
2.1
Iraq
6.4
2.6
5.6
–12.4
1.4
7.7
0.9
0.1
–0.4
–6.8
11.3
3.5
Jordan
3.4
1.9
1.9
–1.2
3.8
2.7
3.1
2.6
2.7
2.7
3.1
3.0
Kazakhstan
4.0
4.1
4.5
–2.6
4.1
3.2
5.1
5.0
6.5
4.6
4.4
3.6
Kuwait
0.9
2.7
2.3
–4.8
1.7
6.8
–1.6
–1.5
3.5
–0.6
2.8
2.4
Kyrgyz Republic
4.3
3.5
4.6
–7.1
5.5
9.0
9.0
11.5
11.1
6.1
6.1
5.2
Lebanon1
3.9
–1.9
–6.6
–26.8
2.1
1.0
–0.7
–7.5
4.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya
–2.7
7.9
–11.2
–29.5
27.3
–8.6
10.5
4.2
15.9
6.7
4.5
3.8
Mauritania
3.2
4.8
3.1
–0.4
0.7
6.8
6.8
6.3
4.2
4.4
4.5
3.0
Morocco
3.9
3.1
2.9
–7.2
8.2
1.8
3.7
3.8
4.9
4.9
4.5
4.0
Oman
4.6
1.3
–1.1
–3.4
2.6
8.0
1.4
1.6
2.4
3.5
3.4
2.7
Pakistan1
3.4
6.1
3.1
–0.9
5.8
6.2
–0.2
2.6
3.1
3.6
3.5
4.5
Qatar
8.0
1.2
0.7
–3.6
1.6
4.2
1.5
2.4
2.8
–8.6
8.6
5.0
Saudi Arabia
4.2
3.2
1.7
–3.8
6.5
12.0
0.5
2.6
4.5
3.1
4.5
3.6
Somalia
. . .
1.4
2.8
–2.8
3.5
2.7
4.2
4.1
3.0
2.6
3.1
4.2
Sudan1
–0.1
–2.3
–2.5
–3.6
0.5
–2.5
–20.8
–23.4
3.2
0.7
8.1
4.5
Syria1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
6.7
7.6
7.4
4.4
9.4
8.0
8.3
8.4
8.4
6.0
4.8
4.5
Tunisia
2.3
2.6
1.6
–9.0
4.7
2.7
0.2
1.6
2.5
2.1
1.6
1.5
Turkmenistan1
9.9
4.8
5.1
–1.6
9.9
3.3
4.3
3.4
3.6
2.6
2.0
2.3
United Arab Emirates
3.8
1.5
1.3
–8.7
4.6
7.5
4.3
4.0
5.8
3.1
5.3
4.0
Uzbekistan
7.5
5.7
6.8
1.6
8.2
6.1
6.3
6.7
7.7
6.5
5.9
5.7
West Bank and Gaza1
5.6
1.2
1.4
–11.3
7.0
4.1
–1.0
–22.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Yemen1
. . .
8.5
4.7
0.3
6.0
–0.5
–9.3
–1.5
–0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
125
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.4
3.2
3.0
–3.1
3.9
4.4
3.8
4.2
4.5
4.3
4.4
4.7
Angola
3.8
–0.6
–0.2
–4.0
2.1
4.2
1.3
5.0
3.1
2.3
2.6
3.1
Benin
4.1
6.6
7.1
3.8
7.2
6.3
6.4
7.5
7.5
7.0
6.7
6.0
Botswana
2.6
4.2
3.0
–8.7
11.9
5.5
3.2
–3.0
–0.9
4.7
2.2
4.0
Burkina Faso
5.6
6.6
5.9
2.0
6.9
1.6
3.0
4.8
5.0
4.9
4.8
4.9
Burundi
2.7
1.6
1.8
0.3
3.1
1.8
2.7
4.1
3.9
3.8
4.2
4.2
Cabo Verde
2.3
3.7
6.9
–20.8
7.0
15.8
4.8
7.2
5.5
4.8
5.0
5.1
Cameroon 
4.1
4.0
3.5
0.3
3.3
3.7
3.3
3.5
3.1
3.3
3.8
4.6
Central African Republic
–1.3
3.2
4.0
0.9
0.1
0.8
0.1
3.1
4.8
2.6
3.0
3.5
Chad
3.1
5.2
5.9
0.0
2.0
4.7
5.0
5.0
5.6
5.2
4.9
5.3
Comoros
3.3
3.6
1.8
–0.2
2.0
2.6
3.0
3.3
3.8
4.1
4.1
3.6
Democratic Republic of the Congo
6.0
6.1
0.6
0.8
6.4
9.3
8.5
6.1
5.7
5.9
5.4
5.4
Republic of Congo
3.0
–2.3
1.1
–6.3
1.1
1.8
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.8
3.2
3.6
Côte d’Ivoire
5.4
4.8
6.7
0.7
7.1
6.4
6.6
6.0
6.5
6.2
6.3
6.5
Equatorial Guinea
–0.6
–6.2
–5.5
–4.8
0.9
3.2
–5.1
0.9
–6.4
–2.7
–1.3
2.5
Eritrea1
1.4
13.0
3.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eswatini
2.8
0.1
6.4
–3.0
4.2
0.4
3.5
3.0
3.6
4.0
3.5
2.7
Ethiopia
10.1
7.7
9.0
6.1
6.3
6.4
7.2
8.1
9.2
9.2
7.9
7.7
Gabon
3.1
0.9
3.8
–1.8
1.5
3.0
2.4
3.4
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.9
The Gambia
2.7
7.2
6.2
0.6
5.3
5.5
5.9
5.6
6.0
5.1
5.0
5.0
Ghana
6.8
6.2
6.5
0.5
5.1
3.8
3.1
5.8
6.0
4.8
4.9
5.0
Guinea
5.0
6.4
5.6
4.7
5.6
4.0
6.2
6.1
6.7
8.7
9.3
7.2
Guinea-Bissau
3.9
3.8
4.5
1.5
6.2
4.6
5.2
4.8
5.5
4.9
4.9
4.2
Kenya
4.3
5.7
5.1
–0.3
7.6
4.9
5.7
4.7
4.9
4.5
4.7
5.0
Lesotho
2.4
–1.3
–1.8
–8.6
4.6
1.6
2.5
4.9
1.4
1.1
0.8
1.5
Liberia
4.4
1.2
–2.5
–3.0
5.0
4.8
4.6
4.0
5.1
5.1
5.4
5.5
Madagascar
2.4
3.2
4.4
–7.1
4.7
4.1
4.2
4.3
2.8
3.6
4.1
4.8
Malawi
4.9
4.4
5.4
1.0
4.6
0.9
1.9
1.7
2.1
2.2
2.4
3.0
Mali
4.6
4.9
5.0
–1.2
3.1
3.7
4.7
5.0
4.9
5.5
5.7
5.2
Mauritius
3.9
4.0
2.9
–14.5
3.4
8.7
5.0
4.9
3.1
3.4
3.4
3.4
Mozambique
6.4
3.5
2.3
–1.2
2.4
4.4
5.5
2.1
–0.5
0.5
2.7
13.0
Namibia
3.4
1.1
–0.8
–8.1
3.6
5.4
4.4
3.7
2.4
2.4
2.7
3.0
Niger
5.8
7.0
6.1
3.5
1.4
11.9
2.4
10.3
6.9
6.7
6.5
6.0
Nigeria1
4.9
1.9
2.2
–6.4
1.1
4.3
3.3
4.1
4.0
4.1
4.3
4.2
Rwanda
7.1
8.1
9.3
–2.8
8.4
9.8
8.6
7.2
7.0
7.2
7.6
6.8
São Tomé and Príncipe
3.9
4.4
2.0
2.6
1.9
0.2
0.4
1.1
2.1
3.4
3.9
3.2
Senegal
4.4
6.2
4.6
1.3
6.5
3.9
4.3
6.1
7.9
2.2
2.3
4.6
Seychelles
5.1
4.9
5.5
–11.8
0.6
9.9
5.2
3.4
5.1
1.5
4.0
3.3
Sierra Leone
4.3
3.4
5.5
–1.3
5.9
5.3
5.7
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.7
4.5
South Africa
1.7
1.6
0.3
–6.2
4.9
2.1
0.8
0.5
1.1
1.0
1.3
1.8
South Sudan
. . .
–2.1
0.9
–6.5
5.3
–5.2
3.0
–26.1
46.1
4.1
3.3
3.0
Tanzania
6.4
7.0
6.9
4.5
4.8
4.7
5.1
5.5
5.9
5.9
6.1
6.3
Togo
5.4
4.8
4.9
2.2
5.1
6.3
6.2
6.3
5.9
5.0
5.3
5.5
Uganda
6.0
5.6
7.6
–1.2
5.5
6.2
5.0
6.0
6.7
7.5
8.2
5.9
Zambia
6.0
4.0
1.4
–2.8
6.2
5.2
5.4
3.8
3.8
4.3
4.7
5.3
Zimbabwe1
4.9
5.0
–6.3
–7.8
8.5
6.1
5.3
1.7
7.5
5.0
4.2
4.2
1 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Bolivia, Eritrea, India, Lebanon, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Timor-Leste, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela, West Bank and Gaza, 
Yemen, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.  
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
126
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)
Average
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.7
1.5
1.7
3.3
5.8
4.3
2.9
2.7
2.5
2.2
1.9
United States
1.5
2.3
1.7
1.3
4.6
7.1
3.7
2.5
2.8
2.9
2.2
1.8
Euro Area
1.2
1.5
1.7
1.8
2.1
5.3
6.1
3.0
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.0
Japan
–0.1
–0.1
0.8
1.2
0.0
0.6
4.6
3.2
3.4
1.4
2.7
2.1
Other Advanced Economies1
1.6
1.7
1.4
2.0
4.1
6.3
2.7
3.4
2.5
2.6
2.0
1.9
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.3
4.6
2.6
2.5
2.8
2.2
2.1
United States
1.7
2.4
1.8
1.3
4.7
8.0
4.1
3.0
2.7
3.2
2.1
2.2
Euro Area2
1.4
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.4
5.4
2.4
2.1
2.6
2.2
2.0
Japan
0.3
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.5
3.3
2.7
3.2
2.2
2.3
2.0
Other Advanced Economies1
2.0
1.9
1.4
0.6
2.6
6.6
4.9
2.4
2.3
2.6
2.1
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing  
Economies3
5.7
4.9
5.2
5.3
5.9
9.7
8.2
8.0
5.2
5.5
4.6
3.9
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.2
2.7
3.3
3.2
2.3
3.9
2.3
1.9
1.1
2.6
2.5
2.8
Emerging and Developing Europe
7.7
6.3
6.6
5.2
9.2
25.7
17.4
17.2
13.5
10.5
8.2
6.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
5.1
6.6
7.6
6.5
9.9
14.2
14.8
16.6
7.6
6.7
4.9
3.5
Middle East and Central Asia
7.8
9.5
7.4
10.4
11.9
13.3
15.5
13.9
11.2
11.9
9.1
6.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
9.1
8.7
9.6
12.4
12.3
16.1
19.4
20.7
12.5
8.8
8.8
6.5
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
7.8
8.3
6.8
9.6
11.7
13.6
13.0
12.6
12.6
13.3
10.1
7.0
Nonfuel
5.4
4.5
5.0
4.8
5.2
9.2
7.7
7.4
4.4
4.7
4.0
3.5
Of Which, Primary Products4
6.8
7.9
9.1
15.9
15.8
17.6
17.2
15.9
9.0
6.2
5.8
4.4
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
6.8
6.0
5.9
6.5
7.8
13.2
12.2
11.1
7.2
7.0
6.0
4.7
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2020–24
11.2
14.1
12.5
14.9
16.1
21.4
25.1
25.5
15.1
9.9
9.1
5.7
Other Groups
European Union
1.5
1.8
1.5
0.7
2.9
9.3
6.3
2.5
2.5
2.8
2.4
2.1
Middle East and North Africa
7.6
10.5
7.7
10.9
12.9
13.5
14.8
14.1
12.9
13.5
9.6
6.2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
5.4
4.5
4.8
4.6
5.2
9.1
7.4
7.1
4.6
5.1
4.2
3.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
9.4
9.8
10.2
14.0
14.9
16.9
19.0
19.9
13.1
9.9
8.9
6.5
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.7
1.4
0.3
2.5
8.1
5.3
2.4
2.5
2.7
2.3
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
4.4
3.1
2.6
2.6
4.0
7.9
5.9
3.7
3.3
3.9
3.7
3.0
1 Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3 Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4 Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
127
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
2025
2026
2027
Advanced Economies
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.3
4.6
2.6
2.5
2.8
2.2
2.1
2.5
2.8
2.2
United States
1.7
2.4
1.8
1.3
4.7
8.0
4.1
3.0
2.7
3.2
2.1
2.2
2.9
2.8
2.4
Euro Area3
1.4
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.4
5.4
2.4
2.1
2.6
2.2
2.0
2.0
3.0
2.1
Germany
1.4
1.9
1.4
0.4
3.2
8.7
6.0
2.5
2.3
2.7
2.3
2.1
2.3
2.6
2.2
France
1.3
2.1
1.3
0.5
2.1
5.9
5.7
2.3
0.9
1.8
1.7
1.8
0.8
2.6
1.3
Italy
1.5
1.2
0.7
–0.2
2.0
8.7
5.9
1.1
1.6
2.6
2.4
2.0
1.2
3.6
2.4
Spain
1.4
1.7
0.8
–0.3
3.0
8.3
3.4
2.9
2.7
3.0
2.3
2.0
3.0
3.0
2.2
The Netherlands
1.4
1.6
2.7
1.1
2.8
11.6
4.1
3.2
3.0
2.7
2.4
2.0
2.7
2.8
2.3
Belgium
1.9
2.3
1.2
0.4
3.2
10.3
2.3
4.3
3.0
2.8
2.2
1.8
2.2
3.2
1.7
Ireland
0.4
0.7
0.9
–0.5
2.4
8.1
5.2
1.3
2.1
3.1
2.4
2.0
2.7
3.1
2.3
Austria
1.9
2.1
1.5
1.4
2.8
8.6
7.7
2.9
3.6
2.5
2.6
2.1
3.8
2.2
2.3
Portugal
1.2
1.2
0.3
–0.1
0.9
8.1
5.3
2.7
2.2
3.1
2.3
2.0
0.0
6.1
2.3
Greece
1.2
0.8
0.5
–1.3
0.6
9.3
4.2
3.0
2.9
3.5
2.7
2.1
2.9
3.6
2.1
Finland
1.8
1.2
1.1
0.4
2.1
7.2
4.3
1.0
1.8
2.5
2.2
2.0
1.7
3.4
2.2
Bulgaria
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Slovak Republic
1.5
2.5
2.8
2.0
2.8
12.1
11.0
3.1
4.2
4.2
3.3
2.0
4.1
3.5
3.3
Croatia
1.7
1.6
0.8
0.0
2.7
10.7
8.4
4.0
4.4
4.4
2.7
2.5
3.8
3.5
2.5
Lithuania
2.8
2.5
2.2
1.1
4.6
18.9
8.7
0.9
3.4
4.0
2.7
2.5
2.5
4.2
2.9
Slovenia
1.6
1.9
1.7
–0.3
2.0
9.3
7.2
2.0
2.5
2.9
2.1
2.1
2.6
2.9
2.1
Luxembourg
1.8
2.0
1.7
0.0
3.5
8.1
2.9
2.3
2.5
2.1
2.2
2.0
3.2
2.1
1.5
Latvia
2.7
2.6
2.7
0.1
3.2
17.2
9.1
1.3
3.8
3.0
2.7
2.2
3.4
3.0
2.2
Estonia
3.1
3.4
2.3
–0.6
4.5
19.4
9.1
3.7
4.8
3.8
3.0
2.3
4.0
4.0
2.6
Cyprus
1.2
0.8
0.5
–1.1
2.3
8.1
3.9
2.3
0.8
2.6
1.6
2.0
0.1
2.2
2.0
Malta
1.9
1.7
1.5
0.8
0.7
6.1
5.6
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.0
2.5
2.5
2.4
Japan
0.3
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.5
3.3
2.7
3.2
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.7
2.7
2.0
United Kingdom 
2.4
2.5
1.8
0.9
2.6
9.1
7.3
2.5
3.4
3.2
2.4
2.0
3.4
3.5
2.0
Korea
2.3
1.5
0.4
0.5
2.5
5.1
3.6
2.3
2.1
2.5
1.9
2.0
2.3
2.6
1.8
Canada
1.6
2.3
1.9
0.7
3.4
6.8
3.9
2.4
2.1
2.5
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.5
2.0
Australia
2.4
1.9
1.6
0.9
2.8
6.6
5.6
3.2
2.9
4.0
3.2
2.4
3.7
3.9
2.9
Taiwan Province of China
1.1
1.4
0.6
–0.2
2.0
2.9
2.5
2.2
1.7
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.6
1.6
Singapore
2.3
0.4
0.6
–0.2
2.3
6.1
4.8
2.4
0.9
2.3
1.9
2.0
1.2
2.3
1.9
Switzerland
0.1
0.9
0.4
–0.7
0.6
2.8
2.1
1.1
0.2
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.1
0.6
0.6
Sweden
1.4
2.0
1.7
0.7
2.7
8.1
5.9
2.0
2.6
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.5
1.5
1.7
Czech Republic
1.9
2.2
2.8
3.2
3.9
15.1
10.7
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.7
2.0
Norway
2.2
2.7
2.2
1.3
3.5
5.8
5.5
3.2
3.0
3.3
2.6
2.0
3.2
3.0
2.4
Hong Kong SAR
3.2
2.4
2.9
0.3
1.6
1.9
2.1
1.7
1.4
2.1
1.8
2.5
1.5
3.2
1.8
Israel
1.7
0.8
0.8
–0.6
1.5
4.4
4.2
3.1
3.0
2.3
2.1
2.0
2.6
2.5
1.9
Denmark
1.4
0.7
0.7
0.3
1.9
8.6
3.4
1.3
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.0
1.8
2.4
1.9
New Zealand
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.7
3.9
7.2
5.7
2.9
2.8
3.1
2.3
2.0
3.1
3.2
2.0
Puerto Rico
1.4
1.3
0.1
–0.5
2.4
6.0
3.5
2.0
1.4
2.1
2.4
2.1
1.9
2.2
2.5
Macao SAR
4.4
3.0
2.8
0.8
0.0
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.3
1.8
1.9
2.2
0.7
1.8
1.9
Iceland
5.0
2.7
3.0
2.8
4.5
8.3
8.7
5.9
4.1
4.8
2.8
2.5
4.5
4.2
2.6
Liechtenstein
0.1
0.9
0.4
–0.7
0.6
2.8
2.1
1.1
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.5
0.7
Andorra
1.0
1.0
0.5
0.1
1.7
6.2
5.6
3.1
2.4
3.0
2.3
2.0
2.7
2.5
2.0
San Marino
1.8
1.2
0.5
–0.1
1.6
5.3
5.9
1.2
2.3
2.8
2.6
2.0
2.3
2.8
2.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.5
2.1
1.5
0.8
3.3
7.3
4.7
2.7
2.5
2.9
2.2
2.1
2.5
2.8
2.2
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2 Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
128
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
2025
2026
2027
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.2
2.7
3.3
3.2
2.3
3.9
2.3
1.9
1.1
2.6
2.5
2.8
1.9
2.7
2.5
Bangladesh
7.3
5.8
5.5
5.6
5.6
6.1
9.0
9.7
10.0
9.2
6.0
5.5
8.5
9.4
4.9
Bhutan
6.9
3.6
2.8
3.0
8.2
5.9
4.5
4.3
2.6
4.0
4.2
4.0
3.4
4.5
4.0
Brunei Darussalam
0.2
0.9
–0.3
1.9
1.7
3.7
0.4
–0.4
–0.3
1.6
1.1
1.0
–0.7
1.6
0.9
Cambodia
4.9
2.5
1.9
2.9
2.9
5.3
2.1
0.8
2.5
3.0
1.9
3.0
1.2
3.1
1.4
China
2.6
2.1
2.9
2.5
0.9
2.0
0.2
0.2
0.0
1.2
1.5
2.0
0.9
1.3
1.6
Fiji
3.8
4.1
1.8
–1.7
1.5
6.1
3.0
3.9
–1.4
2.2
3.0
2.5
0.0
3.8
2.4
India
7.6
3.4
4.8
6.2
5.5
6.6
5.4
4.6
2.1
4.7
4.0
4.0
3.3
4.7
4.0
Indonesia
5.5
3.3
2.8
2.0
1.6
4.1
3.7
2.3
1.9
3.0
2.6
2.5
2.9
2.7
2.5
Kiribati
2.0
0.6
–1.8
2.6
2.1
5.3
9.3
2.5
6.5
4.5
3.1
1.8
6.3
3.3
2.5
Lao P.D.R.
3.9
2.0
3.3
5.1
3.8
23.0
31.2
23.1
7.7
9.6
8.5
9.0
5.6
10.4
8.7
Malaysia
2.6
1.0
0.7
–1.1
2.5
3.4
2.5
1.8
1.4
1.9
2.0
2.0
1.6
2.0
2.0
Maldives
5.5
1.4
1.3
–1.6
0.2
2.6
2.6
1.4
3.5
3.0
2.0
2.3
0.3
2.0
2.0
Marshall Islands
2.5
0.8
–0.1
–0.7
2.2
2.8
7.4
5.2
5.5
7.4
5.5
2.4
5.3
9.4
1.9
Micronesia
3.0
1.0
2.2
1.0
1.8
5.0
6.2
5.4
3.2
3.2
4.0
2.0
3.2
3.2
4.0
Mongolia
10.0
6.8
7.3
3.7
7.4
15.1
10.4
6.2
8.6
7.4
7.2
6.2
7.5
7.3
7.0
Myanmar
6.9
7.3
9.1
2.3
9.6
27.2
27.6
29.6
22.0
19.0
16.0
7.8
20.0
18.0
16.0
Nauru
3.7
1.1
4.1
0.9
2.0
1.1
4.8
9.3
6.1
5.5
4.2
2.5
4.1
3.6
4.1
Nepal
8.8
4.1
4.6
6.1
3.6
6.4
7.7
5.4
4.1
3.1
5.0
5.0
2.6
5.1
5.0
Palau
3.2
2.4
0.4
0.7
–0.5
13.2
12.4
3.6
0.3
5.9
2.6
2.1
–0.9
9.0
–0.1
Papua New Guinea
6.0
4.4
3.9
4.9
4.5
5.3
2.3
0.6
4.4
5.0
4.4
4.5
4.1
4.4
4.5
Philippines
3.5
5.3
2.4
2.4
3.9
5.8
6.0
3.2
1.7
4.3
3.2
3.0
1.8
4.1
3.0
Samoa
3.1
3.7
2.2
1.5
–3.0
8.7
12.0
3.6
1.9
2.5
3.2
3.0
2.1
2.8
2.9
Solomon Islands
4.9
3.6
2.2
2.9
0.2
5.4
5.1
4.2
3.4
3.2
2.5
3.0
–0.5
2.5
2.5
Sri Lanka3
6.7
4.3
4.3
4.6
6.0
45.2
17.4
1.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Thailand
1.9
1.1
0.7
–0.8
1.2
6.1
1.2
0.4
–0.1
0.9
1.0
1.8
–0.3
1.5
0.8
Timor-Leste
4.5
2.3
0.9
0.5
3.8
7.0
8.4
2.1
0.5
2.1
2.0
2.0
1.0
2.3
1.9
Tonga
3.5
6.1
4.1
0.2
0.6
6.5
12.6
8.0
3.2
3.8
6.2
3.6
1.3
4.0
5.7
Tuvalu
2.4
2.2
3.5
1.6
6.7
12.2
7.2
1.2
2.0
3.1
2.7
2.5
2.0
3.1
2.7
Vanuatu
2.3
2.4
2.7
5.3
2.3
6.7
11.2
1.1
1.7
4.1
3.4
2.3
2.2
4.3
3.3
Vietnam
8.4
3.5
2.8
3.2
1.8
3.2
3.3
3.6
3.3
4.9
4.6
3.6
3.5
5.8
3.8
Emerging and Developing Europe
7.7
6.3
6.6
5.2
9.2
25.7
17.4
17.2
13.5
10.5
8.2
6.5
10.9
9.8
7.4
Albania 
2.3
2.0
1.4
1.6
2.0
6.7
4.8
2.2
2.2
3.4
3.1
3.0
2.3
3.7
3.0
Belarus
20.4
4.9
5.6
5.5
9.5
15.2
5.0
5.7
6.6
6.4
6.2
5.0
6.8
6.4
5.7
Bosnia and Herzegovina
1.2
1.4
0.6
–1.0
2.0
14.0
6.1
1.7
4.0
4.5
2.9
2.0
3.2
3.6
2.9
Hungary
2.9
2.8
3.4
3.3
5.1
14.6
17.1
3.7
4.4
3.8
3.5
3.0
3.3
4.2
3.1
Kosovo
2.3
1.1
2.7
0.2
3.3
11.6
4.9
1.6
3.9
5.9
3.6
2.0
5.3
5.8
2.6
Moldova
6.4
3.6
4.8
3.8
5.1
28.7
13.4
4.7
7.8
6.4
5.5
5.0
6.8
7.1
4.8
Montenegro
2.5
2.6
0.4
–0.3
2.4
13.0
8.6
3.3
3.9
3.2
2.9
2.2
4.0
3.4
2.5
North Macedonia
1.8
1.5
0.8
1.2
3.2
14.2
9.4
3.5
4.1
4.5
4.1
2.0
4.1
5.4
4.0
Poland
2.0
1.6
2.3
3.4
5.1
14.4
11.4
3.6
3.6
3.3
3.3
2.5
2.4
4.8
2.0
Romania
3.3
4.6
3.8
2.6
5.0
13.8
10.4
5.6
7.3
7.8
3.9
2.5
9.7
4.5
3.7
Russia 
8.6
2.9
4.5
3.4
6.7
13.7
5.9
8.4
8.7
5.6
4.3
4.0
5.6
5.6
4.0
Serbia
6.0
2.0
1.9
1.5
4.1
12.0
12.4
4.7
3.9
5.2
4.9
3.0
2.8
7.0
4.2
Türkiye
8.3
16.3
15.2
12.3
19.6
72.3
53.9
58.5
34.9
28.6
21.4
15.0
30.9
24.5
19.3
Ukraine
14.1
10.9
7.9
2.7
9.4
20.2
12.9
6.5
12.7
6.1
7.7
5.0
8.0
7.5
7.0
Latin America and the Caribbean4
5.1
6.6
7.6
6.5
9.9
14.2
14.8
16.6
7.6
6.7
4.9
3.5
6.5
6.6
4.2
Antigua and Barbuda
2.0
1.2
1.4
1.1
1.6
7.5
5.1
6.2
1.4
2.6
2.1
2.0
3.1
2.5
2.0
Argentina3
15.3
34.3
53.5
42.0
48.4
72.4
133.5
219.9
41.9
30.4
15.7
7.5
31.5
25.0
12.5
Aruba
1.0
3.6
3.9
–1.3
0.7
5.5
3.4
1.7
0.1
1.2
2.0
2.0
0.4
2.0
2.0
The Bahamas
1.7
2.3
2.5
0.0
2.9
5.6
3.1
0.4
0.6
1.6
1.9
2.0
0.7
1.8
1.9
Barbados
4.0
3.1
1.7
0.6
1.5
4.4
3.2
1.5
0.8
2.3
2.2
2.4
1.6
2.7
2.0
Belize
1.2
0.3
0.2
0.1
3.2
6.3
4.4
3.3
1.1
1.5
1.5
1.3
0.4
1.9
1.3
Bolivia3
5.6
2.3
1.8
0.9
0.7
1.7
2.6
5.1
19.5
20.7
. . .
. . .
20.4
26.1
. . .
Brazil
6.1
3.7
3.7
3.2
8.3
9.3
4.6
4.4
5.0
4.0
3.4
3.0
4.3
4.3
3.0
Chile
3.5
2.3
2.3
3.0
4.5
11.6
7.6
3.9
4.2
2.9
3.3
3.0
3.4
3.6
3.0
Colombia
4.2
3.2
3.5
2.5
3.5
10.2
11.7
6.6
5.1
5.9
5.2
3.0
5.1
6.3
4.5
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
129
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
2025
2026
2027
Latin America and the 
Caribbean (continued)4
5.1
6.6
7.6
6.5
9.9
14.2
14.8
16.6
7.6
6.7
4.9
3.5
6.5
6.6
4.2
Costa Rica
4.8
2.2
2.1
0.7
1.7
8.3
0.5
–0.4
–0.1
–0.4
2.0
3.0
–1.2
1.0
2.4
Dominica
1.2
1.0
1.5
–0.7
1.6
7.7
4.2
3.1
2.3
3.0
2.3
2.2
1.6
3.9
1.8
Dominican Republic
4.4
3.6
1.8
3.8
8.2
8.8
4.8
3.3
3.9
5.1
4.5
4.0
5.0
4.5
4.0
Ecuador
3.9
–0.2
0.3
–0.3
0.1
3.5
2.2
1.5
0.7
2.9
1.6
1.5
1.9
3.0
1.6
El Salvador
1.8
1.1
0.1
–0.4
3.5
7.2
4.0
0.9
0.3
2.5
2.0
1.8
0.9
2.5
2.0
Grenada
1.7
0.8
0.6
–0.7
1.2
2.6
2.7
1.1
0.6
1.3
1.6
2.0
0.3
2.1
1.6
Guatemala
4.6
3.8
3.7
3.2
4.3
6.9
6.2
2.9
1.6
2.6
4.0
4.0
1.7
3.9
3.7
Guyana
2.6
1.3
2.1
0.7
4.5
6.9
2.8
2.9
3.3
4.1
5.1
5.5
2.5
5.7
5.2
Haiti
6.7
11.4
17.3
22.9
15.9
27.6
44.1
25.8
28.3
23.5
19.7
8.0
31.9
22.0
14.4
Honduras
5.4
4.3
4.4
3.5
4.5
9.1
6.7
4.6
4.6
4.4
4.5
4.0
5.0
4.8
4.0
Jamaica
8.5
3.7
3.9
5.2
5.9
10.3
6.5
5.5
3.9
6.1
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.3
5.0
Mexico
4.1
4.9
3.6
3.4
5.7
7.9
5.5
4.7
3.8
3.9
3.4
3.0
3.7
3.9
3.0
Nicaragua
6.8
4.9
5.4
3.7
4.9
10.5
8.4
4.6
2.1
3.5
3.0
3.0
2.7
3.5
3.0
Panama
3.4
0.8
–0.4
–1.6
1.6
2.9
1.5
0.7
0.0
1.4
2.0
2.0
0.4
2.5
2.0
Paraguay
4.8
4.0
2.8
1.8
4.8
9.8
4.6
3.8
4.1
3.3
3.5
3.5
3.1
3.5
3.5
Peru
3.3
1.3
2.1
1.8
4.0
7.9
6.3
2.4
1.5
2.5
1.8
2.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
1.4
–1.0
–0.3
–1.2
1.2
2.7
3.6
1.1
1.3
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.5
2.2
2.1
St. Lucia
1.6
1.9
0.5
–1.8
2.4
9.7
3.8
–0.7
2.0
2.5
2.4
2.0
0.3
2.5
2.1
St. Vincent and the  
Grenadines
1.8
2.3
0.9
–0.6
1.6
5.7
4.6
3.6
0.9
0.9
2.0
2.0
0.5
2.0
2.0
Suriname
12.4
6.9
4.4
34.9
59.1
52.4
51.6
16.2
9.2
11.8
10.6
5.0
11.4
12.0
8.1
Trinidad and Tobago
6.4
1.0
1.0
0.6
2.1
5.8
4.6
0.5
1.0
1.8
2.8
2.0
0.4
3.1
2.4
Uruguay
8.0
7.6
7.9
9.8
7.7
9.1
5.9
4.8
4.7
4.0
4.5
4.5
3.7
4.5
4.5
Venezuela3
77.7
65,374.1
19,906.0
2,355.1
1,588.5
186.5
337.5
49.4
252.0
387.4
94.4
. . .
475.3
219.7
79.6
Middle East and  
Central Asia
7.8
9.5
7.4
10.4
11.9
13.3
15.5
13.9
11.2
11.9
9.1
6.0
11.5
11.2
8.1
Afghanistan3
5.8
0.6
2.3
5.6
7.8
10.6
–7.7
–4.3
2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
5.0
. . .
. . .
Algeria
5.1
4.3
2.0
2.4
7.2
9.3
9.3
4.0
1.4
2.9
3.0
3.3
1.4
2.9
2.9
Armenia
4.2
2.5
1.4
1.2
7.2
8.6
2.0
0.3
3.3
3.6
3.4
3.0
3.3
3.8
3.5
Azerbaijan
6.8
2.3
2.6
2.8
6.7
13.9
8.8
2.2
5.6
6.0
5.1
4.0
5.2
6.0
4.2
Bahrain
2.3
2.1
1.0
–2.3
–0.6
3.6
0.1
0.9
–0.1
2.4
1.2
2.0
0.5
2.4
1.2
Djibouti
3.1
0.1
3.3
1.8
1.2
5.2
1.4
2.1
–0.3
1.5
1.2
0.9
0.7
1.5
1.3
Egypt
12.0
20.9
13.9
5.7
4.5
8.5
24.4
33.3
20.4
13.2
11.1
5.3
14.9
14.8
9.6
Georgia
4.1
2.6
4.9
5.2
9.6
11.9
2.5
1.1
3.9
4.4
3.0
3.0
4.0
4.0
3.0
Iran
17.3
26.9
34.8
36.5
40.2
45.8
40.7
32.5
50.9
68.9
39.6
25.0
74.4
48.7
35.0
Iraq
2.0
0.4
–0.2
0.6
6.0
5.0
4.4
2.6
0.3
3.0
3.3
4.8
–1.2
3.5
3.3
Jordan
3.5
4.5
0.8
0.3
1.3
4.2
2.1
1.6
1.8
2.3
2.2
2.2
1.3
2.2
2.2
Kazakhstan
8.6
6.0
5.3
6.8
8.0
15.0
14.5
8.7
11.4
10.7
10.1
5.0
12.3
11.1
9.1
Kuwait
. . .
0.6
1.1
2.1
3.4
4.0
3.6
2.9
2.4
2.8
2.5
1.6
2.6
2.6
2.3
Kyrgyz Republic
8.1
1.5
1.1
6.3
11.9
13.9
10.8
5.0
8.2
10.6
10.0
6.5
9.3
10.5
9.5
Lebanon3
3.3
6.1
2.9
84.9
154.8
171.2
221.3
45.2
14.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
12.2
. . .
. . .
Libya
10.1
13.2
–2.2
1.4
2.9
4.5
2.4
2.1
1.8
10.5
10.2
10.2
2.0
9.5
10.2
Mauritania
4.1
3.1
2.3
2.4
3.6
9.6
4.9
2.5
1.6
4.1
4.1
4.0
4.1
4.2
4.0
Morocco
1.3
1.6
0.2
0.7
1.4
6.6
6.1
0.9
0.8
1.3
1.6
2.0
–0.3
2.0
1.5
Oman
3.1
0.7
0.5
–0.4
1.7
2.5
1.0
0.6
1.0
1.7
1.9
2.0
0.6
1.7
1.9
Pakistan3
9.3
4.7
6.8
10.7
8.9
12.2
29.2
23.4
4.5
7.2
8.4
6.5
3.2
11.5
7.0
Qatar
2.2
0.1
–0.9
–2.5
2.3
5.0
3.1
1.2
0.6
3.9
2.5
2.0
2.0
3.9
2.5
Saudi Arabia
2.9
2.5
–2.0
3.2
3.1
2.5
2.5
1.5
2.0
2.3
2.1
2.0
0.5
2.3
2.1
Somalia
. . .
4.3
4.7
4.1
4.6
6.8
6.2
5.5
3.7
5.9
4.5
3.2
4.0
5.7
4.3
Sudan3
22.9
63.3
51.0
163.3
359.1
138.8
77.2
185.7
100.2
75.1
44.6
12.5
68.2
64.1
35.5
Syria3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
8.1
3.8
7.8
8.6
9.0
6.6
3.7
3.5
3.4
4.0
4.7
5.0
3.5
4.5
4.7
Tunisia
4.4
7.3
6.7
5.6
5.7
8.3
9.3
7.0
5.3
6.5
7.2
9.6
4.9
7.0
7.6
Turkmenistan
5.8
13.3
5.1
6.1
19.5
11.2
–1.6
4.6
2.7
3.9
4.7
5.0
3.2
4.5
5.0
United Arab Emirates
2.0
3.1
–1.9
–2.1
–0.1
4.8
1.6
1.7
1.3
2.5
2.0
2.0
1.3
2.5
2.0
Uzbekistan
11.4
17.5
14.5
12.9
10.8
11.4
10.0
9.6
8.8
7.0
5.6
5.0
7.3
6.8
5.0
West Bank and Gaza3
2.7
–0.2
1.6
–0.7
1.2
3.7
5.9
53.7
10.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
–42.9
. . .
. . .
Yemen3
. . .
33.6
22.6
30.5
59.8
36.4
17.6
26.6
21.4
26.5
18.7
10.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
130
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
2025
2026
2027
Sub-Saharan Africa
9.1
8.7
9.6
12.4
12.3
16.1
19.4
20.7
12.5
8.8
8.8
6.5
8.1
9.6
8.1
Angola
14.8
19.6
17.1
22.3
25.8
21.4
13.6
28.2
20.2
12.9
12.8
9.8
15.7
13.1
11.2
Benin
2.1
0.8
–0.9
3.0
1.7
1.4
2.7
1.2
1.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.4
2.0
2.0
Botswana
6.3
3.2
2.7
1.9
6.7
12.2
5.1
2.8
2.8
5.1
5.7
4.5
3.9
6.3
5.1
Burkina Faso
2.1
2.0
–3.2
1.9
3.9
13.8
0.9
4.2
–0.5
1.5
2.1
2.0
–2.2
2.7
2.1
Burundi
10.7
–2.8
–0.8
7.5
8.4
18.9
27.1
20.2
34.2
14.5
15.3
9.8
15.2
18.8
13.5
Cabo Verde
1.7
1.3
1.1
0.6
1.9
7.9
3.7
1.1
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.0
3.3
2.0
2.0
Cameroon
2.3
1.1
2.5
2.5
2.3
6.3
7.4
4.5
3.4
3.5
3.2
2.8
2.5
3.8
3.0
Central African Republic
5.3
1.6
2.8
0.9
4.3
5.6
3.0
1.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
3.0
–0.5
0.9
2.7
Chad
2.2
4.0
–1.0
–2.7
–0.8
5.8
4.1
5.7
–2.6
0.5
3.9
3.0
–5.7
5.9
2.0
Comoros
2.4
1.7
3.7
0.8
0.0
12.4
8.5
5.0
3.2
3.7
2.5
2.5
1.6
5.9
2.2
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
13.5
29.3
4.7
11.4
9.0
9.3
19.9
17.7
7.4
3.3
6.4
7.0
2.3
6.7
7.0
Republic of Congo
3.0
1.2
0.4
1.4
2.0
3.0
4.3
3.1
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.0
–1.0
5.0
3.0
Côte d’Ivoire
1.6
0.6
0.8
2.3
4.2
5.2
4.4
3.4
0.1
1.8
2.0
2.0
0.1
1.8
2.0
Equatorial Guinea
3.5
1.3
1.2
4.8
–0.1
4.9
2.4
3.4
2.8
3.2
2.9
2.5
2.8
3.2
2.6
Eritrea3
9.4
–14.4
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eswatini
7.0
4.8
2.6
3.9
3.7
4.8
4.9
4.0
3.1
3.5
3.8
3.0
2.3
3.5
3.8
Ethiopia
15.4
13.8
15.8
20.4
26.8
33.9
30.2
21.0
13.2
11.8
10.7
7.5
9.7
12.3
9.1
Gabon
2.2
4.8
2.0
1.7
1.1
4.3
3.6
1.2
2.0
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.7
2.5
2.3
The Gambia
5.7
6.5
7.1
5.9
7.4
11.5
17.0
11.6
7.9
5.8
5.0
5.0
6.6
5.0
5.0
Ghana
12.5
9.8
7.2
9.9
10.0
31.9
39.2
22.9
14.2
5.8
7.8
8.0
5.4
7.9
8.0
Guinea
12.1
9.8
9.5
10.6
12.6
10.5
5.4
4.5
3.1
4.1
5.6
4.0
3.9
5.4
5.7
Guinea-Bissau
2.0
0.4
0.3
1.5
3.3
7.9
7.2
3.7
0.9
2.5
2.1
2.1
–2.8
2.5
2.1
Kenya
8.6
4.7
5.2
5.3
6.1
7.6
7.7
4.5
4.1
5.9
5.9
5.0
4.5
6.4
5.5
Lesotho
5.6
4.7
4.9
5.4
6.5
8.2
6.5
5.2
4.4
4.2
3.9
4.0
4.3
4.7
3.8
Liberia
9.4
23.5
27.0
17.0
7.8
7.6
10.1
8.2
8.3
5.7
6.2
5.0
4.0
6.7
5.8
Madagascar
7.7
8.6
5.6
4.2
5.8
8.2
9.9
7.6
8.0
8.3
7.0
5.0
7.2
8.0
6.5
Malawi
15.8
9.2
9.4
8.6
9.3
20.8
28.8
32.2
28.4
24.4
22.0
16.4
26.0
24.0
23.1
Mali
2.3
1.9
–3.0
0.5
3.8
9.7
2.1
3.2
2.3
2.2
2.0
2.0
0.4
2.2
2.0
Mauritius
3.8
3.2
0.5
2.5
4.0
10.8
7.0
3.6
3.7
3.7
3.8
3.5
4.5
3.9
3.6
Mozambique
8.7
3.2
5.7
0.9
6.6
10.4
7.0
3.2
4.4
4.4
5.2
5.0
3.2
5.5
5.0
Namibia
6.2
4.3
3.7
2.2
3.6
6.1
5.9
4.2
3.5
3.9
3.4
3.0
3.2
4.3
2.9
Niger
1.8
2.8
–2.5
2.9
3.8
4.2
3.7
9.1
–4.6
0.4
2.0
2.0
–9.4
9.7
2.0
Nigeria
11.8
12.1
11.4
13.2
17.0
18.8
24.7
33.2
23.0
16.0
15.9
10.0
15.2
17.0
14.5
Rwanda
5.8
1.4
2.4
7.7
0.8
13.9
14.0
4.8
7.0
5.6
5.0
5.0
8.0
4.1
5.0
São Tomé and Príncipe
11.7
7.9
7.7
9.8
8.1
18.1
21.1
14.4
0.9
9.6
7.9
5.0
10.3
8.8
6.9
Senegal
1.3
0.5
1.0
2.5
2.2
9.7
5.9
0.8
1.4
2.5
2.2
2.0
2.8
3.6
1.9
Seychelles
8.0
3.7
1.8
1.2
9.8
2.6
–1.0
0.3
0.3
2.6
1.7
2.5
–0.2
3.1
1.6
Sierra Leone
8.2
16.0
14.8
13.4
11.9
27.2
47.7
28.4
7.6
7.5
9.0
9.0
4.3
9.0
9.0
South Africa
6.1
4.6
4.1
3.3
4.6
6.9
5.9
4.4
3.2
3.9
3.4
3.0
3.6
4.3
2.9
South Sudan
. . .
83.4
49.3
24.0
30.2
–3.2
39.7
99.8
97.6
14.0
10.0
4.5
27.7
14.4
5.8
Tanzania
8.8
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.7
4.4
3.8
3.1
3.3
4.0
4.3
4.0
3.6
4.7
4.0
Togo
2.4
0.9
0.7
1.8
4.5
7.6
5.3
2.9
0.4
2.8
2.3
2.0
0.0
–0.8
1.1
Uganda
8.5
2.5
2.1
2.8
2.2
7.2
5.4
3.3
3.6
4.0
4.9
5.0
3.1
5.0
4.8
Zambia
9.8
7.5
9.2
15.7
22.0
11.0
10.9
15.0
13.9
9.0
8.0
7.0
11.2
8.5
7.5
Zimbabwe
. . .
10.6
255.3
557.2
98.5
193.4
667.4
736.1
81.4
8.0
8.0
8.0
15.0
9.0
8.0
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2 Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia, Eritrea, Lebanon, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen in the “Country Notes” section of the 
Statistical Appendix.
4 Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
131
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
Average
Projections
2008–17
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.5
–3.4
–3.8
–11.7
–8.9
–3.7
–6.2
–6.1
–5.3
–5.8
–5.7
–5.5
Output Gap2
–1.4
0.0
0.2
–3.9
–0.6
0.3
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.6
–3.2
–3.8
–8.7
–8.1
–5.2
–6.1
–5.7
–5.5
–5.6
–5.6
–5.4
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
–7.0
–5.3
–5.8
–14.1
–11.5
–3.7
–7.9
–7.9
–6.8
–7.5
–7.4
–7.4
Output Gap2
–1.7
–0.6
0.1
–3.4
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Structural Balance2
–5.9
–4.9
–5.7
–10.5
–10.6
–6.0
–7.8
–7.4
–7.2
–7.4
–7.3
–7.3
Net Debt 
72.7
79.9
81.6
95.9
95.2
91.3
94.0
95.7
96.7
98.5
101.3
115.4
Gross Debt 
98.9
107.7
108.8
132.6
125.0
119.1
120.0
122.3
123.9
125.8
128.6
142.1
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.3
–0.4
–0.5
–7.0
–5.1
–3.4
–3.5
–3.1
–3.0
–3.3
–3.4
–3.0
Output Gap2
–1.4
0.1
0.4
–5.3
–1.5
0.8
0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
Structural Balance2
–2.3
–0.4
–0.5
–3.5
–4.0
–3.6
–3.7
–3.2
–3.0
–3.2
–3.4
–2.9
Net Debt
70.2
70.2
68.5
78.2
76.3
73.8
72.8
73.2
74.1
74.9
75.9
78.3
Gross Debt
86.4
85.2
83.3
96.1
93.4
88.9
86.5
86.6
87.1
87.8
88.4
89.7
Germany 
Net Lending/Borrowing
–0.5
1.9
1.3
–4.4
–3.2
–1.9
–2.5
–2.7
–2.7
–3.8
–4.2
–3.7
Output Gap2
–0.1
0.9
0.4
–3.1
–0.8
1.3
–0.1
–1.0
–1.1
–0.9
–0.4
0.0
Structural Balance2
–0.1
1.5
1.1
–3.0
–2.8
–1.9
–2.4
–2.1
–2.1
–3.3
–4.0
–3.7
Net Debt
55.0
42.1
39.8
45.3
46.2
45.8
45.7
46.0
47.2
49.4
51.9
60.7
Gross Debt
73.2
60.8
58.7
68.0
67.9
64.4
62.3
62.2
62.9
64.6
66.5
73.7
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.9
–2.3
–2.4
–8.9
–6.6
–4.7
–5.4
–5.8
–5.1
–4.9
–4.8
–2.9
Output Gap2
–1.6
–0.8
0.0
–4.5
–2.1
–0.8
–0.5
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
Structural Balance2
–3.9
–1.6
–1.4
–5.9
–5.1
–4.2
–5.2
–5.7
–5.1
–4.8
–4.6
–2.8
Net Debt
80.9
89.4
89.0
101.6
100.5
101.1
101.5
105.0
108.8
110.2
112.3
112.6
Gross Debt
90.5
98.5
98.2
114.9
112.8
111.4
109.6
113.2
116.0
118.4
120.5
120.7
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.1
–2.2
–1.5
–9.4
–8.9
–8.1
–7.1
–3.4
–3.1
–2.8
–2.6
–2.7
Output Gap2
–3.7
–1.9
–1.9
–11.1
–3.9
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
0.0
Structural Balance2
–1.4
–1.3
–0.5
–3.0
–7.9
–8.7
–7.6
–4.1
–3.6
–2.9
–2.6
–1.1
Net Debt
115.2
123.4
123.0
141.4
134.0
127.9
123.9
125.3
127.7
129.0
129.4
126.7
Gross Debt
125.5
134.2
133.9
154.4
145.8
138.4
133.9
134.7
137.1
138.4
138.8
136.1
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.3
–2.4
–3.0
–9.0
–6.3
–4.2
–2.4
–1.7
–1.1
–2.0
–2.4
–4.0
Output Gap2
–0.4
1.9
0.7
–2.9
–1.3
–0.6
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.0
Structural Balance2
–6.2
–3.0
–3.3
–8.1
–5.8
–4.3
–2.4
–1.7
–1.2
–2.2
–2.4
–4.0
Net Debt
134.2
146.7
148.2
160.8
157.5
159.6
149.5
141.7
136.5
134.3
130.1
122.8
Gross Debt4
190.3
203.7
206.3
228.8
222.7
227.8
220.3
214.5
206.5
204.4
200.1
192.8
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.1
–2.2
–2.4
–12.9
–7.5
–4.6
–6.0
–6.1
–5.4
–3.9
–3.1
–1.6
Output Gap2
–1.2
1.6
1.5
–3.5
0.5
2.2
–0.3
–0.5
–0.6
–0.9
–0.9
–0.1
Structural Balance2
–5.2
–3.2
–3.5
–11.1
–7.0
–5.8
–6.3
–5.6
–4.9
–3.3
–2.5
–1.5
Net Debt
70.9
75.9
75.1
92.2
90.2
87.9
90.4
92.4
93.8
95.5
95.9
94.5
Gross Debt
78.8
85.6
84.9
104.8
103.4
97.5
98.9
99.9
102.3
103.6
104.1
102.6
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.6
0.4
0.0
–10.9
–3.1
0.6
–0.2
–2.1
–1.8
–2.7
–2.5
–1.5
Output Gap2
–0.4
0.6
0.4
–3.4
–1.4
0.8
0.0
–0.7
–0.9
–0.8
–0.6
0.0
Structural Balance2
–1.4
0.0
–0.2
–8.2
–2.0
0.1
–0.2
–0.8
–1.2
–2.2
–2.1
–1.5
Net Debt5
23.5
11.8
8.7
16.2
14.1
13.3
12.7
10.8
10.2
10.3
10.7
10.4
Gross Debt
85.7
90.8
90.1
118.1
112.6
103.5
105.1
110.0
113.5
110.7
109.5
103.5
Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the 
relevant individual countries. 
1 Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the 
System of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ 
defined-benefit pension plans.
2 Percent of potential GDP.
3 Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4 Nonconsolidated basis.
5 Includes equity shares. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
132
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2008–17
2018–27
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
3.2
2.9
4.0
1.2
–8.3
10.8
5.9
0.9
3.7
5.1
2.8
3.8
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
–0.2
2.5
5.5
–2.5
–1.6
12.8
6.7
–2.5
0.2
2.0
4.9
0.0
In SDRs
0.8
2.5
3.3
–0.1
–2.3
10.3
13.7
–2.3
0.7
0.3
2.9
–0.2
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
2.8
2.3
3.5
1.5
–8.7
9.7
6.2
0.6
2.1
3.7
2.5
2.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.8
3.9
4.1
0.7
–6.6
12.7
4.5
1.4
6.6
7.4
3.5
5.4
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.4
2.6
3.8
2.0
–8.1
10.1
7.5
–0.8
2.2
4.7
2.6
3.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.3
5.2
–0.5
–9.6
12.0
4.1
3.8
6.0
5.7
2.7
4.9
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
0.1
0.2
–0.4
0.1
1.0
1.0
–1.7
0.6
0.8
0.6
–1.0
0.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.0
–0.3
1.3
–1.2
–1.2
1.4
1.3
–1.0
0.2
–0.7
–1.5
–1.2
Trade in Goods 
World Trade1
Volume
2.9
2.6
3.7
0.1
–5.5
11.0
3.4
–0.8
2.8
5.4
2.8
3.9
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
–0.4
2.4
6.0
–2.9
–2.2
14.6
8.5
–3.9
–0.6
1.6
5.2
–0.5
In SDRs
0.6
2.5
3.8
–0.5
–3.0
12.1
15.6
–3.7
–0.1
–0.1
3.2
–0.7
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
0.1
1.8
2.0
0.4
–3.1
6.8
10.2
–1.7
1.2
1.1
1.4
0.2
Oil
–2.9
3.7
29.4
–10.4
–32.0
65.8
39.2
–16.4
–1.8
–14.4
21.4
–7.6
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
0.4
7.1
1.3
0.7
6.5
26.7
7.9
–5.7
3.7
9.6
21.7
1.9
Food
1.0
2.7
–1.2
–3.1
1.7
27.0
14.8
–6.8
–3.1
–4.6
6.0
0.7
Beverages
1.8
5.2
–9.2
–5.7
2.4
22.4
14.1
4.0
64.4
17.4
–28.7
–5.5
Agricultural Raw Materials
0.2
0.2
2.0
–5.4
–3.4
15.5
5.7
–15.6
4.4
–1.9
1.3
2.1
Metal
–2.7
6.3
6.6
3.9
3.5
46.7
–5.6
–2.8
–1.9
2.1
18.9
–0.2
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
1.1
1.8
–0.1
2.8
–3.8
4.4
17.4
–1.5
1.7
–0.5
–0.5
0.0
Oil
–1.9
3.7
26.7
–8.2
–32.6
62.1
48.2
–16.2
–1.3
–15.8
19.0
–7.8
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
1.4
7.1
–0.8
3.2
5.7
23.9
14.9
–5.4
4.2
7.9
19.4
1.8
Food
2.0
2.8
–3.3
–0.7
0.9
24.2
22.3
–6.5
–2.6
–6.1
4.0
0.5
Beverages
2.8
5.2
–11.1
–3.4
1.6
19.7
21.6
4.2
65.2
15.5
–30.0
–5.7
Agricultural Raw Materials
1.2
0.2
–0.1
–3.1
–4.2
12.9
12.6
–15.4
4.9
–3.5
–0.6
2.0
Metal
–1.7
6.3
4.4
6.4
2.6
43.4
0.6
–2.5
–1.4
0.4
16.6
–0.4
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
2.1
1.4
–2.5
5.9
–4.9
2.9
23.8
–4.2
1.1
–3.1
–2.8
0.4
Oil
–1.0
3.2
23.6
–5.4
–33.3
59.9
56.3
–18.5
–1.8
–18.0
16.2
–7.4
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
2.4
6.6
–3.2
6.2
4.5
22.2
21.1
–8.1
3.7
5.0
16.6
2.2
Food
3.0
2.3
–5.6
2.3
–0.2
22.5
29.0
–9.2
–3.2
–8.5
1.5
0.9
Beverages
3.8
4.8
–13.2
–0.5
0.5
18.1
28.2
1.3
64.3
12.5
–31.7
–5.3
Agricultural Raw Materials
2.2
–0.2
–2.5
–0.2
–5.2
11.3
18.8
–17.7
4.4
–6.1
–3.0
2.4
Metal
–0.8
5.8
1.9
9.6
1.5
41.5
6.0
–5.2
–2.0
–2.2
13.9
0.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
133
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2008–17
2018–27
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Trade in Goods (continued)
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
2.4
1.9
3.0
0.4
–6.5
9.9
3.8
–1.1
0.8
4.1
2.5
2.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.7
3.6
3.8
–0.2
–3.6
12.0
1.6
0.5
6.3
7.7
3.7
5.4
Fuel Exporters
1.8
1.4
–0.7
–3.7
–8.4
2.1
6.2
2.3
2.0
8.7
–3.8
10.3
Nonfuel Exporters
4.1
4.0
4.7
0.6
–2.7
13.3
0.9
0.2
7.1
7.5
5.0
4.5
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.1
2.3
3.9
0.5
–5.9
11.5
5.2
–3.2
1.3
5.0
2.7
3.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.5
2.9
4.3
–0.6
–5.5
10.7
1.7
1.7
4.5
5.6
2.3
5.3
Fuel Exporters
2.6
3.1
–3.3
2.8
–12.7
1.0
11.8
11.7
6.4
7.9
–3.0
11.3
Nonfuel Exporters
4.8
2.9
5.4
–1.0
–4.6
11.8
0.7
0.5
4.3
5.3
3.1
4.4
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
0.3
2.4
2.9
–1.2
–2.2
10.5
12.8
–2.2
0.4
1.6
2.6
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.4
2.4
5.0
0.0
–3.4
15.5
18.6
–6.4
–0.8
–2.6
2.9
–1.9
Fuel Exporters
–0.5
4.1
15.6
–3.6
–20.6
41.1
36.8
–11.6
1.3
–7.2
11.3
–5.0
Nonfuel Exporters
1.8
2.1
3.0
0.7
–0.2
11.9
15.8
–5.4
–1.2
–1.7
1.4
–1.4
Imports
Advanced Economies
0.1
2.1
3.4
–1.3
–3.3
9.1
15.2
–2.9
–0.2
0.7
2.8
–0.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.4
3.2
4.5
1.2
–3.1
15.7
17.3
–4.2
0.0
–0.9
4.9
–0.5
Fuel Exporters
1.7
3.8
1.9
3.1
–0.6
12.0
14.9
–1.8
2.3
2.1
5.4
0.2
Nonfuel Exporters
1.4
3.2
4.8
1.0
–3.5
16.1
17.5
–4.4
–0.3
–1.3
4.8
–0.5
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
0.1
0.2
–0.5
0.1
1.1
1.3
–2.1
0.7
0.6
0.8
–0.2
0.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–0.1
–0.8
0.5
–1.2
–0.3
–0.2
1.1
–2.3
–0.8
–1.7
–1.9
–1.5
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
0.6
–2.5
–3.7
–0.7
5.5
–9.2
–1.4
–1.7
–3.8
–1.2
–7.1
–1.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.6
1.1
4.2
0.3
–4.7
7.8
3.3
–4.9
5.3
–1.2
2.4
–0.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
0.0
1.1
–0.7
–0.4
2.4
5.2
–3.7
5.7
1.4
0.0
1.9
–0.7
Middle East and Central Asia
–1.8
0.4
11.5
–5.2
–18.3
23.0
15.6
–8.3
–0.8
–7.5
5.6
–4.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
0.6
2.1
3.4
–1.9
0.9
9.3
–2.2
–5.4
5.4
7.0
6.9
–1.0
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
–2.2
0.3
13.4
–6.5
–20.2
25.9
19.1
–10.0
–1.0
–9.1
5.5
–5.2
Nonfuel
0.4
–1.0
–1.8
–0.3
3.4
–3.6
–1.5
–1.0
–0.9
–0.4
–3.3
–0.9
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
21,132
30,512
25,094
24,718
22,336
28,017
31,522
30,986
32,307
34,614
 37,088 
 38,442 
Goods
16,471
22,724
18,991
18,430
17,075
21,691
24,155
23,002
23,550
25,217
 27,158 
 27,976 
Average Oil Price3
–2.9
3.7
29.4
–10.4
–32.0
65.8
39.2
–16.4
–1.8
–14.4
21.4
–7.6
In US Dollars a Barrel
79.4
72.3
68.5
61.4
41.8
69.2
96.4
80.6
79.2
67.7
82.2
76.0
Export Unit Value of Manufactures4
0.1
1.8
2.0
0.4
–3.1
6.8
10.2
–1.7
1.2
1.1
1.4
0.2
Note: SDRs = special drawing rights.
1 Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
2 As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 82 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) 
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16 
shares in world commodity imports.
3 Percent change of the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 
4 Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
134
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Advanced Economies
413.1
380.3
136.5
429.7
–278.9
–16.2
47.1
49.8
–86.9
–50.3
68.1
United States
–439.0
–442.0
–593.5
–858.6
–993.1
–928.0
–1,185.3
–1,116.0
–1,199.7
–1,227.8
–1,388.6
Euro Area
410.0
324.7
245.0
408.6
–30.8
264.7
443.0
288.2
254.7
292.1
432.7
Germany
341.7
311.8
248.8
301.1
160.2
251.8
272.1
222.9
211.7
216.7
243.6
France
–19.4
16.3
–54.3
8.2
–39.7
–31.8
2.9
–14.8
–12.0
–7.5
17.5
Italy
52.5
63.8
71.7
43.8
–38.5
5.1
25.7
30.9
16.9
31.8
67.9
Spain
26.9
29.9
10.2
11.3
6.1
44.3
54.8
55.0
46.2
42.6
37.8
Japan
177.8
176.3
149.9
196.2
89.9
156.2
189.2
214.2
166.4
176.3
207.8
United Kingdom
–108.0
–71.3
–74.2
–24.2
–61.2
–122.2
–110.1
–125.2
–144.2
–140.4
–119.8
Canada
–41.0
–34.1
–33.4
–0.4
–10.1
–15.1
–10.9
–21.7
–5.4
–9.2
–0.7
Other Advanced Economies1
323.4
330.1
372.4
577.4
562.8
483.6
608.7
657.3
685.2
705.7
779.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–45.7
13.0
152.4
375.4
682.5
288.6
421.0
601.0
529.8
457.8
377.7
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
–51.9
94.3
323.4
287.9
336.4
253.4
422.7
741.4
638.9
637.7
619.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
67.4
52.3
1.3
69.4
129.1
–20.3
–4.7
–75.4
–78.3
–85.8
–80.9
Latin America and the Caribbean
–145.4
–107.4
–9.1
–91.1
–129.4
–76.9
–74.2
–81.7
–75.6
–89.2
–114.2
Middle East and Central Asia
118.8
24.9
–118.7
124.6
389.8
182.6
101.6
35.4
60.2
22.9
–15.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
–34.7
–51.3
–44.5
–15.4
–43.4
–50.3
–24.5
–18.7
–15.4
–27.9
–30.9
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
211.1
79.5
–94.2
191.5
497.7
248.8
205.0
120.0
161.7
124.0
102.3
Nonfuel
–254.7
–64.8
248.5
185.6
186.8
42.1
218.9
483.2
371.3
337.2
277.9
Of Which, Primary Products
–49.2
–45.3
–8.1
–25.7
–64.1
–38.2
–26.7
–16.1
7.1
–6.3
–35.0
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–388.8
–300.4
–130.6
–301.5
–449.1
–273.7
–279.2
–314.3
–425.7
–444.2
–517.2
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2020–24
–55.0
–54.4
–36.4
–44.5
–42.7
–50.4
–56.3
–61.1
–79.8
–89.2
–67.5
Memorandum
World
367.4
393.3
288.9
805.1
403.5
272.4
468.0
650.8
442.9
407.5
445.8
European Union
512.3
460.5
376.1
569.5
125.9
478.5
629.7
504.3
459.7
495.4
660.8
Middle East and North Africa
135.5
43.9
–100.4
126.9
381.9
203.3
122.8
57.3
62.1
40.7
22.2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
15.5
79.9
215.1
445.7
789.9
373.3
467.2
628.5
550.9
503.5
449.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
–61.2
–66.9
–62.7
–70.4
–107.4
–84.7
–46.2
–27.5
–21.0
–45.7
–71.8
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
135
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Advanced Economies
0.8
0.7
0.3
0.7
–0.5
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
United States
–2.1
–2.1
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.3
–4.0
–3.6
–3.7
–3.6
–3.6
Euro Area
2.9
2.4
1.8
2.7
–0.2
1.7
2.7
1.6
1.3
1.5
1.9
Germany
8.4
7.9
6.3
6.9
3.8
5.5
5.8
4.4
3.9
3.8
3.8
France
–0.7
0.6
–2.1
0.3
–1.4
–1.0
0.1
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
0.4
Italy
2.5
3.2
3.8
2.0
–1.8
0.2
1.1
1.2
0.6
1.1
2.2
Spain
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.8
0.4
2.7
3.2
2.9
2.2
1.9
1.5
Japan
3.4
3.4
2.9
3.8
2.0
3.6
4.5
4.8
3.8
3.9
4.1
United Kingdom
–3.7
–2.5
–2.7
–0.8
–1.9
–3.6
–3.0
–3.1
–3.4
–3.1
–2.2
Canada
–2.4
–2.0
–2.0
0.0
–0.5
–0.7
–0.5
–0.9
–0.2
–0.3
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
4.2
4.4
5.0
6.6
6.4
5.5
6.6
6.8
6.4
6.3
5.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–0.1
0.0
0.4
0.9
1.6
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.5
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.8
1.4
0.0
1.6
2.7
–0.4
–0.1
–1.2
–1.2
–1.3
–1.0
Latin America and the Caribbean
–2.7
–2.0
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–1.1
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
Middle East and Central Asia
3.0
0.6
–3.4
3.0
7.8
3.7
2.0
0.7
1.1
0.4
–0.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
–1.8
–2.5
–2.4
–0.7
–1.9
–2.4
–1.3
–0.9
–0.6
–1.1
–0.9
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.4
2.1
–2.9
5.0
10.5
5.4
4.5
2.6
3.3
2.4
1.6
Nonfuel
–0.8
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.5
1.1
0.8
0.7
0.4
Of Which, Primary Products
–3.2
–3.1
–0.6
–1.6
–4.0
–2.3
–1.5
–0.8
0.3
–0.3
–1.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–2.7
–2.1
–1.0
–2.0
–2.7
–1.5
–1.5
–1.6
–1.9
–1.9
–1.7
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2020–24
–3.9
–3.7
–2.5
–2.7
–2.4
–2.9
–3.1
–3.1
–3.7
–3.8
–2.2
Memorandum
World
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.3
European Union
3.2
2.9
2.4
3.3
0.7
2.6
3.2
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.4
Middle East and North Africa
4.2
1.4
–3.6
3.8
9.3
5.1
3.0
1.4
1.4
0.9
0.4
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
0.0
0.2
0.7
1.2
1.9
0.9
1.1
1.4
1.1
1.0
0.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
–2.9
–3.0
–2.9
–3.0
–4.2
–3.4
–2.0
–1.1
–0.7
–1.5
–1.7
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
136
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Advanced Economies
2.6
2.4
1.0
2.5
–1.5
–0.1
0.2
0.2
–0.4
–0.2
0.2
United States
–17.3
–17.3
–27.3
–33.2
–32.5
–30.0
–36.7
–32.5
–34.3
–33.8
–35.2
Euro Area
10.8
8.6
7.1
9.8
–0.7
5.8
9.4
5.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
19.7
18.6
16.1
16.2
8.3
12.9
14.0
10.9
9.8
9.8
9.8
France
–2.1
1.8
–7.3
0.9
–3.9
–3.0
0.3
–1.3
–1.0
–0.6
1.3
Italy
8.1
10.2
13.1
6.4
–5.2
0.7
3.3
3.8
1.9
3.4
6.3
Spain
5.4
6.1
2.6
2.3
1.1
7.2
8.6
7.9
6.1
5.4
4.0
Japan
19.1
19.5
18.9
21.3
9.7
16.9
20.5
22.2
17.9
18.6
20.3
United Kingdom
–11.7
–7.8
–9.1
–2.6
–5.6
–11.2
–9.6
–10.3
–11.0
–10.3
–7.6
Canada
–7.4
–6.0
–6.8
–0.1
–1.4
–2.1
–1.5
–3.0
–0.7
–1.1
–0.1
Other Advanced Economies1
7.4
7.8
9.5
11.6
10.2
9.2
10.9
10.5
10.0
9.9
9.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–0.6
0.1
1.9
3.5
5.5
2.4
3.4
4.5
3.7
3.0
2.1
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
–1.2
2.1
7.4
5.1
5.5
4.3
6.7
10.9
8.8
8.4
6.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.6
3.6
0.1
4.1
6.8
–1.1
–0.3
–3.9
–3.7
–3.9
–3.1
Latin America and the Caribbean
–11.4
–8.5
–0.8
–6.6
–7.8
–4.6
–4.2
–4.4
–3.7
–4.3
–4.6
Middle East and Central Asia
6.9
1.4
–10.3
8.0
18.0
9.0
5.0
1.7
2.5
0.9
–0.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
–8.2
–12.3
–13.3
–3.5
–8.3
–10.2
–4.7
–3.2
–2.2
–3.9
–3.5
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
13.0
5.3
–8.6
12.8
23.7
12.8
10.4
5.9
7.3
5.2
3.6
Nonfuel
–3.3
–0.8
3.5
2.0
1.8
0.4
2.1
4.3
3.0
2.7
1.8
Of Which, Primary Products
–12.0
–11.4
–2.2
–5.3
–12.1
–7.4
–4.9
–2.6
1.0
–0.8
–4.0
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–10.6
–8.2
–4.0
–7.2
–9.1
–5.5
–5.4
–5.7
–7.0
–7.0
–6.7
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
–13.7
–13.5
–10.6
–10.3
–8.8
–10.8
–11.6
–11.4
–13.0
–13.8
–8.0
Memorandum
World
1.4
1.6
1.3
2.9
1.2
0.9
1.5
1.9
1.2
1.1
1.0
European Union
6.6
6.0
5.3
6.5
1.3
4.9
6.4
4.8
4.0
4.2
4.9
Middle East and North Africa
9.0
3.0
–9.8
9.2
19.9
11.3
6.8
3.0
3.0
1.8
0.8
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
0.0
0.9
2.8
4.3
6.6
3.3
3.9
4.9
4.0
3.5
2.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
–16.1
–16.4
–18.4
–17.1
–21.7
–17.4
–8.9
–4.5
–2.9
–6.0
–7.4
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
137
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Advanced Economies
0.8
0.7
0.3
0.7
–0.5
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
United States
–2.1
–2.1
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.3
–4.0
–3.6
–3.7
–3.6
–3.6
Euro Area1
2.9
2.4
1.8
2.7
–0.2
1.7
2.7
1.6
1.3
1.5
1.9
Germany
8.4
7.9
6.3
6.9
3.8
5.5
5.8
4.4
3.9
3.8
3.8
France
–0.7
0.6
–2.1
0.3
–1.4
–1.0
0.1
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
0.4
Italy
2.5
3.2
3.8
2.0
–1.8
0.2
1.1
1.2
0.6
1.1
2.2
Spain
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.8
0.4
2.7
3.2
2.9
2.2
1.9
1.5
The Netherlands
8.8
6.8
5.7
10.2
6.8
9.4
9.1
8.8
8.8
8.7
8.5
Belgium
–0.9
0.1
0.9
1.8
–1.9
0.2
–0.4
–2.1
–2.0
–1.9
–0.7
Ireland
4.3
–20.7
–7.1
12.2
8.8
7.0
16.2
8.2
8.1
8.1
7.7
Austria
0.8
2.4
3.4
1.7
–1.3
1.6
1.5
1.0
0.4
0.7
2.5
Portugal
0.8
0.8
–0.7
–0.7
–2.0
0.6
2.2
1.2
0.5
0.7
0.5
Greece
–3.5
–2.1
–7.2
–7.2
–10.7
–6.8
–7.2
–5.7
–6.4
–5.7
–4.0
Finland
–1.6
–0.1
0.4
0.3
–2.4
–0.9
–0.4
1.3
0.1
0.4
1.1
Bulgaria
0.7
1.7
1.6
0.2
–1.4
–1.2
–1.4
–5.9
–4.0
–3.2
1.2
Slovak Republic
–1.6
–3.5
–0.5
–4.8
–9.6
–3.0
–4.6
–3.6
–3.0
–1.7
–1.1
Croatia
1.0
2.1
–1.9
0.3
–3.6
0.1
–2.2
–3.2
–3.8
–3.3
–1.9
Lithuania
0.4
3.8
7.2
1.4
–6.1
1.1
3.2
1.3
0.2
1.0
1.7
Slovenia
6.5
6.4
7.3
3.5
–0.9
4.8
4.5
3.5
3.2
2.8
2.8
Luxembourg
8.3
8.5
4.7
5.0
5.4
6.8
4.3
4.7
4.5
4.7
5.0
Latvia
–0.4
–0.2
3.0
–4.1
–5.5
–3.8
–1.5
–3.4
–3.6
–3.6
–3.6
Estonia
0.6
2.0
–2.5
–3.7
–3.1
–1.2
–1.2
–0.2
–1.1
–2.0
–1.4
Cyprus
–3.9
–5.5
–9.7
–5.5
–6.9
–9.7
–8.2
–8.1
–9.3
–10.3
–10.5
Malta
13.3
17.9
16.0
9.4
–2.9
6.5
7.1
5.7
5.8
5.2
5.0
Japan
3.4
3.4
2.9
3.8
2.0
3.6
4.5
4.8
3.8
3.9
4.1
United Kingdom
–3.7
–2.5
–2.7
–0.8
–1.9
–3.6
–3.0
–3.1
–3.4
–3.1
–2.2
Korea
4.2
3.4
4.4
4.3
1.3
1.8
5.3
6.6
5.6
5.4
5.5
Canada
–2.4
–2.0
–2.0
0.0
–0.5
–0.7
–0.5
–0.9
–0.2
–0.3
0.0
Australia
–2.6
–0.1
1.6
2.3
0.3
–0.4
–2.2
–2.6
–2.3
–2.2
–2.4
Taiwan Province of China
11.6
10.7
14.4
15.0
13.2
14.0
14.1
17.4
18.1
18.0
15.4
Singapore
15.7
15.5
17.7
19.3
18.9
16.4
17.2
16.7
16.6
16.5
16.3
Switzerland
6.0
4.0
0.6
7.4
9.0
5.8
8.9
7.1
6.8
7.1
7.0
Sweden
2.1
5.2
5.7
6.2
4.0
6.2
6.9
6.1
5.3
4.7
4.8
Czech Republic
0.4
0.3
1.8
–2.1
–4.7
–0.1
1.7
0.7
–1.5
–1.3
–0.5
Norway
8.6
3.6
1.8
14.4
27.8
17.1
15.0
14.1
14.3
13.6
11.2
Hong Kong SAR
3.7
5.9
7.0
11.8
10.2
8.4
13.2
12.2
12.6
12.3
11.4
Israel
2.5
3.0
3.8
3.1
2.7
3.1
2.9
1.5
1.9
2.3
2.8
Denmark
6.3
7.4
7.2
8.5
11.2
11.0
12.2
12.5
12.3
11.5
11.2
New Zealand
–4.3
–2.9
–1.0
–5.8
–9.0
–6.3
–4.7
–3.7
–4.0
–3.8
–2.9
Puerto Rico
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
32.9
33.5
13.8
8.5
13.6
31.4
36.3
35.7
35.0
34.2
32.5
Iceland
4.4
7.4
1.9
–2.6
–1.7
–1.2
–3.2
–3.6
–0.7
–0.1
0.5
Liechtenstein
24.0
16.1
17.7
17.0
14.8
14.9
14.4
13.4
12.7
12.7
12.0
Andorra
. . .
18.0
15.5
15.0
11.6
14.2
15.9
15.9
16.0
16.0
16.2
San Marino
–1.9
2.0
2.8
5.4
13.6
22.0
18.4
17.1
17.1
16.9
14.4
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.1
–0.7
–0.8
–2.0
–1.4
–1.6
–1.5
–1.7
–1.7
–1.5
Euro Area2
3.6
3.1
2.4
3.6
0.9
2.6
3.3
2.5
2.1
2.2
2.6
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.
1 Data are corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
2 Data are calculated as the sum for the balances of individual euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
138
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Emerging and Developing Asia
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.5
Bangladesh
–3.0
–1.3
–1.5
–1.1
–4.0
–2.6
–1.4
0.0
–0.6
–1.2
–2.0
Bhutan
–17.4
–19.2
–14.8
–11.2
–29.5
–35.0
–20.4
–18.9
–19.3
–21.9
–18.4
Brunei Darussalam
6.9
6.6
4.3
11.1
19.5
12.9
14.5
13.7
14.5
15.6
15.9
Cambodia
–9.0
–8.3
–1.0
–30.1
–19.2
1.3
0.5
–2.9
–6.3
–6.6
–6.8
China
0.2
0.7
1.6
1.9
2.4
1.4
2.2
3.7
3.5
3.3
2.8
Fiji
–8.4
–11.8
–12.0
–6.5
–15.3
–6.6
–7.8
–9.5
–12.5
–10.9
–6.6
India
–2.2
–0.9
0.9
–1.3
–2.1
–0.7
–0.6
–0.9
–2.0
–1.6
–1.9
Indonesia
–2.9
–2.7
–0.4
0.3
1.0
–0.1
–0.6
–0.1
–1.1
–0.9
–0.8
Kiribati
32.6
37.2
32.2
7.1
–12.0
–1.8
–17.4
–18.8
–17.7
–16.8
–14.8
Lao P.D.R.
–9.1
–7.0
–1.6
2.3
–3.0
2.7
4.3
11.4
0.2
0.9
–0.6
Malaysia
2.2
3.5
4.2
3.9
3.2
1.1
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.6
1.8
Maldives
–27.8
–26.1
–35.1
–8.7
–16.3
–21.2
–18.7
–8.4
–17.6
–15.5
–12.4
Marshall Islands
5.4
–23.5
22.7
27.4
6.8
15.8
15.7
9.1
2.4
6.2
–3.5
Micronesia
26.3
19.4
7.3
9.9
16.5
5.5
3.5
3.8
1.1
–0.4
–1.0
Mongolia
–16.7
–15.2
–5.1
–13.8
–13.4
0.6
–10.4
–8.6
–7.9
–8.6
–9.3
Myanmar
–2.7
–1.8
–0.4
–2.8
–3.5
–2.9
3.1
0.4
–1.1
–1.7
–2.1
Nauru
7.6
4.6
2.5
4.5
1.6
1.2
6.0
2.7
2.3
2.1
2.0
Nepal
–7.1
–6.9
–1.0
–7.7
–12.6
–0.9
3.9
6.7
6.9
2.0
–4.0
Palau
–18.6
–33.7
–43.6
–43.4
–45.1
–38.2
–20.2
–19.0
–17.2
–15.2
–12.5
Papua New Guinea
13.6
14.4
14.4
12.6
14.4
9.1
15.6
14.7
13.7
11.6
10.4
Philippines
–2.6
–0.8
3.2
–1.5
–4.5
–2.8
–4.0
–3.3
–4.4
–3.5
–2.7
Samoa
0.8
2.8
0.9
–14.6
–10.6
–3.0
4.4
5.7
–1.6
–4.0
–2.3
Solomon Islands
–3.0
–9.5
–1.6
–5.0
–14.6
–11.4
–4.2
–1.0
–4.6
–4.9
–4.8
Sri Lanka1
–3.0
–2.1
–1.4
–3.7
–2.0
1.7
1.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Thailand
5.6
7.0
4.1
–2.1
–3.4
1.6
2.2
3.1
0.7
1.4
2.7
Timor-Leste1
–12.3
22.2
22.5
54.8
15.2
–9.3
–32.4
–34.0
–32.0
–33.1
–35.3
Tonga
–7.0
–3.7
–5.6
–6.3
–5.0
–5.1
–3.3
–5.3
–7.4
–7.5
–5.9
Tuvalu
59.3
–16.5
16.2
29.8
–0.3
40.0
15.8
29.9
–1.0
–4.2
–7.8
Vanuatu
2.5
4.6
–9.7
–14.9
–12.4
–7.8
–20.2
–10.4
–8.5
–7.5
–4.7
Vietnam
1.9
3.8
4.3
–2.2
0.3
6.4
6.6
6.7
5.3
4.4
0.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.8
1.4
0.0
1.6
2.7
–0.4
–0.1
–1.2
–1.2
–1.3
–1.0
Albania
–6.7
–7.5
–8.6
–7.7
–5.8
–1.2
–2.4
–2.0
–2.8
–3.4
–3.0
Belarus
0.0
–1.9
–0.3
3.2
3.4
–1.8
–3.1
–2.6
–2.7
–3.4
–3.3
Bosnia and Herzegovina
–3.2
–2.6
–2.8
–1.8
–4.4
–2.1
–3.5
–3.2
–4.6
–4.4
–4.0
Hungary
0.2
–0.6
–1.1
–4.5
–9.1
–0.1
1.5
1.3
–0.4
0.4
1.8
Kosovo
–7.6
–5.7
–7.0
–8.7
–9.4
–7.2
–8.7
–9.2
–10.5
–9.9
–8.7
Moldova
–10.8
–9.4
–7.7
–12.4
–17.1
–11.1
–16.5
–19.1
–21.9
–20.4
–15.6
Montenegro
–17.2
–14.4
–26.3
–9.3
–12.9
–11.2
–17.1
–20.5
–19.4
–18.3
–15.7
North Macedonia
0.2
–3.0
–2.9
–2.8
–6.1
0.3
–2.2
–4.4
–5.0
–4.4
–3.0
Poland
–2.0
–0.3
2.4
–1.3
–2.3
1.5
0.3
–0.7
–1.1
–0.9
–1.0
Romania
–4.6
–4.9
–5.1
–7.2
–9.6
–6.7
–8.2
–8.0
–6.8
–6.2
–5.0
Russia 
7.0
3.9
2.4
6.8
10.4
2.4
2.9
1.6
2.9
2.3
1.1
Serbia
–4.6
–6.6
–3.9
–4.1
–6.5
–2.3
–4.5
–4.9
–5.7
–4.4
–4.8
Türkiye
–1.8
1.9
–4.2
–0.9
–5.0
–3.6
–1.0
–1.9
–2.8
–2.5
–1.2
Ukraine
–3.3
–2.7
2.7
–2.4
4.5
–5.2
–8.0
–15.0
–18.9
–16.6
–7.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
–2.7
–2.0
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–1.1
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
Antigua and Barbuda
–14.0
–6.5
–15.6
–17.6
–15.1
–12.9
–7.5
–11.6
–11.8
–11.3
–9.4
Argentina
–5.2
–0.8
0.7
1.4
–0.6
–3.2
0.9
–1.1
–0.8
–0.6
–0.3
Aruba
–0.5
0.2
–17.2
–2.3
6.4
5.4
9.6
7.7
6.5
5.8
4.7
The Bahamas
–9.4
–2.1
–22.0
–20.2
–8.9
–7.0
–7.6
–10.0
–9.1
–8.4
–5.9
Barbados
–3.4
–1.0
–5.1
–7.9
–7.9
–7.8
–3.9
–7.5
–7.0
–6.6
–5.2
Belize
–6.6
–7.8
–6.2
–6.5
–8.3
–1.0
–1.9
–3.5
–4.5
–3.9
–3.2
Bolivia
–3.5
–2.8
0.0
3.3
2.2
–2.2
–2.4
–1.9
1.2
. . .
. . .
Brazil
–2.8
–3.4
–1.6
–2.4
–2.1
–1.2
–3.0
–3.0
–2.7
–2.4
–1.8
Chile
–4.5
–5.2
–1.9
–7.3
–8.8
–3.1
–1.5
–2.3
–0.8
–1.8
–2.4
Colombia
–4.2
–4.6
–3.4
–5.6
–6.0
–2.3
–1.7
–2.4
–2.5
–2.6
–3.2
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
139
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
–2.7
–2.0
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–1.1
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
Costa Rica
–3.0
–1.2
–1.0
–3.1
–3.2
–1.3
–0.9
–0.7
–1.5
–1.6
–1.3
Dominica
–46.7
–38.1
–37.0
–33.5
–27.3
–40.4
–37.8
–38.0
–33.2
–25.4
–16.5
Dominican Republic
–1.6
–1.3
–1.7
–2.8
–5.8
–3.7
–3.3
–1.2
–1.5
–1.3
–1.7
Ecuador
–1.5
–0.5
2.1
2.8
2.0
2.0
5.7
5.8
5.2
4.6
3.1
El Salvador
–3.3
–0.4
1.1
–4.3
–6.7
–1.1
–1.8
–3.9
–3.3
–1.9
–1.3
Grenada
–12.8
–10.3
–16.1
–14.4
–12.1
–20.3
–21.9
–17.8
–18.3
–15.9
–14.1
Guatemala
0.9
2.4
5.0
2.2
1.2
3.1
2.9
4.8
3.2
2.2
–0.6
Guyana
–29.0
–68.8
–17.3
–24.7
25.9
9.9
16.5
12.9
21.5
13.9
19.3
Haiti
–2.9
–1.1
0.4
0.4
–2.5
–3.5
–0.6
1.9
0.2
–0.5
–2.1
Honduras
–6.6
–2.6
2.9
–5.5
–6.9
–4.0
–4.4
2.4
–2.6
–2.9
–3.7
Jamaica
–1.4
–1.8
–1.0
0.9
–0.7
2.7
2.9
1.2
–6.0
–6.6
0.5
Mexico
–2.1
–0.3
2.4
–0.3
–1.3
–0.7
–0.9
–0.4
–0.4
–0.5
–0.7
Nicaragua
–1.8
5.9
3.8
–2.8
–2.9
8.2
4.2
8.6
6.4
5.2
–0.1
Panama
–7.9
–5.1
0.2
–1.2
0.0
–3.1
0.7
0.3
–1.5
–2.5
–2.5
Paraguay
0.2
–0.2
2.4
–0.6
–6.5
0.1
–3.4
–3.5
–3.0
–2.1
–0.2
Peru
–1.2
–0.7
0.8
–2.2
–4.0
0.3
2.2
3.1
3.4
2.5
–0.8
St. Kitts and Nevis
–5.9
–4.9
–11.0
–3.4
–10.8
–13.7
–13.0
–14.6
–15.4
–14.2
–11.9
St. Lucia
1.5
3.3
–18.8
–10.4
–3.3
–2.2
–1.6
–4.6
–4.6
–3.7
–1.1
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
–10.3
–2.4
–15.9
–23.2
–20.5
–18.2
–17.1
–20.2
–19.8
–17.1
–16.1
Suriname
–3.0
–11.2
8.9
–2.6
1.3
–3.7
–12.9
–53.3
–44.8
–42.2
28.9
Trinidad and Tobago
6.8
4.3
–6.5
10.9
10.2
11.5
2.5
3.1
3.8
4.8
4.3
Uruguay
–0.5
1.3
–0.6
–2.4
–3.5
–3.0
–0.8
–0.5
–0.8
–0.9
–1.7
Venezuela1
8.4
5.9
–3.2
–0.9
4.0
5.8
4.1
2.6
7.1
4.8
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
3.0
0.6
–3.4
3.0
7.8
3.7
2.0
0.7
1.1
0.4
–0.2
Afghanistan1
12.1
11.7
14.0
–0.1
–18.5
–20.3
–39.6
–40.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
–8.7
–8.7
–11.3
–2.4
8.4
2.4
–1.1
–7.7
–1.2
–2.5
–1.5
Armenia
–7.2
–7.1
–4.0
–3.4
0.7
–2.8
–4.6
–6.7
–6.0
–5.2
–4.4
Azerbaijan
12.8
9.1
–0.5
15.1
29.8
11.5
6.3
5.5
9.7
5.4
0.6
Bahrain
–6.2
–2.0
–9.1
6.4
14.7
5.8
4.8
5.9
3.9
4.8
2.0
Djibouti
14.7
18.3
11.7
–6.6
19.0
18.2
14.6
10.2
10.1
8.9
8.3
Egypt
–2.3
–3.4
–2.9
–4.4
–3.5
–1.2
–5.4
–4.2
–4.2
–4.6
–2.7
Georgia
–6.7
–6.0
–12.4
–10.3
–4.4
–5.5
–5.3
–2.6
–5.0
–4.5
–5.0
Iran
7.6
–0.7
–1.7
3.6
3.5
2.0
3.2
0.6
–1.8
–0.2
2.7
Iraq
8.1
5.9
–6.8
3.1
13.4
5.8
–2.1
–1.7
–5.3
0.2
–5.6
Jordan
–6.2
–2.4
–5.6
–7.3
–7.5
–3.3
–5.4
–5.6
–6.2
–5.1
–4.6
Kazakhstan
–1.0
–3.9
–6.5
–1.4
2.9
–3.6
–2.7
–3.9
–1.0
–2.0
–2.0
Kuwait
14.3
12.7
4.4
25.2
34.4
31.1
29.0
23.3
26.0
21.8
14.3
Kyrgyz Republic
–12.1
–11.5
4.5
–8.0
–41.9
–44.9
–22.6
–23.4
–7.1
–6.1
–5.4
Lebanon1
–24.2
–21.7
–11.8
–22.2
–28.9
–24.0
–19.0
–22.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya
14.7
6.7
–10.2
11.4
22.2
4.2
–4.4
–3.8
4.2
1.6
1.0
Mauritania
–13.1
–10.5
–6.8
–8.6
–14.9
–8.7
–9.4
–5.8
–6.5
–6.4
–6.3
Morocco
–4.9
–3.4
–1.2
–2.3
–3.5
–1.0
–1.2
–2.1
–3.1
–2.9
–3.3
Oman
–4.9
–4.9
–16.5
–5.5
3.7
2.3
3.2
1.3
7.5
5.6
5.6
Pakistan1
–5.4
–4.2
–1.5
–0.8
–4.7
–1.0
–0.6
0.5
–0.4
–0.9
–1.0
Qatar
9.1
2.4
–2.1
14.6
26.8
16.8
17.3
14.5
11.0
9.9
14.4
Saudi Arabia
7.9
3.6
–4.5
4.6
11.7
2.1
–1.3
–3.0
–1.6
–3.0
–3.8
Somalia
–3.2
–9.7
–4.7
–7.1
–8.6
–8.9
–9.1
–9.5
–8.7
–9.6
–10.3
Sudan1
–13.9
–15.2
–16.6
–7.5
–11.3
–3.8
–3.3
–8.1
–4.5
–10.3
–9.0
Syria1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
–4.9
–2.2
4.3
8.2
15.3
4.8
6.1
16.6
6.3
2.5
–2.0
Tunisia
–10.8
–8.1
–6.0
–6.0
–9.0
–2.3
–1.6
–2.8
–4.2
–5.8
–4.8
Turkmenistan
7.4
3.4
–1.4
4.6
9.7
5.4
4.7
3.3
3.7
1.6
–1.3
United Arab Emirates
9.4
8.6
5.9
11.4
13.0
14.1
15.4
15.3
11.4
11.4
9.0
Uzbekistan
–5.9
–4.8
–4.3
–6.0
–3.0
–7.3
–4.7
–3.9
–1.3
–3.4
–4.5
West Bank and Gaza1
–13.2
–10.4
–12.3
–9.8
–10.6
–12.5
–18.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Yemen1
–33.1
–32.3
–40.3
–56.1
–40.6
–18.3
–10.7
–6.7
–8.1
–8.0
–7.8
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
140
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2031
Sub-Saharan Africa
–1.8
–2.5
–2.4
–0.7
–1.9
–2.4
–1.3
–0.9
–0.6
–1.1
–0.9
Angola
6.4
5.4
1.3
10.1
8.5
3.7
5.3
0.4
2.2
1.0
0.6
Benin
–4.5
–3.9
–1.7
–4.2
–5.7
–8.2
–6.0
–5.7
–5.0
–4.9
–4.0
Botswana
0.4
–6.9
–9.8
–1.8
–0.6
1.5
–4.2
3.7
–1.9
–1.4
–2.4
Burkina Faso
–4.2
–3.3
4.2
0.4
–7.5
–5.1
–3.5
6.7
8.6
8.4
5.5
Burundi
–12.8
–11.6
–11.2
–12.6
–16.8
–14.8
–8.6
–6.1
–5.5
–5.3
–4.8
Cabo Verde
–4.8
0.2
–15.4
–12.1
–3.5
–2.7
3.9
3.6
–0.4
–1.2
–2.3
Cameroon
–3.5
–4.3
–3.7
–4.0
–3.4
–4.1
–3.3
–3.8
–5.1
–5.8
–3.6
Central African Republic
–7.2
–4.8
–7.6
–12.4
–12.9
–8.2
–9.1
–3.8
–3.4
–3.6
–5.4
Chad
–4.0
–3.0
–2.5
–0.5
6.3
1.6
1.4
0.2
0.8
0.3
1.7
Comoros
–3.0
–3.5
–1.8
–0.3
–0.4
–1.5
–2.3
–2.9
–4.2
–4.4
–3.0
Democratic Republic of the Congo
–3.6
–3.5
–2.3
–1.0
–3.7
–5.3
–4.2
–3.7
–2.0
–1.6
–1.7
Republic of Congo
18.5
11.7
12.6
12.8
17.0
–5.0
–3.0
–5.9
–6.0
–5.8
–4.3
Côte d’Ivoire 
–3.9
–2.2
–3.1
–3.9
–7.6
–8.0
–4.5
–1.1
–1.1
–3.1
–2.5
Equatorial Guinea
–2.7
–7.5
–0.8
5.7
6.6
0.9
–0.6
–3.0
–1.6
–2.4
–3.3
Eritrea1
15.5
13.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eswatini
1.4
3.8
6.8
2.6
–2.7
2.2
1.6
–0.6
–1.8
–0.5
0.9
Ethiopia
–6.5
–5.3
–4.6
–3.2
–4.3
–2.9
–4.2
–0.9
–2.4
–1.9
–2.6
Gabon
7.1
4.6
–0.5
3.3
8.8
3.0
1.7
–3.1
–4.3
–5.5
–6.6
The Gambia
–9.5
–6.1
–5.8
–4.2
–4.2
–5.4
–6.5
–4.9
–5.1
–4.1
–2.3
Ghana
–3.0
–2.2
–2.5
–2.8
–2.3
–0.8
1.8
7.9
10.1
9.5
4.9
Guinea
–18.5
–15.5
–16.1
4.1
–5.7
–9.7
–14.7
–22.3
–3.6
0.1
–1.4
Guinea-Bissau
–3.5
–8.5
–2.6
–0.8
–8.6
–8.6
–7.4
–6.2
–6.3
–5.1
–4.0
Kenya
–4.0
–2.2
–3.7
–5.1
–5.0
–3.6
–2.3
–2.7
–4.1
–3.7
–3.2
Lesotho
–7.0
–6.3
–5.7
–9.1
–14.0
–0.8
2.1
–3.3
–3.4
–2.3
–0.1
Liberia
–20.4
–19.5
–23.9
–13.0
–15.9
–20.1
–8.1
–6.3
–12.0
–11.1
–14.3
Madagascar
0.7
–2.3
–5.4
–4.9
–5.4
–4.0
–5.3
–5.8
–8.0
–6.6
–5.4
Malawi
–12.0
–12.6
–14.1
–15.2
–18.2
–15.6
–18.5
–16.5
–15.4
–13.4
–9.4
Mali
–4.1
–6.3
–1.8
–6.4
–6.5
–6.5
–4.3
–0.8
–1.5
1.6
0.8
Mauritius
–3.8
–5.0
–8.9
–13.1
–11.1
–3.0
–6.4
–6.4
–6.9
–5.1
–2.3
Mozambique
–29.5
–16.1
–26.5
–21.2
–33.7
–10.6
–11.0
–14.2
–43.0
–39.6
–1.8
Namibia
–3.6
–1.8
3.9
–10.8
–12.6
–15.2
–14.2
–13.2
–15.7
–13.6
–12.1
Niger
–12.7
–12.2
–13.2
–14.1
–16.2
–13.9
–5.6
–5.0
–6.1
–4.0
–2.0
Nigeria1
1.2
–2.0
–2.7
–0.5
0.2
1.3
6.8
5.1
5.8
3.1
3.3
Rwanda
–10.1
–11.7
–11.7
–10.7
–9.0
–11.4
–12.1
–13.0
–13.4
–11.7
–6.0
São Tomé and Príncipe
–12.9
–12.8
–11.2
–13.1
–14.5
–12.3
–2.2
–6.3
–4.7
–5.1
–5.7
Senegal
–8.8
–7.9
–11.9
–12.1
–19.9
–19.8
–11.3
–5.6
–6.2
–5.8
–5.3
Seychelles
–2.4
–2.8
–12.5
–10.5
–7.6
–6.4
–7.9
–6.5
–7.8
–5.6
–4.6
Sierra Leone
–9.3
–7.8
–5.8
–7.3
–6.3
–9.5
–6.9
–5.1
–3.3
–2.9
–3.0
South Africa
–2.9
–2.6
2.0
3.7
–0.3
–1.1
–0.7
–0.5
–0.9
–1.4
–1.8
South Sudan
–12.3
–4.8
–31.7
–0.1
–7.9
–18.4
53.7
–4.0
3.2
4.8
6.2
Tanzania
–4.2
–2.3
–2.3
–3.5
–7.4
–3.8
–2.8
–2.4
–2.3
–2.1
–2.0
Togo
–2.6
–0.8
–0.3
–2.2
–3.3
–3.8
–2.4
–1.0
–3.2
–2.8
–1.7
Uganda
–6.1
–6.9
–9.5
–8.4
–8.6
–7.5
–7.3
–6.2
–3.9
–2.7
–1.4
Zambia
–1.3
0.5
11.8
11.9
3.7
–3.0
–4.4
–3.5
0.9
1.9
1.4
Zimbabwe
–2.6
2.3
1.7
0.7
0.6
0.3
1.0
4.0
3.7
3.5
1.5
1 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Eritrea, Lebanon, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Timor-Leste, Venezuela, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen in the “Country Notes” section of 
the Statistical Appendix.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
141
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
479.3
138.3
–16.0
428.6
–109.2
–108.3
149.8
9.2
–71.9
–70.3
Direct Investment, Net
–120.6
4.5
33.4
590.8
470.0
342.6
339.4
330.6
333.1
283.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
497.6
69.5
133.1
252.1
–750.9
–378.0
–345.8
–1,126.9
–488.3
–547.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
50.9
1.4
71.1
43.1
–6.8
–26.0
9.0
92.3
56.5
47.8
Other Investment, Net
–82.8
–6.6
–620.8
–1,097.3
384.2
–8.1
125.1
533.0
–211.7
–68.3
Change in Reserves
132.9
69.4
367.3
640.1
–206.0
–38.5
22.6
181.3
239.7
215.5
United States
Financial Account Balance 
–302.9
–558.4
–672.0
–825.6
–875.6
–1,073.0
–1,128.6
–1,212.2
–1,201.4
–1,229.6
Direct Investment, Net
–345.4
–201.1
145.3
–135.8
–28.0
–10.9
25.1
21.7
–79.2
–82.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
78.8
–244.9
–540.2
97.4
–438.3
–1,184.1
–961.1
–1,348.5
–710.1
–755.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
–20.4
–41.7
–5.1
–39.0
–80.7
–15.6
–42.3
–19.4
–32.1
–33.5
Other Investment, Net
–20.8
–75.4
–280.9
–862.2
–334.4
137.5
–152.4
131.3
–380.0
–357.6
Change in Reserves
5.0
4.7
9.0
114.0
5.8
0.0
2.1
2.6
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Financial Account Balance 
372.1
247.3
195.4
444.8
48.0
318.2
507.7
262.5
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
135.6
99.5
–221.7
509.0
263.5
39.4
205.9
204.3
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
273.8
–104.9
516.7
294.5
–268.2
–43.2
–45.8
–88.6
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
60.8
–9.8
22.0
75.3
106.7
9.4
13.8
1.3
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–127.9
255.9
–136.8
–588.7
–73.3
326.0
328.8
118.8
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
29.9
6.6
15.2
154.6
19.3
–13.4
5.1
26.6
. . .
. . .
Germany
Financial Account Balance
308.5
224.9
192.8
242.7
158.8
211.4
283.7
303.8
211.7
216.7
Direct Investment, Net
46.7
95.5
–31.4
86.7
64.2
26.1
32.8
17.0
29.3
29.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
177.4
82.9
19.7
237.7
14.6
2.3
34.0
60.2
25.3
32.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
26.8
23.0
106.3
58.3
47.0
38.7
45.5
45.3
32.8
32.8
Other Investment, Net
57.1
24.1
98.2
–177.7
28.4
143.3
173.0
180.3
124.4
121.9
Change in Reserves
0.5
–0.6
–0.1
37.7
4.7
1.0
–1.6
1.0
0.0
0.0
France
Financial Account Balance
–13.3
0.3
–70.0
1.8
–44.0
–39.4
–7.5
–41.4
–4.8
–0.2
Direct Investment, Net
61.0
31.0
10.5
21.0
–10.5
51.9
–10.6
2.7
15.6
19.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
7.8
–75.1
–33.2
11.0
–90.4
–129.6
55.1
93.5
92.4
78.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
–30.5
4.1
–27.2
21.0
–41.4
–18.0
–28.0
18.9
6.0
–1.0
Other Investment, Net
–63.8
37.1
–24.7
–78.2
96.2
78.1
–25.6
–161.0
–124.2
–102.5
Change in Reserves
12.3
3.2
4.6
27.0
2.0
–21.7
1.5
4.5
5.5
5.9
Italy
Financial Account Balance
44.6
61.6
85.6
54.3
–8.1
36.8
56.1
30.4
18.5
33.4
Direct Investment, Net
–3.6
4.0
23.9
31.2
–14.3
–11.5
18.9
12.4
–3.3
–3.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
157.1
–55.7
133.5
149.7
178.7
–25.8
–85.3
–25.5
–0.8
7.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
–3.3
3.0
–2.9
–0.2
12.2
–4.5
3.6
–3.4
–1.5
–0.5
Other Investment, Net
–108.7
106.7
–73.4
–150.7
–186.8
75.6
116.6
44.9
24.0
30.0
Change in Reserves
3.1
3.6
4.6
24.5
2.1
3.0
2.3
2.0
0.0
0.0
Spain
Financial Account Balance
36.7
30.0
12.1
30.6
19.5
58.7
90.8
66.1
73.2
47.6
Direct Investment, Net
–21.2
10.4
18.8
–13.7
0.9
3.8
28.9
30.9
33.0
33.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
28.3
–56.7
87.8
44.5
29.7
–24.8
–6.4
33.8
36.2
34.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.1
–6.2
–8.1
1.0
2.1
–7.1
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Investment, Net
28.1
81.7
–86.0
–13.4
–17.9
80.3
65.6
1.5
4.1
–21.0
Change in Reserves
2.6
0.8
–0.4
12.2
4.7
6.5
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
142
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Japan
Financial Account Balance
183.9
228.3
132.2
153.3
53.1
174.7
166.2
203.1
164.2
173.9
Direct Investment, Net
134.6
218.9
87.5
174.7
126.7
176.5
186.1
171.6
168.3
164.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
92.2
87.4
38.5
–198.3
–142.6
195.3
93.0
–107.1
–41.8
–26.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.9
3.2
7.8
19.9
38.0
44.6
29.1
38.7
34.1
36.9
Other Investment, Net
–67.9
–106.7
–12.4
94.1
78.4
–271.5
–77.7
62.9
–7.8
–12.7
Change in Reserves
24.0
25.5
10.9
62.8
–47.4
29.8
–64.4
37.0
11.5
11.5
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
–124.1
–91.4
–90.1
–46.8
–74.5
–105.9
–124.3
–130.8
–150.5
–146.6
Direct Investment, Net
–4.9
–42.2
–140.4
31.4
51.2
15.0
–59.0
8.0
8.5
8.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–357.8
36.8
38.9
–264.5
–44.5
224.7
–43.7
–217.2
–231.4
–242.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
10.3
2.5
33.1
–37.5
–59.8
1.3
–13.6
7.0
7.4
7.8
Other Investment, Net
203.4
–87.4
–18.4
199.4
–20.1
–342.2
–5.0
62.0
58.4
71.8
Change in Reserves
24.8
–1.1
–3.3
24.4
–1.3
–4.6
–3.0
9.3
6.5
7.2
Canada
Financial Account Balance
–35.8
–37.9
–34.3
4.4
–8.2
–12.2
–15.3
–15.5
–6.1
–10.1
Direct Investment, Net
20.4
26.9
18.1
44.5
37.8
47.9
26.4
–12.4
53.6
27.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
3.4
–1.6
–67.7
–43.2
–115.4
14.2
–58.9
12.5
–37.4
–58.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–58.2
–63.3
14.0
–17.1
58.7
–81.3
11.7
–16.5
–22.3
20.5
Change in Reserves
–1.5
0.1
1.3
20.2
10.6
7.0
5.4
0.9
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
357.1
318.7
392.6
622.3
498.5
500.3
612.2
649.2
686.9
706.6
Direct Investment, Net
36.7
–35.2
68.7
–35.2
–1.8
35.7
–23.5
–25.8
5.2
–13.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
363.3
312.8
281.0
492.7
316.9
442.3
603.6
439.7
411.3
417.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
23.3
14.1
–16.4
–9.8
29.7
–31.1
9.1
9.2
9.2
4.7
Other Investment, Net
–117.3
–4.1
–264.1
–80.4
351.2
113.2
–53.1
111.5
53.1
108.1
Change in Reserves
51.3
32.5
324.9
256.5
–196.8
–58.2
77.8
115.7
209.3
191.1
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Financial Account Balance
–272.4
–145.7
39.2
208.8
546.1
186.1
384.9
567.9
573.1
486.8
Direct Investment, Net
–364.9
–345.1
–311.2
–487.8
–247.2
–132.2
–125.1
–197.8
–265.5
–337.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–108.8
–77.3
–11.4
118.6
507.4
203.6
264.6
532.4
194.9
301.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
–5.0
. . .
. . .
41.9
28.4
21.5
19.5
Other Investment, Net
92.8
99.8
251.6
65.4
166.8
–74.4
143.8
–14.8
–15.1
45.3
Change in Reserves
110.5
172.2
81.4
520.8
107.9
174.6
52.9
215.3
633.1
452.8
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
143
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
–261.9
–52.6
154.3
135.6
206.5
216.5
405.5
713.2
640.2
642.3
Direct Investment, Net
–168.2
–144.8
–164.1
–260.5
–64.6
113.4
86.3
–1.0
–43.7
–74.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–100.5
–71.3
–107.3
–20.7
309.0
38.5
216.2
492.0
139.6
292.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
4.7
–2.5
15.8
–2.3
18.3
21.2
34.5
25.1
25.1
25.5
Other Investment, Net
–18.5
69.3
241.4
143.9
–105.5
–32.6
121.6
131.9
121.0
113.3
Change in Reserves
21.1
97.7
168.3
277.2
50.3
75.1
–53.4
65.4
398.7
286.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
101.4
56.5
6.6
90.7
155.6
–25.9
–17.2
–90.0
–44.4
–70.3
Direct Investment, Net
–25.4
–49.9
–35.9
–39.6
–37.9
–30.3
–27.7
–24.6
–36.0
–44.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
8.1
–4.7
20.7
46.5
30.9
–17.5
–27.9
–16.6
–5.3
–23.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
–3.1
1.3
0.4
–4.6
–5.6
5.0
5.1
5.5
0.8
–0.9
Other Investment, Net
77.6
16.8
32.3
–35.0
140.9
–27.3
–1.5
–47.6
–72.5
–56.2
Change in Reserves
44.2
92.9
–10.8
123.3
27.2
44.2
34.8
–6.6
68.6
54.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
–166.1
–124.6
–13.4
–107.8
–150.8
–99.7
–97.2
–87.8
–76.3
–91.3
Direct Investment, Net
–147.7
–114.2
–94.4
–103.2
–123.3
–133.8
–125.3
–120.6
–135.9
–150.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–16.5
–2.0
–9.5
–16.4
12.5
24.2
15.2
24.0
–6.5
–8.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
4.0
4.9
5.7
2.0
2.3
–7.0
2.0
–2.0
–3.6
–3.8
Other Investment, Net
–17.0
19.3
69.4
–40.9
–24.6
15.4
2.6
–51.0
21.2
27.4
Change in Reserves
11.0
–32.4
15.5
50.8
–17.8
1.3
8.2
61.5
48.3
44.0
Middle East and Central Asia
Financial Account Balance
92.1
29.8
–88.0
106.6
389.0
157.8
111.5
48.2
57.7
23.5
Direct Investment, Net
–11.0
–8.3
–9.4
–22.1
–4.0
–40.4
–18.3
–10.5
–1.5
–10.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
5.4
19.2
82.4
67.6
153.5
161.4
69.3
54.0
71.3
46.8
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
75.1
7.1
–83.2
14.3
186.5
–18.7
–4.2
–73.6
–106.0
–68.6
Change in Reserves
29.3
9.9
–84.4
47.7
57.4
58.8
57.6
73.8
89.8
52.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
–38.0
–54.7
–20.3
–16.3
–54.3
–62.6
–17.6
–15.6
–4.1
–17.3
Direct Investment, Net
–12.5
–27.9
–7.4
–62.3
–17.5
–41.2
–40.1
–41.1
–48.3
–57.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–5.3
–18.5
2.3
41.5
1.5
–2.9
–8.1
–20.9
–4.3
–5.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
–0.6
0.2
0.2
–0.3
1.1
–2.5
–0.4
–0.5
–0.4
–0.4
Other Investment, Net
–24.4
–12.6
–8.3
–16.9
–30.3
–11.3
25.3
25.6
21.3
29.6
Change in Reserves
4.9
4.1
–7.1
21.8
–9.2
–4.7
5.7
21.2
27.6
16.3
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
144
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
160.4
63.0
–53.8
158.1
470.7
185.0
191.3
111.4
152.0
114.7
Direct Investment, Net
17.4
6.1
6.5
–7.5
26.0
–21.5
40.7
15.1
29.6
16.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
6.1
17.3
81.2
83.3
119.0
151.3
72.0
50.8
72.2
52.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
104.4
27.3
–61.7
34.5
250.6
2.6
26.2
–11.8
–49.5
–6.5
Change in Reserves
38.8
11.5
–87.0
50.2
79.6
55.6
45.5
53.0
95.8
48.3
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
–432.7
–208.7
92.9
50.8
75.4
1.1
193.6
456.5
421.1
372.1
Direct Investment, Net
–382.3
–351.2
–317.6
–480.3
–273.2
–110.7
–165.8
–213.0
–295.1
–354.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–114.9
–94.5
–92.7
35.3
388.4
52.3
192.6
481.7
122.6
249.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
5.0
3.9
22.1
–5.1
16.1
16.8
41.3
28.2
22.0
20.5
Other Investment, Net
–11.6
72.5
313.3
30.9
–83.8
–77.0
117.7
–2.9
34.4
51.8
Change in Reserves
71.7
160.8
168.4
470.6
28.4
119.1
7.4
162.3
537.3
404.5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
–360.8
–298.7
–119.3
–294.7
–426.3
–285.0
–275.7
–296.9
–369.6
–406.2
Direct Investment, Net
–286.6
–273.3
–230.3
–285.6
–290.6
–269.7
–296.8
–274.3
–312.4
–355.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–40.2
–37.1
–56.4
–22.0
74.2
–39.0
–40.6
–10.0
–32.3
–58.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
4.9
5.0
6.9
27.0
17.4
11.1
9.8
Other Investment, Net
–26.5
–68.3
34.4
–198.3
–163.0
–131.9
–41.1
–153.1
–171.1
–140.0
Change in Reserves
–7.5
81.0
125.3
206.9
–51.3
148.1
75.3
122.8
135.0
138.3
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears  
and/or Rescheduling  
during 2020–24
Financial Account Balance
–43.6
–47.7
–28.9
–38.8
–40.2
–43.1
–36.7
–49.9
–68.0
–75.8
Direct Investment, Net
–24.7
–32.5
–22.3
–33.8
–22.3
–35.6
–77.1
–47.7
–48.8
–60.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–21.4
–17.1
4.2
–22.9
30.7
5.6
5.8
–3.5
2.9
–2.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
0.4
1.7
10.2
4.6
–26.5
–23.7
15.1
–41.0
–55.1
–44.2
Change in Reserves
2.4
0.0
–20.0
13.0
–21.6
10.3
19.3
38.7
33.1
31.7
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance
206.9
–7.4
23.2
637.4
436.8
77.8
534.8
577.1
501.2
416.5
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available 
because of data constraints.
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
145
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2008–17
2012–19
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028–31
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.2
0.6
0.2
0.8
–0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
Current Account Balance
0.2
0.6
0.3
0.7
–0.5
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
Savings
21.8
22.7
22.8
23.7
23.1
22.2
22.0
22.1
22.3
22.4
22.4
Investment
21.7
22.1
22.7
23.0
23.6
22.8
22.3
22.4
22.5
22.5
22.4
Capital Account Balance
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.6
–2.2
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.4
–4.0
–3.6
–3.7
–3.6
–3.6
Current Account Balance
–2.6
–2.1
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.3
–4.0
–3.6
–3.7
–3.6
–3.6
Savings
17.4
19.0
18.2
17.6
18.2
17.0
16.5
16.8
17.7
17.9
17.5
Investment
20.1
21.0
21.4
21.4
22.0
21.6
21.5
21.4
21.4
21.5
21.1
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.2
2.5
1.9
3.1
0.9
2.0
2.8
1.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
1.2
2.5
1.8
2.7
–0.2
1.7
2.7
1.6
1.3
1.5
1.8
Savings
22.6
23.7
24.4
26.4
24.8
25.0
24.8
24.4
24.0
24.1
24.5
Investment
20.6
20.6
22.0
22.8
23.9
22.4
21.4
21.9
21.9
21.8
22.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.4
1.1
0.3
0.1
0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
6.9
7.7
6.0
6.8
3.3
4.9
5.3
3.8
3.9
3.8
3.8
Current Account Balance
7.0
7.8
6.3
6.9
3.8
5.5
5.8
4.4
3.9
3.8
3.8
Savings
26.9
28.1
28.0
29.6
27.1
27.5
27.3
26.3
25.4
25.4
25.6
Investment
19.9
20.3
21.7
22.7
23.3
22.0
21.5
21.9
21.5
21.6
21.8
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
–0.5
–0.6
–0.5
–0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.8
–0.6
–2.0
0.6
–1.0
–0.8
0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.6
Current Account Balance
–0.8
–0.6
–2.1
0.3
–1.4
–1.0
0.1
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
0.4
Savings
21.1
21.4
20.8
23.7
22.6
21.9
21.6
21.6
21.0
20.9
21.3
Investment
21.9
22.0
22.8
23.4
24.0
23.0
21.5
22.1
21.3
21.1
20.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.1
1.9
3.8
2.1
–1.3
1.0
1.1
1.3
0.7
1.2
1.9
Current Account Balance
–0.2
1.8
3.8
2.0
–1.8
0.2
1.1
1.2
0.6
1.1
1.9
Savings
18.7
19.6
21.7
24.0
22.8
23.3
23.3
23.5
23.8
24.3
25.4
Investment
18.8
17.8
17.9
22.0
24.6
23.1
22.3
22.2
23.2
23.2
23.6
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.5
0.8
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.3
2.4
1.2
1.6
1.3
3.9
4.3
3.5
3.5
2.2
1.7
Current Account Balance
–0.7
2.0
0.8
0.8
0.4
2.7
3.2
2.9
2.2
1.9
1.6
Savings
20.0
21.2
21.4
22.6
23.1
23.9
24.4
24.4
24.0
23.6
23.1
Investment
20.7
19.2
20.6
21.9
22.7
21.1
21.2
21.5
21.8
21.7
21.5
Capital Account Balance
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.9
0.9
1.1
1.1
0.6
1.3
0.2
0.2
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.4
2.5
2.9
3.7
2.0
3.5
4.5
4.8
3.8
3.8
3.9
Current Account Balance
2.5
2.5
2.9
3.8
2.0
3.6
4.5
4.8
3.8
3.9
4.0
Savings
28.0
28.9
29.8
31.1
30.3
31.3
32.2
32.6
32.0
32.0
31.9
Investment
25.5
26.3
26.9
27.3
28.3
27.8
27.7
27.7
28.2
28.1
27.9
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.8
–4.1
–2.9
–0.9
–2.0
–3.8
–3.1
–3.3
–3.5
–3.3
–2.6
Current Account Balance
–3.7
–4.0
–2.7
–0.8
–1.9
–3.6
–3.0
–3.1
–3.4
–3.1
–2.5
Savings
13.7
14.1
15.5
17.8
17.2
15.4
15.9
15.4
16.1
16.7
17.7
Investment
17.5
18.1
18.3
18.6
19.1
18.9
18.9
18.6
19.5
19.8
20.1
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
146
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2008–17
2012–19
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028–31
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.7
–2.8
–2.0
0.0
–0.5
–0.7
–0.5
–1.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.3
Current Account Balance
–2.7
–2.8
–2.0
0.0
–0.5
–0.7
–0.5
–0.9
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
Savings
21.1
21.1
20.7
24.3
24.6
22.9
22.7
22.2
22.8
22.7
23.1
Investment
23.8
23.9
22.7
24.3
25.0
23.6
23.2
23.2
23.1
23.1
23.3
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.3
4.5
5.1
6.5
6.5
5.6
6.7
6.8
6.5
6.4
6.2
Current Account Balance
4.4
4.6
5.0
6.6
6.4
5.5
6.6
6.8
6.4
6.3
6.1
Savings
30.4
30.4
31.2
33.3
33.3
31.4
32.0
32.4
31.8
31.8
31.8
Investment
25.8
25.7
26.0
26.3
26.4
25.8
25.3
25.3
25.3
25.5
25.7
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.0
0.3
0.5
1.0
1.6
0.7
1.0
1.3
1.1
0.9
0.7
Current Account Balance
0.9
0.2
0.4
0.9
1.6
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
Savings
32.3
32.1
32.7
34.2
34.4
32.8
32.6
31.9
31.7
31.6
31.9
Investment
31.5
32.0
32.3
33.4
33.0
32.2
31.8
30.8
30.8
30.9
31.5
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.0
0.9
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.7
Current Account Balance
1.9
0.9
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.7
Savings
42.3
40.9
40.0
40.7
40.7
39.2
39.4
38.9
38.5
38.4
38.6
Investment
40.3
40.0
38.4
39.5
39.4
38.2
37.8
36.3
36.3
36.3
36.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.3
0.4
0.6
2.0
2.8
–0.1
0.2
–0.9
–0.7
–1.0
–0.8
Current Account Balance
–0.5
0.2
0.0
1.6
2.7
–0.4
–0.1
–1.2
–1.2
–1.3
–1.1
Savings
23.9
24.7
24.7
27.0
29.2
26.6
25.5
24.8
25.8
25.5
25.9
Investment
24.3
24.4
24.6
25.4
26.4
26.8
25.6
25.9
26.9
26.7
26.9
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.2
0.2
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.2
–2.6
–0.1
–1.9
–2.3
–1.3
–1.2
–1.1
–0.9
–1.0
–1.0
Current Account Balance
–2.2
–2.6
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–1.1
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.0
Savings
19.1
17.7
17.8
18.7
18.1
18.2
18.4
17.8
18.1
18.3
18.7
Investment
21.4
20.4
18.0
20.6
20.5
19.4
19.5
19.0
19.0
19.3
19.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Middle East and Central Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.8
2.5
–3.4
2.8
7.5
3.5
1.9
0.7
1.0
0.4
–0.2
Current Account Balance
4.7
2.4
–3.4
3.0
7.8
3.7
2.0
0.7
1.1
0.4
–0.2
Savings
33.2
30.0
23.0
29.0
33.7
31.3
29.0
27.6
27.5
26.8
26.2
Investment
28.3
27.2
26.0
26.1
26.4
28.0
27.5
27.7
27.1
27.5
27.9
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.3
–2.2
–2.0
–0.4
–1.7
–2.0
–0.8
–0.5
–0.3
–0.7
–0.7
Current Account Balance
–1.9
–2.6
–2.4
–0.7
–1.9
–2.4
–1.3
–0.9
–0.6
–1.1
–1.0
Savings
17.7
17.3
18.5
19.6
18.4
17.2
17.7
17.7
19.3
19.0
19.2
Investment
19.4
19.7
20.8
20.2
20.2
19.6
18.8
18.7
20.0
20.1
20.3
Capital Account Balance
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
147
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2008–17
2012–19
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028–31
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
6.0
3.7
–3.0
4.7
10.2
5.2
4.4
2.6
3.2
2.3
1.7
Current Account Balance
6.0
3.8
–2.9
5.0
10.5
5.4
4.5
2.6
3.3
2.4
1.8
Savings
32.9
30.1
23.7
30.9
35.7
32.8
32.0
30.3
30.8
29.7
28.6
Investment
26.6
25.9
26.4
26.2
25.7
27.9
28.1
28.4
28.2
28.5
28.6
Capital Account Balance
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.1
–0.3
0.9
0.6
0.5
0.1
0.6
1.2
0.9
0.7
0.6
Current Account Balance
0.0
–0.4
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.5
1.1
0.8
0.7
0.5
Savings
32.2
32.3
33.6
34.6
34.3
32.8
32.6
32.0
31.8
31.8
32.2
Investment
32.2
32.7
32.8
34.1
33.8
32.6
32.1
31.0
31.0
31.1
31.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.4
–2.4
–0.7
–1.8
–2.6
–1.4
–1.3
–1.4
–1.7
–1.7
–1.5
Current Account Balance
–2.7
–2.6
–1.0
–2.0
–2.7
–1.5
–1.5
–1.6
–1.9
–1.9
–1.7
Savings
22.9
22.5
23.2
23.8
23.6
23.8
23.7
23.2
23.1
23.3
24.1
Investment
25.5
25.1
24.1
25.7
26.2
25.2
25.2
24.9
25.1
25.2
25.7
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.6
–4.2
–2.0
–2.3
–2.0
–2.4
–2.2
–2.8
–3.3
–3.5
–2.2
Current Account Balance
–4.4
–4.7
–2.5
–2.7
–2.4
–2.9
–3.1
–3.1
–3.7
–3.8
–2.5
Savings
20.3
19.5
18.4
18.6
18.3
16.5
15.1
14.8
15.0
14.9
16.5
Investment
24.9
24.4
20.5
20.9
20.3
19.1
17.8
18.5
19.0
18.9
19.3
Capital Account Balance
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.9
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.9
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.3
Current Account Balance
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.3
Savings
25.7
26.4
26.7
28.0
27.9
26.6
26.4
26.1
26.2
26.3
26.5
Investment
25.3
25.9
26.4
27.2
27.5
26.6
26.2
25.8
25.9
26.0
26.3
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted 
by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’ 
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of 
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to 
the current account balance (CAB) (S – I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In 
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
148
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Reference Forecast
Projections
Averages
Averages
2008–17
2018–27
2024
2025
2026
2027
2024–27
2028–31
Annual Percent Change
World Real GDP
3.3
3.1
3.4
3.4
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.1
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.8
1.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.0
3.9
4.5
4.4
3.9
4.2
4.2
4.0
Memorandum
Potential Output
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Major Advanced Economies
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.4
World Trade, Volume1
3.2
2.9
3.7
5.1
2.8
3.8
3.8
3.1
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.4
2.6
2.2
4.7
2.6
3.1
3.1
2.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.3
6.0
5.7
2.7
4.9
4.8
4.1
Exports
Advanced Economies
2.8
2.3
2.1
3.7
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.8
3.9
6.6
7.4
3.5
5.4
5.7
4.0
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
0.1
0.2
0.8
0.6
–1.0
0.4
0.2
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.0
–0.3
0.2
–0.7
–1.5
–1.2
–0.8
–0.2
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
0.1
1.8
1.2
1.1
1.4
0.2
1.0
0.5
Oil
–2.9
3.7
–1.8
–14.4
21.4
–7.6
–1.5
–0.9
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
0.4
7.1
3.7
9.6
21.7
1.9
9.0
–0.1
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.5
2.9
2.6
2.5
2.8
2.2
2.5
2.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.7
6.2
8.0
5.2
5.5
4.6
5.8
3.9
Interest Rates 
Percent
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate2
0.8
–0.5
0.8
1.2
0.8
1.6
1.1
1.7
Current Account Balances
Percent of GDP
Advanced Economies
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.9
0.7
0.9
1.2
1.0
0.8
1.0
0.6
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
27.4
28.8
28.1
27.3
26.8
26.3
27.1
24.6
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.6
9.7
9.7
9.0
8.6
8.4
8.9
7.5
1 Data refer to trade in goods and services.
2 GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States.
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
149
World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors	
April 2015
World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices	
October 2015
World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long	
April 2016
World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies	
October 2016
World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?	
April 2017
World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, 
Long-Term Challenges	
October 2017
World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change	
April 2018
World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth	
October 2018
World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery	
April 2019
World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers	
October 2019
World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown	
April 2020
World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent	
October 2020
World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries	
April 2021
World Economic Outlook: Uncharted Territory: Recovery during a Pandemic	
October 2021
World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery	
April 2022
World Economic Outlook: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis	
October 2022
World Economic Outlook: A Rocky Recovery	
April 2023
World Economic Outlook: Growing Global Divergences	
October 2023
World Economic Outlook: Steady but Slow: Resilience amid Divergence	
April 2024
World Economic Outlook: Policy Pivot, Rising Threats	
October 2024
World Economic Outlook: A Critical Juncture amid Policy Shifts	
April 2025
World Economic Outlook: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim	
October 2025
World Economic Outlook: Global Economy in the Shadow of War	
April 2026
I. Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Tariff Scenarios	
October 2016, Scenario Box
World Growth Projections over the Medium Term	
October 2016, Box 1.1
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and	
April 2019, Box 1.2  
Commodity Prices
On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices:	
April 2019, Box 3.3  
A Model-Based Analysis
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and	
October 2019, Box 1.3 
Commodity Prices
Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19	
April 2020, Scenario Box
Alternative Scenarios	
October 2020, Scenario Box
Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights	
October 2020, Box 1.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
150
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Scenario Box	
April 2021
Downside Scenarios	
October 2021, Scenario Box
Scenario Box	
April 2022, Scenario Box
Risk Assessment around the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection	
October 2022, Box 1.3
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection	
April 2023, Box 1.3
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
October 2023, Box 1.2
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
April 2024, Box 1.2
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
October 2024, Box 1.2
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
April 2025, Box 1.1
Risk Assessment Surrounding the Baseline Projection	
October 2025, Box 1.2
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations	
October 2025, Commodity  
	
	 Special Feature
Risk Assessment Surrounding the Reference Forecast	
April 2026, Box 1.3
II. Historical Surveys
What Is the Effect of Recessions?	
October 2015, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Fragmentation in History: Many Shades of Gray	
October 2023, Box 3.2
III. Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011	
October 2014, Box 1.2
Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	
October 2014, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output	
April 2015, Chapter 3
Steady as She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output	
April 2015, Box 3.1
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries—	
April 2016, Box 1.2 
The Role of External Factors
Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market	
April 2016, Chapter 3 
Reforms in Advanced Economies
Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a	
April 2017, Chapter 3 
Complicated External Environment
Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2017, Box 2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence	
October 2017, Box 1.3 
over the Forecast Horizon
Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality	
April 2018, Chapter 3
Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?	
April 2018, Chapter 4
Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth	
April 2018, Box 1.3
Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.2
Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.3
The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown	
October 2018, Chapter 2
The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle	
October 2019, Box 1.4
Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can	
October 2019, Chapter 3 
Structural Reforms Play?
Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an	
April 2020, Chapter 2 
Era of Low Rates and High Debt
SELECTED TOPICS
151
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects	
October 2020, Chapter 2
An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns	
October 2020, Box 2.1
Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook	
April 2021, Box 1.1
After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage	
April 2021, Chapter 2
A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector	
April 2021, Box 2.1
Research and Innovation: Fighting the Pandemic and Boosting Long-Term Growth	
October 2021, Chapter 3
Dimming Growth Prospects: A Longer Path to Convergence	
October 2023, Box 1.1
The Uneven Economic Effects of Commodity Market Fragmentation	
October 2023, Box 3.3
Slowdown in Global Medium-Term Growth: What Will It Take to Turn the Tide?	
April 2024, Chapter 3
Allocative Efficiency: Concept, Examples, and Measurement	
April 2024, Box 3.1
The Potential Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Global Productivity and	
April 2024, Box 3.3 
Labor Markets
The Rise of the Silver Economy: Global Implications of Population Aging	
April 2025, Chapter 2
Explaining the Resilience of Global Growth in 2025	
April 2026, Box 1.1
IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment	
April 2015, Chapter 1, 
in an Era of Low Oil Prices	
	 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?	
April 2015, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the	
October 2015, Chapter 1, 
World Economy	
	 Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift	
October 2015, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath	
October 2015, Chapter 2 
of the Commodity Boom
The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon	
October 2015, Box 2.1
Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?	
October 2015, Box 2.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the	
April 2016, Chapter 1, 
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	
	 Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and	
October 2016, Chapter 1, 
Markets in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?	
October 2016, Box 3.3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and	
April 2017, Chapter 1, 
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2017, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?	
April 2018, Box 1.2
The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles	
April 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
October 2018, Box 1.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in	
October 2018, Chapter 1, 
Energy Demand	
	 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
October 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
October 2018, Chapter 3
Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 3.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
152
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Commodity Special Feature	
April 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Is Happening with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2021, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
House Prices and Consumer Price Inflation	
October 2021, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Inflation Scares	
October 2021, Chapter 2
Core Inflation in the COVID-19 Crisis	
October 2021, Box 2.2
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment	
April 2022, Special Feature
Dissecting Recent WEO Inflation Forecast Errors	
October 2022, Box 1.1
Market Power and Inflation during COVID-19	
October 2022, Box 1.2
Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers	
October 2022, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and the Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in	
April 2023, Chapter 1, 
Fossil Fuel Extraction	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Prices and Monetary Policy: High Frequency Analysis	
October 2023, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature 
	
	 Online Annex 1.1
Firms’ Inflation Expectations, Attention, and Monetary Policy Effectiveness	
October 2023, Box 2.1
Energy Subsidies, Inflation, and Expectations: Unpacking Euro Area Measures	
October 2023, Box 2.3
Fragmentation and Commodity Markets: Vulnerabilities and Risks	
October 2023, Chapter 3
Commodity Trade Tensions: Evidence from Tanker Traffic Data	
October 2023, Box 3.1
Market Developments and the Inflationary Effects of Metals Supply Shocks	
October 2024, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature
The Great Tightening: Insights from the Recent Inflation Episode	
October 2024, Chapter 2
Market Developments and the Impact of AI on Energy Demand	
April 2025, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature
Immigration and Inflation	
April 2025, Box 3.4
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations	
October 2025, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature
V. Fiscal Policy
Commodity Booms and Public Investment	
October 2015, Box 2.2
Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant	
October 2017, Chapter 4
The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions	
October 2017, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes	
April 2018, Box 1.5
Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries	
October 2019, Box 2.4
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt	
April 2023, Chapter 3
Market Reforms to Promote Growth and Debt Sustainability	
April 2023, Box 3.1
SELECTED TOPICS
153
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Fiscal Imprudence and Inflation Expectations: The Role of Monetary Policy Frameworks	
October 2023, Box 2.1
Industrial Policies in Emerging Markets: Old and New	
April 2024, Box 4.1
The Role of Price-Suppressing Policies	
October 2024, Box 2.2
The Impact of Immigration on Government Finances	
April 2025, Box 3.3
Defense Spending: Macroeconomic Consequences and Trade-Offs	
April 2026, Chapter 2
VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Box 2.2
A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Box 3.5
Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?	
October 2017, Box 1.2 
The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
October 2018, Box 2.3 
Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
October 2018, Box 3.2
Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy?	
April 2020, Box 2.1
Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help?	
April 2020, Chapter 3
Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings	
April 2020, Box 3.1
Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks?	
April 2020, Box 3.2
Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:	
April 2020, Box 1.3 
Assessment and Policy Options
Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19	
April 2021, Chapter 4
Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness	
April 2021, Box 4.1
Monetary Expansions and Inflationary Risks	
October 2021, Box 1.3
Policy Responses and Expectations in Inflation Acceleration Episodes	
October 2021, Box 2.3
Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects	
April 2022, Box 1.2
Private Sector Debt and the Global Recovery	
April 2022, Chapter 2
Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich, and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2022, Box 2.2
House Prices: Coming Off the Boil	
April 2023, Box 1.1
Monetary Policy: Speed of Transmission, Heterogeneity, and Asymmetries	
April 2023, Box 1.2
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy	
April 2023, Chapter 2
Spillovers to Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
April 2023, Box 2.3
Monetary and Fiscal Interactions	
April 2023, Box 3.2
Managing Expectations: Inflation and Monetary Policy	
October 2023, Chapter 2
Feeling the Pinch? Tracing the Effects of Monetary Policy through Housing Markets	
April 2024, Chapter 2
Weakening Interest Rate Pass-Through in Europe	
April 2024, Box 2.1
The Great Tightening: Insights from the Recent Inflation Episode	
October 2024, Chapter 2
The Role of Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies	
October 2024, Box 2.1
Emerging Market Resilience: Good Luck or Good Policies?	
October 2025, Chapter 2
IMF Arrangements and Emerging Market Resilience	
October 2025, Box 2.1
Milestones in Developing Monetary Policy Frameworks	
October 2025, Box 2.2
Macroeconomic Effects of Undermining Central Bank Independence	
October 2025, Box 2.3
VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment	
April 2016, Box 3.2
Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
154
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects	
April 2018, Chapter 2
Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus	
April 2018, Box 2.1 
Advanced Economies
Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates	
April 2018, Box 2.4
Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil	
April 2018, Box 3.3
The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
October 2018, Box 2.1
The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:	
October 2018, Box 2.2 
The Case of Industrial Robots
Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies	
April 2019, Box 1.1
Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities	
April 2019, Box 1.3
Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in	
October 2019, Chapter 2 
Advanced Economies
Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities	
October 2019, Box 2.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration	
April 2020, Chapter 4
Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation	
April 2020, Box 4.1
Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.2
Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the	
April 2021, Chapter 3 
COVID-19 Shock
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples	
April 2022, Box 1.1
Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability	
April 2022, Box 2.1
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Wage Dynamics Post–COVID-19 and Wage Price Spiral Risks	
October 2022, Chapter 2
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States	
October 2022, Box 2.1
Distributional Implications of Medium-Term Growth Prospects	
April 2024, Box 3.2
Understanding the Social Acceptability of Structural Reforms	
October 2024, Chapter 3
Policies to Facilitate the Integration of Ukrainian Refugees into the European Labor Market:	
October 2024, Box 3.1 
Early Evidence
The Rise of the Silver Economy: Global Implications of Population Aging	
April 2025, Chapter 2
The Impact of AI on Older Workers	
April 2025, Box 2.3
VIII. Exchange Rate Issues
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?	
October 2015, Chapter 3
The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade	
October 2015, Box 3.1
Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains	
October 2015, Box 3.2
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
SELECTED TOPICS
155
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2015, Box 1.2
Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits	
October 2015, Box 1.2
Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies	
October 2015, Box 1.3
Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2016, Box 1.1
Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Chapter 2
Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2016, Box 2.1
The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization	
April 2016, Box 3.3
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?	
October 2016, Chapter 2
The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with	
April 2017, Box 2.3 
China’s Final Demand
Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and	
April 2017, Box 2.4 
Developing Economies
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters	
October 2017, Box 1.4
Remittances and Consumption Smoothing	
October 2017, Box 1.5
A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators	
April 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Services Trade	
April 2018, Box 3.2
Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2018, Box 4.3
Global Trade Tensions	
October 2018, Scenario Box
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?	
April 2019, Chapter 3
Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries	
April 2019, Box 3.2
Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia	
April 2019, Box 3.4
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs	
April 2019, Chapter 4
Gross versus Value-Added Trade	
April 2019, Box 4.1
Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
April 2019, Box 4.2
Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?	
April 2019, Box 4.3
The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S.–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models	
April 2019, Box 4.4
A No-Deal Brexit	
April 2019, Scenario Box
Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production	
October 2019, 
	
	 Scenario Box 1.1
Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario	
October 2019, 
	
	 Scenario Box 1.2
The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018	
October 2019, Box 1.2
Global Trade and Value Chains during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Chapter 4
Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Box 4.1
The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data	
April 2022, Box 4.2
Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France	
April 2022, Box 4.3
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2023, Box 2.2
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment	
April 2023, Chapter 4
Rising Trade Tensions	
April 2023, Box 4.1
Balance Sheet Exposure to Fragmentation Risk	
April 2023, Box 4.2
Geopolitical Tensions, Supply Chains, and Trade	
April 2023, Box 4.3
Fragmentation Is Already Affecting International Trade	
April 2024, Box 1.1
Trading Places: Real Spillovers from G20 Emerging Markets	
April 2024, Chapter 4
Capital Flows to G20 Emerging Markets and the Allocation Puzzle	
April 2024, Box 4.2
The Global Automotive Industry and the Shift to Electric Vehicles	
October 2024, Box 1.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
156
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
The Global Effects of Recent Trade Policy Actions: Insights from Multiple Models	
April 2025, Box 1.2
Enhancing Global Financial Integration to Support Growth in Low-Income Countries	
April 2025, Box 2.1
Trade Reallocation in Response to Tariffs: Will This Time Be Different?	
October 2025, Box 1.1
Services Trade: An Emerging Engine for Global Growth	
April 2026, Box 1.2
Spillovers from Defense Spending	
April 2026, Box 2.2
X. Regional Issues
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions	
April 2018, Box 2.3
Support or Distort: Evaluating National State Aid in Europe	
October 2025, Box 3.2
Dealing with Postconflict Stabilization: Lessons from African Experiences	
April 2026, Box 3.2
XI. Country-Specific Analyses
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade	
October 2014, Box 3.1
Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?	
October 2015, Box 3.3
The Japanese Experience with Deflation	
October 2016, Box 3.2
Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas	
April 2018, Box 2.2
Immigration and Wages in Germany	
April 2020, Box 4.2
The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean	
April 2020, Box 4.3
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States	
October 2022, Box 2.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
China’s Monetary Policy and the Housing Market	
April 2024, Box 2.2
Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on Misallocation	
October 2025, Box 3.1
Scaling Up Defense Spending: The Case of Poland	
April 2026, Box 2.1
Wartime Economic Management in Ukraine	
April 2026, Box 3.1
XII. Climate Change Issues
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?	
October 2017, Chapter 3
The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones	
October 2017, Box 3.1
The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis	
October 2017, Box 3.2
Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies	
October 2017, Box 3.3
Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets	
October 2017, Box 3.4
Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution	
October 2017, Box 3.5
Mitigating Climate Change	
October 2017, Box 3.6
The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies	
April 2019, Box 3.1
What’s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions?	
October 2019, Box 1.SF.1
Mitigating Climate Change—Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies	
October 2020, Chapter 3
Glossary	
October 2020, Box 3.1
Zooming in on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization	
October 2020, Box 3.2
Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters	
April 2021, Box 1.2
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
Clean Tech and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1 
	
	 Special Feature
SELECTED TOPICS
157
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Near-Term Macroeconomic Impact of Decarbonization Policies	
October 2022, Chapter 3
Near-Term Implications of Carbon Pricing: A Review of the Literature	
October 2022, Box 3.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
Decarbonizing the Power Sector While Managing Renewables’ Intermittence	
October 2022, Box 3.3
The Natural Rate of Interest and the Green Transition	
April 2023, Box 2.1
The Global Automotive Industry and the Shift to Electric Vehicles	
October 2024, Box 1.1
XIII. Special Topics
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up	
October 2015, Box 2.3 
Human Development?
Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms	
April 2016, Box 3.1
Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method	
April 2016, Box 3.4
A Global Rush for Land	
October 2016, Box 1.SF.1
Conflict, Growth, and Migration	
April 2017, Box 1.1
Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity	
April 2017, Box 1.2
Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Cases of Brazil, Russia, India,	
April 2017, Box 2.1 
China, and South Africa
Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview	
April 2017, Box 3.1
 The Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation	
April 2017, Box 3.2
Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World	
April 2017, Box 3.3
Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income	
April 2017, Box 3.4
Smartphones and Global Trade	
April 2018, Box 1.1
Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?	
April 2018, Box 1.4
The Changing Service Content of Manufactures	
April 2018, Box 3.1
Patent Data and Concepts	
April 2018, Box 4.1
International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers	
April 2018, Box 4.2
Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation	
April 2018, Box 4.4
Increasing Market Power	
October 2018, Box 1.1
Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
October 2018, Box 1.5
Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
October 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects	
April 2019, Chapter 2
The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving	
April 2019, Box 2.1
Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power	
April 2019, Box 2.2
The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments, and Implications for the Global Outlook	
October 2019, Box 1.1
Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare	
October 2019, Box 2.1
The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures	
October 2019, Box 2.3
The Political Effects of Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.1
The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.2
The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate–Growth Differentials in	
April 2020, Box 2.2 
Advanced Economies
Social Unrest during COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.4
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
158
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the	
October 2020, Box 2.2 
United States
Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure	
April 2021, Box 2.2
Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle	
April 2021, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Annex 1.SF.1
Food Insecurity and Prices during COVID-19	
October 2021, Box 2.1
mRNA Vaccines and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.1
Intellectual Property, Competition, and Innovation	
October 2021, Box 3.3
The Role of Price-Suppressing Policies	
October 2024, Box 2.2
Understanding the Social Acceptability of Structural Reforms	
October 2024, Chapter 3
Policies to Facilitate the Integration of Ukrainian Refugees into the European Labor Market:	
October 2024, Box 3.1 
Early Evidence
Intergenerational Considerations in Pension Reforms	
April 2025, Box 2.2
Journeys and Junctions: Spillovers from Migration and Refugee Policies	
April 2025, Chapter 3
Natural Disasters, Conflict, and Forced Displacement	
April 2025, Box 3.1
The Demographic Dividends from Migration	
April 2025, Box 3.2
Industrial Policy: Managing Trade-Offs to Promote Growth and Resilience	
October 2025, Chapter 3
A Comparison between Industrial and Structural Policies	
October 2025, Box 3.3
Market Developments and the Economics of Rare Earths	
April 2026, Commodity  
	
	 Special Feature
The Macroeconomics of Conflicts and Recovery	
April 2026, Chapter 3
Policies for Refugees’ Return and Integration	
April 2026, Box 3.3
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
159
E
xecutive Directors broadly agreed with staff’s 
assessment of the global economic outlook, 
risks, and policy priorities. They concurred 
that the war in the Middle East presents 
a significant headwind to the global economy—
particularly for the conflict region, energy-importing 
and lower-income countries and Fragile and Conflict-
Affected States—through higher commodity prices, 
inflation expectations, and tighter financial conditions. 
Given the highly uncertain outlook, Directors 
appreciated the reference forecast and downside 
scenarios as a useful analytical framework to support 
preparedness across a range of possible outcomes, 
while helping to clarify the transmission channels 
and spillovers, the heterogeneous impact and policy 
tradeoffs across the membership, and the appropriate 
policy responses. They stressed that the likelihood of 
downside scenarios materializing depends critically on 
the duration, intensity and scope of the conflict.
Directors concurred that overall risks to global 
outlook are tilted to the downside and could be further 
amplified through interactions with each other and 
with pre-existing vulnerabilities. They considered that 
downside risks from further escalation of geopolitical 
tensions and supply chain disruptions, rising fiscal and 
financial vulnerabilities, potential fragilities linked to 
the AI investment boom, and erosion of institutions 
dominate over upside risks related to productivity 
gains from AI and possible renewed momentum in 
structural reforms. A reassessment of expectations 
regarding AI could lead to a decline in investment 
and trigger an abrupt financial market correction. 
Directors agreed that larger fiscal deficits and rising 
public debt, amid already eroded buffers, could place 
upward pressure on long-term interest rates and 
tighten financial conditions. They also noted that 
weakening institutions, including reduced central bank 
independence and monetary policy credibility, could 
de-anchor inflation expectations, particularly given 
renewed pressures from energy shocks.
Directors underscored the importance of preserving 
price stability. Central banks should be ready to act 
decisively in line with their mandates to prevent 
prolonged supply shocks from destabilizing medium-
to-long-term inflation expectations, while reserving 
the option to look through the shocks if they 
prove transitory and the monetary policy stance is 
already properly calibrated. Directors emphasized 
that transparent communication and strong central 
bank independence are critical for credibility. They 
acknowledged that the transmission of the shock will 
differ across countries, reflecting varying exposure to 
commodity markets and the region, the strength of the 
anchoring of inflation expectations, and the extent of 
foreign exchange depreciation. Where negative demand 
shocks emerge and activity falls below potential, a 
reduction in policy rates may be appropriate but only 
if risks to price stability remain contained. If imminent 
risk of excessive or disorderly exchange rate movements 
emerges, temporary foreign exchange intervention and 
capital flow managements measures may be warranted, 
alongside appropriate monetary and fiscal policy 
stances. 
Directors noted that financial stability risks remain 
elevated, reflecting high debt levels and greater 
rollover risks in core sovereign bond markets, a more 
price-sensitive investor base, a buildup of leverage 
across nonbank financial intermediaries (NBFIs) and 
derivative products, rising interconnectedness between 
banks and NBFIs, vulnerabilities in private credit, 
and growing market concentration risk in AI-related 
sectors. Increasingly uneven, debt-heavy capital flows 
and a strengthened sovereign-bank nexus are also risks 
to stability in EMDEs. Directors called on financial 
supervisors to enhance readiness by ensuring robust 
prudential oversight, adopting scenario analysis, 
The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the  
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on April 6, 2026.
IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK, 
APRIL 2026
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in the Shadow of War
160
International Monetary Fund | April 2026
strengthening stress testing, closing data gaps, and 
maintaining adequate capital, liquidity, and reserve 
buffers in line with international regulatory standards. 
Directors agreed on the urgency of rebuilding fiscal 
buffers and strengthening sustainability amid high 
debt and rising risks that could weaken growth and 
revenues and add to pressures on fiscal balances. They 
emphasized that where support is needed to protect 
vulnerable households from extreme external shocks, it 
should be temporary, targeted, and preferably delivered 
through existing social safety nets and within existing 
resource envelopes, while avoiding price distortions 
and broad-based measures that are costly and difficult 
to unwind. Directors stressed that many countries 
will need credible medium-term fiscal plans including 
stronger medium-term anchors, supported by revenue 
mobilization and improvements in spending efficiency, 
to ensure sustainability while creating space for long-
term spending needs, including defense. For countries 
facing tighter financing conditions, they underscored 
that credible consolidation and predictable rules remain 
essential for regaining market confidence. Directors also 
underscored the importance for low-income developing 
countries of domestic revenue mobilization and 
safeguarding critical social and development spending 
in the face of declining aid flows. 
Directors acknowledged the importance of structural 
reforms to strengthen medium-term growth and 
resilience. Investment in AI and digitalization can 
accelerate productivity and growth, together with 
measures to upskill the labor force and increase 
participation, improve the business climate, streamline 
regulations, enhance competition, and strengthen 
supply chain resilience. Accelerating energy transition 
would also support energy diversification and security. 
Directors also noted the importance of addressing 
domestic saving-investment imbalances that give 
rise to excessive external imbalances. Actions aimed 
at removing domestic distortions—through fiscal, 
structural, and targeted industrial policies—can 
simultaneously narrow imbalances while enhancing 
global output. 
Directors highlighted that international cooperation 
will be essential in addressing both the immediate 
threats from the Middle East conflict and longer-term 
challenges to growth and sustainability. They called 
on governments to cooperate to reduce trade policy 
uncertainty by re-anchoring trade in clear, predictable 
rules, including by reducing tariff and non-tariff 
barriers. Directors welcomed the Fund’s cooperation 
with the World Bank and the International Energy 
Agency for the assessment of the impact and policy 
responses to the crisis. They stressed the key role 
of a well-resourced Fund in assisting its member 
countries—especially those most affected by the shock 
from the war, including Fragile and Conflict-Affected 
States—through its tailored policy advice, lending, and 
capacity development assistance, drawing as needed 
on the lessons from the handling of recent crises. 
Directors reaffirmed the role of the Fund in promoting 
multilateral solutions in an evenhanded manner. A 
number of Directors also stressed the important role 
to be played by the Fund in supporting its member 
countries’ climate strategies. Directors called for 
continued efforts to strengthen the G20 Common 
Framework for Debt Treatments.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK	
APRIL 2026
IN THIS ISSUE:
CHAPTER 1
Global Prospects and Policies
CHAPTER 2
Defense Spending:  
Macroeconomic Consequences  
and Trade-Offs
CHAPTER 3
The Macroeconomics of Conflicts 
and Recovery
