WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
2022
APR
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
War Sets Back
the Global Recovery
WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
2022
APR
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
War Sets Back 
the Global Recovery
©2022 International Monetary Fund
 
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and 
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some 
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional 
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial 
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. | 
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
 
HC10.80	
ISBN 978-1-61635-942-3 (English Paper)
	
979-8-40020-525-5 (English ePub)
	
979-8-40020-530-9 (English Web PDF)
The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a 
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited 
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of 
the report on April 11, 2022. The views expressed in this publication are those of the 
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors 
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2022. World Economic Outlook: 
War Sets Back the Global Recovery. Washington, DC, April.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail: 
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services 
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
iii
CONTENTS
Assumptions and Conventions	
viii
Further Information	
x
Data	
xi
Preface	
xii
Foreword	
xiii
Executive Summary	
xvi
Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies	
1
War Slows the Recovery	
1
Fragmentation and Fragility Set to Slow Growth during 2022–23	
1
Forecast Revisions	
4
International Implications of the War in Ukraine	
8
Elevated Inflation Expected to Persist for Longer	
11
Rising Interest Rates: Implications for Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
13
Economic Slack to Narrow in the Medium Term; Significant Scarring Expected	
15
Risks Are Large and to the Downside	
17
Policies to Sustain the Recovery and Improve Medium-Term Prospects	
20
Scenario Box	
25
Box 1.1. The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples	
27
Box 1.2. Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects	
29
Special Feature: Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment	
31
References	
43
Chapter 2. Private Sector Debt and the Global Recovery	
45
Introduction	
45
Private Sector Leverage during the Pandemic	
47
Private Debt and the Business Cycle	
51
Countercyclical Policy Effects amid High Private Debt	
56
Conclusions and Policy Implications	
58
Box 2.1. Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability	
60
Box 2.2. Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich,  
and the Natural Interest Rate	
62
References	
64
Chapter 3. A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
67
Introduction	
67
Environmental Properties of Jobs: Definitions and Stylized Facts	
71
Environmental Properties of Job Transitions	
73
Labor Markets and Environmental Policies: Empirical and Model-Based Analyses	
75
Conclusions	
80
Box 3.1. The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
83
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
iv	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Box 3.2. A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
84
References	
85
Chapter 4. Global Trade and Value Chains during the Pandemic	
87
Introduction	
87
Drivers of Trade during the Pandemic	
90
International Spillovers from Pandemic Containment Policies	
91
Resilience in GVCs	
93
Policy Implications	
99
Box 4.1. Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic	
101
Box 4.2. The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data	
103
Box 4.3. Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France	
104
References	
105
Statistical Appendix	
109
Assumptions	
109
What’s New	
109
Data and Conventions	
110
Country Notes	
111
Classification of Countries	
113
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook  
Classification	
113
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in  
Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2021	
115
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup	
116
Table C. European Union	
116
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source  
of Export Earnings	
117
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position,  
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification 	
118
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods	
120
Table G. Key Data Documentation	
121
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies	
131
List of Tables	
136
Output (Tables A1–A4)	
137
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)	
144
Financial Policies (Table A8)	
149
Foreign Trade (Table A9)	
150
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)	
152
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)	
159
Flow of Funds (Table A14)	
163
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)	
166
World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics	
167
IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, April 2022	
177
Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections	
6
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at  
Market Exchange Rate Weights	
8
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
37
contents
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
v
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
38
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
39
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP,  
Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
40
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
41
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 	
42
Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor  
Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing  
Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of  
Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of  
Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of  
External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region:  
External Debt by Maturity 
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by  
Analytical Criteria: External Debt by Maturity 
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term  
Baseline Scenario: Selected Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators	
2
Figure 1.2. Inflation Trends	
2
Figure 1.3. Monetary and Financial Conditions	
3
Figure 1.4. Fiscal Stance, 2020–23	
3
Figure 1.5. New Confirmed COVID-19 Deaths	
4
Figure 1.6. International Cereal Prices	
8
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
vi	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Figure 1.7. Global Oil Intensity and Oil Revenue Share	
9
Figure 1.8. Trade Exposures to Russia and Ukraine, 2020	
9
Figure 1.9. Global Value Chain Participation, 2018	
10
Figure 1.10. Ratio of Banks’ Exposure to Russia to Total Assets, end-September 2021	
10
Figure 1.11. Changes in Inflation Drivers	
11
Figure 1.12. Core Inflation versus Private Domestic Demand	
12
Figure 1.13. Goods and Services Inflation	
13
Figure 1.14. Changes in Inflation Expectations: January 21–January 22	
13
Figure 1.15. Sovereign Spreads at Tipping Points	
14
Figure 1.16. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Vulnerabilities	
14
Figure 1.17. Medium-Term Prospects: Output and Employment	
16
Figure 1.18. Potential GDP	
16
Figure 1.19. Correlates of Projected Output Revisions to Vaccination	
17
Figure 1.20. Current Account and International Investment Positions	
17
Figure 1.21. Fraction of Countries with a Major Unrest Event	
18
Figure 1.22. Real Policy Rates	
21
Figure 1.23. Public External Debt	
23
Figure 1.24. Changes in Emissions in 2030 versus 2021 under NDCs and  
Warming Scenarios	
24
Scenario Figure 1.1. Downside Scenario	
26
Figure 1.1.1. Employment Rate and Labor Market Tightness	
27
Figure 1.1.2. Inactivity Rates	
28
Figure 1.1.3. United States Wage Growth and Tightness across Sectors	
28
Figure 1.2.1. Estimated Neutral Rates Since 1980	
29
Figure 1.2.2. Neutral Rate Factors	
30
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments	
31
Figure 1.SF.2. European Gas Inventory and Gas Price	
32
Figure 1.SF.3. Oil and Gas Investment as Share of World GDP	
33
Figure 1.SF.4. Price Elasticity of Global Oil and Gas Capital Expenditure	
33
Figure 1.SF.5. Climate Policy and Energy Transition Indicators	
34
Figure 1.SF.6. Counterfactuals for Oil and Gas Capital Expenditure	
35
Figure 1.SF.7. Oil Prices Rise in a Net Zero Emissions Scenario Driven by Supply  
Policies, Decline when Driven by Demand Policy	
35
Figure 1.SF.8. Production in High-Cost Regions Would Be under Pressure in  
Demand-Side Scenario, Uncertain in Supply-Side Scenario	
35
Figure 2.1. Rapidly Mounting Private Debt	
46
Figure 2.2. Advanced Economies: Aggregate Household Balance Sheets	
48
Figure 2.3. Correlation between Wealth and Income Inequality	
48
Figure 2.4. Change in Debt-to-Income Ratio by Income Decile in 2020	
49
Figure 2.5. Uneven COVID-19 Impact on Nonfinancial Corporations’ Revenue Growth	
50
Figure 2.6. Exposure to Contingent Liabilities Associated with Credit Guarantees  
(50 Percent Scenario)	
50
Figure 2.7. Heterogeneous Effect on Nonfinancial Corporation Balance Sheets	
51
Figure 2.8. Concentration of Nonfinancial Corporation Vulnerabilities	
52
Figure 2.9. Consumption and Investment Responses to Household and Nonfinancial  
Corporate Excess Credit	
53
Figure 2.10. Fiscal Position and Deleveraging	
54
Figure 2.11. Advanced Economies: Wealth Inequality and Deleveraging	
54
Figure 2.12. The Role of Vulnerable Firms	
55
Figure 2.13. The Role of Effective Insolvency Frameworks	
56
contents
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
vii
Figure 2.14. Output Sensitivity to Fiscal Consolidation as Function of Private Debt	
57
Figure 2.15. Effects of Macro Policy Tightening on Heterogeneous Households and Firms	
58
Figure 2.1.1. Effect of Income Inequality on the Sustainable Level of Debt	
60
Figure 2.1.2. Debt Denomination	
61
Figure 2.2.1. Saving by Income Group	
62
Figure 2.2.2. Absorption of Accumulated Saving	
63
Figure 3.1. Evolution of Average Carbon Emissions Intensity	
68
Figure 3.2. Cross-Country Distribution and Evolution of Green- and  
Pollution-Intensive Occupations and Carbon Emissions per Worker	
72
Figure 3.3. Sectoral Differences in the Distribution of Green, Pollution, and  
Emissions Intensities in Employment	
73
Figure 3.4. Environmental Properties of Jobs by Worker Characteristics	
73
Figure 3.5. Earnings and the Environmental Properties of Jobs	
74
Figure 3.6. Job Transition Rates and the Environmental Properties of Past Jobs	
74
Figure 3.7. Annual Probability among Job Switchers of Transitioning into a  
Green-Intensive or Neutral Job	
75
Figure 3.8. Estimated Effects of Environmental Policy Stringency	
76
Figure 3.9. Estimated Effects of Environmental Policy Stringency Conditional on  
Labor Market Features	
77
Figure 3.10. Model Simulations of the Green Economic Transformation with a  
Comprehensive Policy Package in an Advanced Economy	
79
Figure 3.11. Model Simulations of the Green Economic Transformation with a  
Comprehensive Policy Package in an Emerging Market Economy	
80
Figure 3.1.1. Geographic Distribution of Green and Pollution Intensities across US Counties	
83
Figure 3.2.1. Cross-Country Evolution of Green Hiring Rates and Job Postings	
84
Figure 4.1. Global Import Volume and Lockdown Stringency	
88
Figure 4.2. Trade Patterns around Global Recessions: Goods and Services Import Volume	
88
Figure 4.3. Imports of Commercial Services by Main Sectors	
88
Figure 4.4. Volatility of Trade in GVC-Intensive Industries versus Non-GVC-Intensive  
Industries Early in the Pandemic	
88
Figure 4.5. Average Forecast Errors of the Growth in Imports from the Import  
Demand Model	
90
Figure 4.6. Factors Associated with the Demand Model’s Forecast Errors for 2020	
91
Figure 4.7. Change in Imports and Partner Countries’ Lockdown Stringency	
92
Figure 4.8. Semielasticity of the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response  
Stringency Index	
93
Figure 4.9. Changes in Regions’ Market Shares of GVC-Related Products	
94
Figure 4.10. Room to Diversify the Sourcing of Intermediates	
96
Figure 4.11. Gains from Diversification Following a Supply Disruption in a Large  
Supplier Country	
97
Figure 4.12. Gains from Diversification under Shocks to Total Factor Productivity	
97
Figure 4.13. Gains from Substitutability Following a Supply Disruption in a  
Large Supplier Country	
98
Figure 4.14. Nontariff Barriers Index	
98
Figure 4.1.1. Global Goods Trade and Supply Chain Pressures	
101
Figure 4.1.2. Foreign Suppliers, Production, and Delivery Delays in the United States	
101
Figure 4.1.3. Trade in Automobiles and Semiconductors	
102
Figure 4.2.1. Response of Bilateral Import Growth to Exporter Lockdowns	
103
Figure 4.3.1. Impact of Supply Chain Upstreamness, Automation, and Inventories on  
Trade Adjustment	
104
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
viii	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook 
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during 
February 22, 2022 to March 22, 2022, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange 
rate mechanism II, which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that 
established policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary 
policies for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be 
$106.83 a barrel in 2022 and $92.63 a barrel in 2023; that the three-month government bond yield for the United 
States will average 0.9 percent in 2022 and 2.4 percent in 2023, for the euro area will average –0.7 percent in 
2022 and 0.0 percent in 2023, and for Japan will average 0.0 percent in 2022 and 0.1 percent in 2023; and 
that the 10-year government bond yield for the United States will average 2.6 percent in 2022 and 3.4 percent 
in 2023, for the euro area will average 0.4 percent in 2022 and 0.6 percent in 2023, and for Japan will average 
0.3 percent in 2022 and 0.4 percent in 2023. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, 
and the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would, in any event, be involved in the 
projections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through April 8, 2022.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
•	 . . .  to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
•	 –  between years or months (for example, 2021–22 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered, 
including the beginning and ending years or months; and 
•	 /  between years or months (for example, 2021/22) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
•	 “Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
•	 “Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 1 
percentage point).
•	 Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in 
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and 
government finance data for each country. 
•	 For some countries, the figures for 2021 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please 
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country.
What is new in this publication:
•	 For Ecuador, fiscal sector projections are excluded from publication for 2022–27 because of ongoing program 
review discussions.
•	 Ethiopia’s forecast data, which were previously omitted due to an unusually high degree of uncertainty, are now 
included.
•	 Fiji’s fiscal data and forecasts are now presented on a fiscal year basis.
•	 For Tunisia, projections are excluded from publication for 2023–27 because of ongoing technical discussions 
pending potential program negotiations.
•	 For Ukraine, all projections for 2022–27 except Real GDP are omitted due to an unusually high degree of 
uncertainty. Real GDP is projected through 2022.
Assumptions and Conventions
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
ix
•	 Venezuela redenominated its currency on October 1, 2021, by replacing 1,000,000 bolívares soberano (VES) 
with 1 bolívar digital (VED). 
•	 Beginning with the April 2022 WEO, the interest rate assumptions are based on the three-month and 10-year 
government bond yields, which replace the London interbank offered rates. See the above for more details.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
•	 If no source is listed in tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.
•	 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
•	 Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
•	 Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or 
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of 
the weighted group data.
•	 The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on maps do not imply, on the part of 
the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is 
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities 
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
x	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
FURTHER INFORMATION
Corrections and Revisions 
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the 
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are 
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and 
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.
Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/512000.
Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the 
IMF eLibrary at http://www.elibrary.imf.org/APR22WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at  
www.imf.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly:
Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
xi
This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compi-
lation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most 
frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histori-
cal data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context 
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each 
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural 
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF 
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a 
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International 
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their 
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a 
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are 
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF 
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and 
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum 
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Fax: (202) 623-6343
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum
DATA
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
xii	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
PREFACE
The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s 
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international 
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a 
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information 
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out 
in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department; Asia and Pacific Department; 
European Department; Middle East and Central Asia Department; and Western Hemisphere Department— 
together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and 
the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of 
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Petya 
Koeva Brooks, Deputy Director, Research Department, and Malhar Nabar, Division Chief, Research Department. 
Shekhar Aiyar, Division Chief, Research Department and Head of the Spillovers Task Force, supervised Chapter 4.
The primary contributors to this report are Silvia Albrizio, Jorge Alvarez, Philip Barrett, John Bluedorn, 
Christian Bogmans, Sonali Das, Niels-Jakob Hansen, Christoffer Koch, Toh Kuan, Ting Lan, Davide Malacrino, 
Adil Mohommad, Jean-Marc Natal, Diaa Noureldin, Andrea Pescatori, Andrea Presbitero, Ervin Prifti, Galen Sher, 
Ippei Shibata, Martin Stuermer, Marina Mendes Tavares, Nico Valckx, and Philippe Wingender.
Other contributors include Itai Agur, Cian Allen, Gavin Asdorian, Srijoni Banerjee, Eric Bang, Katharina 
Bergant, Rachel Brasier, Mariya Brussevich, Diego Cerdeiro, Shan Chen, Yaniv Cohen, Pablo Gonzalez 
Dominguez, Wenchuan Dong, Angela Espiritu, Rebecca Eyassu, Julia Estefania Flores, Francesco Grigoli, 
Jinjin He, Youyou Huang, Benjamin Hunt, Piyusha Khot, Christina Kolerus, Andras Komaromi, Siddharth 
Kothari, Eduard Laurito, Jungjin Lee, Daniel Leigh, Andrei Levchenko, Yang Liu, Rui Mano, Susanna Mursula, 
Yousef F. Nazer, Savannah Newman, Anh Dinh Minh Nguyen, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, 
Myrto Oikonomou, Chris Papageorgiou, Ilse Peirtsegaele, Clarita Phillips, Carlo Pizzinelli, Josef Platzer, 
Rafael Portillo, Evgenia Pugacheva, Yiyuan Qi, Max Rozycki, Marika Santoro, Alexandre Sollaci, Philip Stokoe, 
Nour Tawk, Robin Tietz, Nicholas Tong, Pauline Wibaux, Yarou Xu, Hannah Leheng Yang, Jiaqi Zhao, 
Canran Zheng, and Bryan Zou.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with assistance 
from Lucy Scott Morales, James Unwin, Michael Harrup, Nancy Morrison, Harold Medina, and TalentMEDIA 
Services.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, 
as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on April 11, 2022. However, estimates, 
projections, and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive 
Directors or to their national authorities.
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
xiii
G
lobal economic prospects have worsened 
significantly since our last World Economic 
Outlook forecast in January. At the time, 
we had projected the global recovery to 
strengthen from the second quarter of this year after 
a short-lived impact of the Omicron variant. Since 
then, the outlook has deteriorated, largely because 
of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine—causing a tragic 
humanitarian crisis in Eastern Europe—and the sanc-
tions aimed at pressuring Russia to end hostilities. 
This crisis unfolds while the global economy was on 
a mending path but had not yet fully recovered from 
the COVID-19 pandemic, with a significant diver-
gence between the economic recoveries of advanced 
economies and emerging market and developing ones. 
In addition to the war, frequent and wider-ranging 
lockdowns in China—including in key manufactur-
ing hubs—have also slowed activity there and could 
cause new bottlenecks in global supply chains. Higher, 
broader, and more persistent price pressures also led 
to a tightening of monetary policy in many coun-
tries. Overall risks to economic prospects have risen 
sharply and policy trade-offs have become ever more 
challenging. 
Beyond the immediate humanitarian impacts, the 
war will severely set back the global recovery, slow-
ing growth and increasing inflation even further. This 
report projects global growth at 3.6 percent in 2022 
and 2023—0.8 and 0.2 percentage points lower than 
in the January forecast, respectively. The downgrade 
largely reflects the war’s direct impacts on Russia and 
Ukraine and global spillovers. 
Both Russia and Ukraine are projected to experi-
ence large GDP contractions in 2022. The severe 
collapse in Ukraine is a direct result of the invasion, 
destruction of infrastructure, and exodus of its people. 
In Russia, the sharp decline reflects the impact of 
the sanctions with a severing of trade ties, greatly 
impaired domestic financial intermediation, and loss 
of confidence. 
The economic effects of the war are spreading far 
and wide—like seismic waves that emanate from the 
epicenter of an earthquake—mainly through com-
modity markets, trade, and financial linkages. Because 
Russia is a major supplier of oil, gas, and metals, and, 
together with Ukraine, of wheat and corn, the current 
and anticipated decline in the supply of these com-
modities has already driven their prices up sharply. 
Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia, Middle East 
and North Africa, and sub-Saharan Africa are most 
affected. The food and fuel price increases will hurt 
lower-income households globally—including in the 
Americas and Asia.
As Chapter 1 details, the war adds to the series of 
supply shocks that have struck the global economy 
over the course of the pandemic, contributing to more 
shortages beyond the energy and agricultural sectors. 
Through closely integrated global supply chains, pro-
duction disruptions in one country can very quickly 
cascade globally. Firms in Russia and Ukraine supply 
specialized inputs, and shortfalls in some of those 
inputs are already having impacts on European car 
manufacturers. Some countries in eastern Europe and 
central Asia have large direct trade and remittance links 
with Russia. Activity in those economies is expected 
to suffer. The displacement of more than 4 million 
Ukrainian people to neighboring countries, especially 
Poland but also Romania, Moldova, and Hungary, will 
also add to economic pressures in the region.
Even prior to the war, inflation had surged in many 
economies because of soaring commodity prices and 
pandemic-induced supply-demand imbalances. Some 
emerging markets and developed economies’ central 
banks, such as the US Federal Reserve and those in 
Latin America, had already come under pressure before 
the war, bringing forward the timing of their mon-
etary policy tightening. War-related supply shortages 
will greatly amplify those pressures, notably through 
increases in the price of energy, metals, and food. 
Although bottlenecks are expected to eventually ease 
as production elsewhere responds to higher prices and 
new capacity becomes operational, supply shortages in 
some sectors are expected to last into 2023. As a result, 
inflation is now projected to remain elevated for much 
longer than in our previous forecast, in both advanced 
and emerging market and developing economies.
FOREWORD
In many countries, inflation has become a central 
concern. In some advanced economies, including the 
United States and some European countries, it has 
reached its highest level in more than 40 years, in 
the context of tight labor markets. There is a rising 
risk that inflation expectations become de-anchored, 
prompting a more aggressive tightening response from 
central banks. In emerging market and developing 
economies, increases in food and fuel prices could 
significantly increase the risk of social unrest.
Immediately after the invasion, capital outflows 
increased markedly from emerging market and 
developing economies, tightening financial condi-
tions for vulnerable borrowers and net importers of 
commodities, and putting downward pressure on the 
currencies of the most exposed countries. So far, this 
repricing has been mostly orderly. Yet the April 2022 
Global Financial Stability Report highlights several 
financial fragility risks. A wider range of emerging 
market economies could come under pressure if the 
pace of global monetary tightening accelerates further, 
especially in the United States, or if financial markets 
start to reprice more aggressively, which would further 
weigh on the global outlook.
On the fiscal side, policy space was already eroded 
in many countries by necessary COVID-related 
spending. Debt levels have risen significantly, and 
extraordinary fiscal support was expected to be 
removed in 2022–23. The war and the impending 
increase in global interest rates will further reduce 
fiscal space in many countries, especially oil- and 
food-importing emerging market and developing 
economies. The analysis in Chapter 2 shows that 
non-financial corporate and household leverage 
increased in many countries during the pandemic, as 
many governments helped maintain access to credit. 
Looking ahead, this may create some credit market 
vulnerabilities as interest rates and risk premia rise, 
with implications for financial stability. 
The war has also increased the risk of a more 
permanent fragmentation of the world economy into 
geopolitical blocks with distinct technology standards, 
cross-border payment systems, and reserve currencies. 
Such a tectonic shift would entail high adjustment 
costs and long-run efficiency losses as supply chains 
and production networks are reconfigured. It also 
represents a major challenge to the rules-based frame-
work that has governed international and economic 
relations for the last 70 years.
Because of the unprecedented nature of the shock, 
we highlight that the uncertainty around these projec-
tions is considerable, well-beyond the usual range. 
Growth could slow significantly more while inflation 
could turn out higher than expected if, for instance, 
sanctions aimed at ending the war extend to an even 
broader volume of Russian energy and other exports. 
These possibilities are explored in more detail in a 
Scenario Box in Chapter 1. Moreover, the pandemic is 
still with us. The continued spread of the virus could 
give rise to more lethal variants that escape vaccines 
or immunity from past infections, prompting new 
lockdowns and production disruptions. 
In this difficult and uncertain environment, effec-
tive national-level policies and multilateral efforts 
have an ever more important role in shaping eco-
nomic outcomes. Central banks will need to adjust 
their monetary stances even more aggressively should 
medium- or long-term inflation expectations start 
drifting from central bank targets or core inflation 
remains persistently elevated. As advanced economy 
central banks tighten policy and interest rates rise 
in those countries, emerging market and developing 
economies could face a further withdrawal of capital 
and currency depreciations that increase inflation 
pressures. Clear central bank communications on 
the drivers of inflation and forward guidance on the 
outlook for monetary policy, supplemented—when 
appropriate—with capital flow management measures 
in line with the IMF’s revised Institutional View on 
capital flows, will be essential to minimize the risk of 
disruptive adjustments. 
Although several economies will need to consoli-
date their fiscal balances, this should not impede 
governments from providing well-targeted support for 
refugees displaced by conflict, households squeezed by 
higher food and fuel prices, and those affected by the 
pandemic, as argued in the April 2022 Fiscal Monitor. 
Social and health spending more broadly should 
continue to be prioritized. Embedding these fiscal 
initiatives in a medium-term framework with a clear, 
credible path for stabilizing public debt can also help 
create room to deliver the needed support.
Even as policymakers focus on cushioning the impact 
of the war and the pandemic, attention will need to be 
maintained on longer-term goals. This includes reskill-
ing workers for the ongoing digital transformation while 
facilitating the labor market transformation necessary to 
achieve net zero emissions, as discussed in Chapter 3 of 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
xiv	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
this report. A comprehensive approach that combines 
carbon pricing, investment in renewables, and com-
pensation for those adversely affected by the transition 
can help hasten the needed green transition. Another 
long-term goal will be to improve the resilience of global 
supply chains, as discussed in Chapter 4. The analysis 
in that chapter highlights how reshoring policies could 
leave economies more exposed to supply disruptions, 
not less.
Multilateral cooperation remains essential to 
advance these goals. An immediate priority is to 
find a peaceful resolution to the war. On the climate 
front, it is imperative to close the gap between stated 
ambitions and policy actions. An international carbon 
price floor differentiated by country income levels and 
multilateral finance initiatives will be required to coor-
dinate national efforts aimed at reducing the risks of 
catastrophic climate events. Equally important is the 
need to secure equitable worldwide access to the full 
complement of COVID-19 tools—tests, therapies, 
and vaccines—to contain the virus, and to address 
other global health priorities.
Policymakers should also ensure that the global 
financial safety net operates effectively to help vulner-
able economies adjust as interest rates rise in the fight 
against inflation. For some economies, this will mean 
securing adequate liquidity support to tide over short-
term refinancing difficulties. But for other economies, 
comprehensive sovereign debt restructuring will be 
required to free up resources for vital health, social, 
and development spending. The G20’s Common 
Framework for Debt Treatments offers guidance for 
such restructuring but has yet to deliver. The absence 
of an effective and expeditious framework is a fault 
line in the global financial system. Particular atten-
tion should also be paid to the overall stability of the 
global economic order to make sure that the rules-
based framework that has lifted hundreds of millions 
out of poverty is not dismantled.
Importantly, these risks and policies interact in 
complex ways, at short, medium, and longer horizons. 
Rising interest rates, the need to protect vulnerable 
populations against high food and energy prices, or 
increased defense spending, make it more difficult to 
maintain fiscal sustainability. In turn, the erosion of 
fiscal space makes it harder to invest in the climate 
transition, while delays in dealing with the climate 
crisis make economies more vulnerable to commodity 
price shocks, which feeds into inflation and economic 
instability. Geopolitical fragmentation worsens all 
these trade-offs by increasing the risk of conflict and 
economic volatility and decreasing overall efficiency. 
In the matter of a few weeks, the world has yet again 
experienced a major, transformative shock. Just as a 
durable recovery from the pandemic-induced global 
economic collapse appeared in sight, the war has cre-
ated the very real prospect that a large part of the recent 
gains will be erased. The long list of challenges calls 
for commensurate and concerted policy actions at the 
national and multilateral levels to prevent even worse 
outcomes and improve economic prospects for all. 
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Economic Counsellor and Director of Research
FOREWORD
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
xv
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
xvi	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
The war in Ukraine has triggered a costly humani-
tarian crisis that demands a peaceful resolution. 
Economic damage from the conflict will contribute 
to a significant slowdown in global growth in 2022. 
A severe double-digit drop in GDP for Ukraine and 
a large contraction in Russia are more than likely, 
along with worldwide spillovers through commodity 
markets, trade, and financial channels. Even as the 
war reduces growth, it will add to inflation. Fuel and 
food prices have increased rapidly, with vulnerable 
populations—particularly in low-income countries—
most affected. Elevated inflation will complicate the 
trade-offs central banks face between containing price 
pressures and safeguarding growth. Interest rates 
are expected to rise as central banks tighten policy, 
exerting pressure on emerging market and developing 
economies. Moreover, many countries have limited 
fiscal policy space to cushion the impact of the war 
on their economies. The invasion has contributed to 
economic fragmentation as a significant number of 
countries sever commercial ties with Russia and risks 
derailing the post-pandemic recovery. It also threat-
ens the rules-based frameworks that have facilitated 
greater global economic integration and helped lift 
millions out of poverty. In addition, the conflict adds 
to the economic strains wrought by the pandemic. 
Although many parts of the world appear to be mov-
ing past the acute phase of the COVID-19 crisis, 
deaths remain high, especially among the unvacci-
nated. Moreover, recent lockdowns in key manufac-
turing and trade hubs in China will likely compound 
supply disruptions elsewhere.
Global growth is projected to slow from an esti-
mated 6.1 percent in 2021 to 3.6 percent in 2022 and 
2023. This is 0.8 and 0.2 percentage points lower for 
2022 and 2023 than in the January World Economic 
Outlook Update. Beyond 2023, global growth is fore-
cast to decline to about 3.3 percent over the medium 
term. Crucially, this forecast assumes that the conflict 
remains confined to Ukraine, further sanctions on 
Russia exempt the energy sector (although the impact 
of European countries’ decisions to wean themselves 
off Russian energy and embargoes announced through 
March 31, 2022, are factored into the baseline), 
and the pandemic’s health and economic impacts 
abate over the course of 2022. With a few excep-
tions, employment and output will typically remain 
below pre-pandemic trends through 2026. Scarring 
effects are expected to be much larger in emerging 
market and developing economies than in advanced 
economies—reflecting more limited policy sup-
port and generally slower vaccination—with output 
expected to remain below the pre-pandemic trend 
throughout the forecast horizon. Unusually high 
uncertainty surrounds this forecast, and downside 
risks to the global outlook dominate—including from 
a possible worsening of the war, escalation of sanc-
tions on Russia, a sharper-than-anticipated decelera-
tion in China as a strict zero-COVID strategy is 
tested by Omicron, and a renewed flare-up of the 
pandemic should a new, more virulent virus strain 
emerge. Moreover, the war in Ukraine has increased 
the probability of wider social tensions because of 
higher food and energy prices, which would further 
weigh on the outlook. 
Inflation is expected to remain elevated for longer 
than in the previous forecast, driven by war-induced 
commodity price increases and broadening price pres-
sures. For 2022, inflation is projected at 5.7 percent in 
advanced economies and 8.7 percent in emerging mar-
ket and developing economies—1.8 and 2.8 percentage 
points higher than projected in January. Although a 
gradual resolution of supply-demand imbalances and a 
modest pickup in labor supply are expected in the base-
line, easing price inflation eventually, uncertainty again 
surrounds the forecast. Conditions could significantly 
deteriorate. Worsening supply-demand imbalances—
including those stemming from the war—and further 
increases in commodity prices could lead to persistently 
high inflation, rising inflation expectations, and stron-
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
ger wage growth. If signs emerge that inflation will be 
high over the medium term, central banks will be forced 
to react faster than currently anticipated—raising inter-
est rates and exposing debt vulnerabilities, particularly in 
emerging markets. 
The war in Ukraine has exacerbated two difficult 
policy trade-offs: between tackling inflation and safeguard-
ing the recovery; and between supporting the vulnerable 
and rebuilding fiscal buffers. 
•	 Tackling inflation: Although the drivers of inflation 
are in many cases beyond the control of central 
banks (the war, sanctions, the pandemic, supply 
chain disruptions), price pressures are increasingly 
broad-based. The transmission of the war shock will 
vary across countries, depending on trade and finan-
cial linkages, exposure to commodity price increases, 
and the strength of the preexisting inflation surge. 
The appropriate monetary policy response will 
therefore differ across economies. In some places, 
including the United States, inflationary pressure 
had strengthened considerably and become more 
broad-based even before the Russian invasion of 
Ukraine—buoyed by strong policy support. In other 
countries, the prominence of fuel- and war-affected 
commodities in local consumption baskets could 
lead to broader and more persistent price pressures. 
In both cases, tighter monetary policy will be appro-
priate to check the cycle of higher prices driving 
up wages and inflation expectations, and wages and 
inflation expectations driving up prices. In countries 
where the harmful effects from the war are larger, 
the trade-off between safeguarding growth and con-
taining inflation will be more challenging. Central 
banks should remain vigilant to the impact of price 
pressures on inflation expectations and continue to 
communicate clearly on the outlook for inflation 
and monetary policy. A well-telegraphed, data-
dependent approach to adjusting forward guidance 
on the monetary stance—including the unwinding 
of record-high central bank balance sheets and the 
path for policy rates—is the key to maintaining the 
credibility of policy frameworks. 
•	 Fiscal policy amid rising interest rates and a cost-of-
living squeeze: Fiscal policies should depend on 
exposure to the war, the state of the pandemic, and 
the strength of the recovery. Following a huge and 
necessary fiscal expansion in many countries during 
the pandemic, debt levels are at all-time highs and 
governments are more exposed than ever to higher 
interest rates. The need for consolidation should not 
prevent governments from prioritizing spending with 
well-targeted support for the vulnerable—including 
refugees, those struggling because of commodity price 
spikes, and those affected by the pandemic. Where 
fiscal space permits and when monetary policy 
is constrained at the national level—for instance 
by the Effective Lower Bound or in a monetary 
union—broader fiscal support may be warranted, 
depending on the severity of the decline in aggregate 
demand. But this support should be deployed in 
ways that avoid exacerbating ongoing supply-demand 
­imbalances and price pressures. Where fiscal space is 
more limited, governments will need to tread a diffi-
cult path between fiscal consolidation and prioritizing 
essential expenditures. Moreover, authorities should 
be vigilant regarding private sector vulnerabilities to 
rising interest rates, a topic explored in Chapter 2.
•	 Preparing for tomorrow’s economy: Beyond the 
immediate challenges of the war and the pandemic, 
policymakers should not lose sight of longer-term 
goals. Pandemic disruptions have highlighted the 
productivity of novel ways of working. Govern-
ments should look to harness positive structural 
change wherever possible, embracing the digital 
transformation and retooling and reskilling workers 
to meet its challenges. Carbon pricing and fossil fuel 
subsidy reform can also help with the transition to 
a cleaner mode of production, less exposed to fossil 
fuel prices—more important than ever in light of 
the fallout of the war on the global energy market. 
The green energy transition will also entail labor 
market reallocation across occupations and sectors. 
Chapter 3 examines policies that can facilitate this 
labor market transformation. 
Multilateral efforts to respond to the humanitarian 
crisis, prevent further economic fragmentation, maintain 
global liquidity, manage debt distress, tackle climate 
change, and end the pandemic remain essential. The 
adverse consequences from the current geopolitical 
conflict are a reminder of the importance of global 
cooperation. This extends from addressing the immedi-
ate needs of war refugees to the eventual great effort to 
rebuild Ukraine. As countries contend with higher vol-
atility, spending pressures from humanitarian response 
needs, and tighter financial market ­conditions, the 
Executive Summary
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
xvii
likelihood that some countries will become financially 
constrained increases. Multilateral institutions offer a 
critical safety net, providing emergency liquidity and 
preventing crises from spreading. Where liquidity 
support alone is insufficient, progress toward orderly 
debt restructuring is essential. On climate, advanced 
economies must make real progress toward their 
COP26 climate summit pledges. Emerging market 
and developing economies must extend their ambition 
to reduce emissions. And as the pandemic is not yet 
over, governments must use all tools at their disposal 
to combat the virus, both by meeting vaccination 
targets and by ensuring equitable access to tests and 
treatment. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
xviii	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
1
War Slows the Recovery
The war in Ukraine has triggered a costly humani-
tarian crisis that, without a swift and peaceful reso-
lution, could become overwhelming. Global growth 
is expected to slow significantly in 2022, largely as a 
consequence of the war. A severe double-digit drop in 
GDP is expected in Ukraine due to fighting. A deep 
contraction is projected for Russia due to sanctions 
and European countries’ decisions to scale back energy 
imports. The economic costs of war are expected to 
spread farther afield through commodity markets, 
trade, and—to a lesser extent—financial interlinkages. 
Fuel and food price rises are already having a global 
impact, with vulnerable populations—particularly in 
low-income countries—most affected.
The war in Ukraine will amplify economic forces 
already shaping the global recovery from the pandemic. 
The war has further increased commodity prices and 
intensified supply disruptions, adding to inflation. Even 
before Russia invaded Ukraine, broad price pressures had 
led central banks to tighten monetary policy and indicate 
increasingly hawkish future stances. As a result, inter-
est rates had risen sharply and asset price volatility had 
increased since the start of 2022—hitting household and 
corporate balance sheets, consumption, and investment. 
The prospect of higher borrowing costs has also increased 
the cost of extended fiscal support. These changes are 
occurring faster than previously expected even as many 
parts of the global economy—particularly countries with 
low vaccination rates—must contend with continued 
strain on health care systems because of the pandemic.
The war has also added to already high uncertainty 
about the global outlook. Although many countries 
appear to be moving past the acute phase of the 
pandemic, new variants could again lead to waves of 
infection and further disruption. Inflation pressure 
could strengthen more than anticipated and demand 
more aggressive policy responses. Tighter financial 
conditions will shine a harsh spotlight on debt vul-
nerabilities among sovereign and corporate borrow-
ers, risking widespread debt distress. Moreover, with 
continued tight policies toward the real estate sector 
and the possibility of more widespread lockdowns as 
part of the strict zero-COVID strategy, China’s econ-
omy could slow more than currently projected—with 
consequences for Asia and beyond. This could further 
set back the recovery, particularly in emerging mar-
ket and developing economies. More limited policy 
space could compound scarring effects, particularly in 
emerging market and developing economies, where 
medium-term baseline output is expected to be close 
to 6 percent below pre-pandemic projections.
More fundamentally, geopolitical tensions threaten 
the rules-based frameworks that have governed interna-
tional economic relations since World War II. Current 
sanctions imposed with the aim of pressing Russia to 
end the war are already cutting financial and trade 
linkages between Russia and other countries, with 
far-reaching repercussions. Increased global polarization 
also impedes the cooperation essential for long-term 
prosperity. This could include derailing the urgent 
climate change agenda and undermining multilateral 
efforts to improve debt resolution frameworks, trade 
integration, and initiatives to avoid future pandemics.
This chapter first discusses the global growth 
outlook before outlining spillover channels from the 
war in Ukraine, inflation prospects, and the implica-
tions of rising interest rates for emerging market and 
developing economies. The discussion then turns to 
the risks to the outlook and policies for improving 
global prospects.
Fragmentation and Fragility Set to Slow 
Growth during 2022–23
The war in Ukraine has led to extensive loss of 
life, triggered the biggest refugee crisis in Europe 
since World War II, and severely set back the global 
recovery. After a strong recovery in 2021, short-term 
indicators suggest that global activity has slowed (see 
Figure 1.1). Global growth is projected to decline 
from an estimated 6.1 percent in 2021 to 3.6 percent 
in 2022–23—0.8 and 0.2 percentage points lower for 
2022 and 2023 than in the January 2022 World Eco-
nomic Outlook. The ongoing war in Ukraine and sanc-
tions on Russia are expected to reduce global growth in 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
1
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
2
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
2022 through direct impacts on the two countries and 
global spillovers. This shock comes just as the threat 
from the Omicron variant appeared to be fading, with 
many parts of world moving past the acute phase of 
the pandemic.
Five principal forces shape the near-term 
global outlook:
•• War in Ukraine—The invasion and resulting sanctions 
on Russia will have important consequences for the 
global economy. The baseline forecast assumes that 
the theater of conflict remains limited to Ukraine and 
that sanctions on Russia (along with European plans 
to become independent of Russian energy) do not 
tighten beyond those announced by March 31 and 
remain in place over the forecast horizon. The effects 
of conflict and sanctions will hit Ukraine, Russia, and 
Belarus directly. But international spillovers via global 
commodity prices, trade and financial linkages, labor 
supply, and humanitarian impacts will spread the 
effects more widely—notably in Europe.
•• Monetary tightening and financial market volatility—
Even before the war, inflation had risen significantly 
(Figure 1.2), and many central banks tightened 
monetary policy. This contributed to a rapid increase 
in nominal interest rates across advanced economy 
sovereign borrowers. In the months ahead, policy rates 
are generally expected to rise further and record-high 
central bank balance sheets will begin to unwind, most 
notably in advanced economies (for more discussion, 
see the April 2022 Global Financial Stability Report). 
In emerging market and developing economies, several 
central banks also tightened policy, adding to those that 
had already done so in 2021. One exception is China, 
where inflation remains low and the central bank cut 
policy rates in January 2022 to support the recovery. 
Expectations of tighter policy and worries about the 
war have contributed to financial market volatility 
and risk repricing (see the April 2022 Global Financial 
Stability Report). In particular, the war and related 
sanctions have tightened global financial conditions, 
lowered risk appetite, and induced flight-to-quality 
flows. In Russia, the sanctions and the impairment 
of domestic financial intermediation have led to large 
increases in its sovereign and credit default swap 
spreads. Emerging market economies in the region, as 
well as Caucasus, Central Asia, and North Africa, have 
also seen their sovereign spreads widen (Figure 1.3). 
Industrial production
Monthly world trade volumes (seasonally
adjusted, 2018 = 100, right scale)
Manufacturing PMI: New orders
Services PMI: New business
Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics; 
Markit Economics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Units for industrial production are annualized percent change. For PMIs, units 
are deviation from 50. PMI above 50 indicates expansion, below 50 indicates 
contraction. PMI = purchasing managers’ index.
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
2018
19
20
21
Mar.
22
Figure 1.1.  Global Activity Indicators
(Three-month moving average)
Consumer price index
Core consumer price index
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Average inﬂation rates by economy group are purchasing-power-parity GDP- 
weighted averages. In terms of International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
country codes, advanced economies comprise AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, 
DNK, ESP, EST, FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HKG, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, LVA, 
NLD, NOR, PRT, SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, TWN, USA; emerging market and developing 
economies comprise BGR, BRA, CHL, CHN, COL, HUN, IDN, IND, MEX, MYS, PER, 
PHL, POL, ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, ZAF.
–2
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2017
18
19
20
21
Feb.
22
2017
18
19
20
21
Feb.
22
1. Advanced Economies
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Figure 1.2.  Inﬂation Trends
(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change)
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
3
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Emerging markets capital outflows in early March were 
as large and fast as those seen early in the pandemic, 
albeit concentrated among a few economies. Since 
mid-March, though, the situation has stabilized, with 
slow-but-steady capital inflows reversing around one 
quarter of initial losses. Overall, markets have so far 
differentiated across emerging market securities based 
on geographic proximity, trade linkages, and commod-
ity exposures to Russia and Ukraine.
•• Fiscal withdrawal—Policy space in many countries 
has been eroded by necessary higher COVID-related 
spending and lower tax revenue in 2020–21. Faced 
with rising borrowing costs, governments are increas-
ingly challenged by the imperative to rebuild buffers. 
Fiscal support is set to generally decline in 2022 
and 2023—particularly in advanced economies—as 
emergency measures to cushion the impact of the 
pandemic are wound down (­Figure 1.4; also see the 
April 2022 Fiscal Monitor for more discussion on the 
evolution of fiscal measures over the acute phase of 
the pandemic and subsequent recovery).
•• China’s slowdown—Slowing growth in China’s 
economy has wider ramifications for Asia and for 
commodity exporters. The combination of more 
transmissible variants and a zero-COVID strategy 
entail the prospect of more frequent lockdowns, 
with attendant effects on private consumption in 
China. Moreover, the continued tight stance toward 
highly leveraged property developers means that real 
estate investment remains subdued.
•• Pandemic and vaccine access—Worker shortages and 
mobility restrictions compounded supply disruptions 
and bottlenecks early in 2022, constraining activity 
and adding to inflation. Restrictions have begun to 
ease as the peak of the Omicron wave passes and 
global weekly COVID deaths decline (Figure 1.5). 
The risk of infection leading to severe illness or death 
appears lower for the dominant Omicron strain than 
for others—especially for the vaccinated and boosted. 
The baseline assumes that the health and economic 
impacts of the virus start to fade in the second quarter 
of 2022 and that hospitalizations and deaths are 
brought to low levels in most countries by the end 
of the year. A key assumption in the baseline is that 
the virus does not mutate into new strains requiring 
further restrictions (see “Risks Are Large and to the 
Downside” in this chapter). The baseline assumes that 
United 
States
United 
Kingdom
Euro area
China
Brazil
Mexico
Russia
India
South Africa
Right scale
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Reﬁnitiv Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Dashed lines in panel 1 are from the October 2021 World Economic Outlook. 
AE = advanced economy; EM = emerging market; EMBIG = emerging markets 
bond index global. Panel 3 data as of April 8, 2022. Data labels use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States, the 
sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro 
short-term rate (€STR) forward rates for the euro area, updated April 8, 2022.
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
2021
23
22
24
25
0
5
10
15
20
Feb.
2021
Oct.
21
Jun.
21
Mar.
22
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
1. AE Policy Rate
Expectations1
2. EM Policy Rate
3. EMBIG Sovereign Spread Changes since February 23, 2022
(Difference in basis points)
Figure 1.3.  Monetary and Financial Conditions
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
KAZ
BOL
ARM
GEO
SLV
TUN
PAK
LKA
UKR
RUS
BLR
October 2021 World Economic Outlook
Cyclically adjusted primary balance (percent of GDP)
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Cyclically adjusted balance is the general government balance adjusted for 
the economic cycle. Structural balance is the cyclically adjusted balance corrected 
for a broader range of noncyclical factors, such as asset and commodity prices. 
Primary balances shown are obtained by subtracting interest income and adding 
interest expense to the two series.
–9
–6
–3
0
3
2020
21
22
23
2020
21
22
23
Emerging market and
developing economies
Advanced economies
Figure 1.4.  Fiscal Stance, 2020–23
(Change in structural primary ﬁscal balance, percent of potential GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
4
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
most countries will not attain the target of 70 percent 
full vaccination in 2022. Given vaccination shortfalls 
in low-income countries, the possibility of renewed 
outbreaks is factored into the baseline. Yet their impact 
on activity is assumed to be less than in earlier waves. 
Adaptation has improved, effective therapeutics are 
more readily available, and immunity due to previous 
infection or vaccination has increased. The forecasts 
are based on information up to 31 March 2022.
Forecast Revisions
Ukraine: Although precise measures of the damage 
to the Ukrainian economy are impossible to obtain, 
the war will cause a very severe contraction. For 2022, 
the Ukrainian economy is expected to contract by 
35 percent.1 And even if the war were to end soon, the 
loss of life, destruction of physical capital, and flight 
of citizens will severely impede economic activity for 
many years to come.
Russia: The tight trade and financial sanctions—
including loss of correspondent banking privileges, 
access of some banks to the SWIFT payments system, 
and the interdiction of central bank assets—and the oil 
1This is broadly in line with the evidence presented by Novta and 
Pugacheva (2021) on the most severe conflicts.
and gas embargo by some large economies will have 
a severe impact on the Russian economy. Announced 
plans by large consumers to wean themselves off Russian 
energy will also hit in the medium-term. To stave off 
capital flight, the central bank of Russia has increased 
the interest rate and broad capital controls have been 
introduced. Yet financial markets have been turbulent, 
with the ruble falling close to 60 percent, before return-
ing to near pre-invasion levels in recent weeks, sovereign 
spreads widening more than 2,500 basis points, and 
stock markets temporarily suspended. The withdrawal 
of foreign firms has hobbled many industries, including 
aviation, finance, software, and agriculture. As a result, 
the outlook remains bleak. Moreover, financial disinter-
mediation and a loss of investor confidence will lead to a 
significant drop in private investment and consumption, 
only partly offset by fiscal spending. The baseline forecast 
is for a sharp contraction in 2022, with GDP falling by 
about 8.5 percent, and a further decline of about 2.3 
percent in 2023.
Emerging and Developing Europe, including Russia 
and Ukraine, will see GDP contract by approximately 
2.9 percent in 2022, before expanding by 1.3 percent 
in 2023. The main drivers of the contraction are the 
impact of higher energy prices on domestic demand and 
the disruption of trade, especially for Baltic states, whose 
external demand will decline along with the contraction 
in Russia’s economy. The influx of refugees is expected 
to place significant immediate pressure on social services, 
but eventually the increase in the labor force could help 
medium-term growth and tax revenues.
Advanced Europe: The main channel through which the 
war in Ukraine and sanctions on Russia affect the euro 
area economy is rising global energy prices and energy 
security. Because they are net energy importers, higher 
global prices represent a negative terms-of-trade shock for 
most European countries, translating to lower output and 
higher inflation. Supply chain disruptions have also hurt 
some industries—including the automobile sector—with 
the war and sanctions further hindering production of 
key inputs. As a consequence, euro area GDP growth 
in 2022 is revised down to 2.8 percent (1.1 percent-
age points lower than in January), with the biggest 
downgrades in economies such as Germany and Italy 
with relatively large manufacturing sectors and greater 
dependence on energy imports from Russia. Across the 
euro area, the hit to activity is partially offset by increased 
fiscal support. In the United Kingdom, GDP growth for 
2022 is revised down 1 percentage point—consumption 
is projected to be weaker than expected as inflation erodes 
Russia, Turkey, South Africa
Rest of the world
United States
Euro area
Other AEs
India
EMs Asia ex. IND
LAC
Sources: Our World in Data; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data as of April 8, 2022. Economy group and regional classiﬁcations are 
those in the World Economic Outlook. Other advanced economies in terms of 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes are AUS, CAN, 
CHE, CZE, DNK, GBR, HKG, ISL, ISR, JPN, KOR, MAC, NOR, NZL, SGP, SMR, SWE, 
TWN. AEs = advanced economies; EMs Asia ex. IND = emerging Asia excluding 
India; LAC = Latin American and the Caribbean economies.
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
12,500
15,000
17,500
Mar.
2020
Sep.
20
Mar.
21
Sep.
21
Apr.
22
Figure 1.5.  New Conﬁrmed COVID-19 Deaths
(Persons, seven-day moving average)
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
5
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
real disposable income, while tighter financial conditions 
are expected to cool investment.
Middle East and North Africa, Caucasus and Central 
Asia: Countries in the Middle East, North Africa, Cau-
casus, and Central Asia regions are highly exposed to 
global food prices, particularly the price of wheat, which 
is expected to remain high throughout the year and into 
2023. In the Middle East and North Africa, spill-
overs from tighter global financial conditions, reduced 
tourism, and secondary demand spillovers (for example, 
from Europe) will also hold back growth, especially for 
oil importers. For oil exporters, higher fossil fuel prices 
may provide some offsetting gains. For example, the 
2022 forecast for Saudi Arabia is revised up 2.8 percent-
age points, reflecting higher oil production in line with 
the OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries, plus Russia and other non-OPEC oil export-
ers) agreement, reinforced by stronger-than-anticipated 
growth in the non-oil sector. Countries in the Cauca-
sus and Central Asia (CCA) region have close trade, 
remittance, and financial linkages to Russia and high 
exposure to commodity prices, so they will see GDP 
growth significantly downgraded, with CCA oil import-
ers facing a disproportionate impact. Unresolved social 
tensions (for example, in Kazakhstan and Sudan) could 
also act as a drag on investment and growth. Overall, 
GDP in the Middle East and Central Asia is expected 
to grow by 4.6 percent in 2022.
Sub-Saharan Africa: In sub-Saharan Africa, food 
prices are also the most important channel of trans-
mission, although in slightly different ways. Wheat is 
a less important part of the diet, but food in general 
is a larger share of consumption. Higher food prices 
will hurt consumers’ purchasing power—particularly 
among low-income households—and weigh on domes-
tic demand. Social and political turmoil, most notably 
in West Africa, also weigh on the outlook. The increase 
in oil prices has however lifted growth prospects for the 
region’s oil exporters, such as Nigeria. Overall, growth in 
sub-Saharan Africa is projected at 3.8 percent in 2022.
Asia: Developments in China continue to dominate the 
outlook for Asia, especially for emerging Asia. As noted, 
the combination of more transmissible variants and the 
strict zero-COVID strategy in China has led to repeated 
mobility restrictions and localized ­lockdowns that, 
together with an anemic recovery in urban employment, 
have weighed on private consumption. Recent lockdowns 
in key manufacturing and trading hubs such as Shenzhen 
and Shanghai will likely compound supply disruptions 
elsewhere in the region and beyond. Moreover, real estate 
investment growth has slowed significantly. External 
demand is also expected to be weaker in light of the war 
in Ukraine. While partially offset by more supportive 
macroeconomic policy, these factors contribute to a 
0.4 percentage point forecast downgrade for 2022. For the 
region more broadly, limited direct trade links to Russia 
and Ukraine mean that spillover effects will be limited 
to the commodity price channel and to indirect impacts 
via weaker demand from key trading partners, such as 
the euro area. As such, external positions are generally 
expected to deteriorate—particularly for net oil importers. 
Notable downgrades to the 2022 forecast include Japan 
(0.9 percentage point) and India (0.8 percentage point), 
reflecting in part weaker domestic demand—as higher oil 
prices are expected to weigh on private consumption and 
investment—and a drag from lower net exports.
United States and Canada: Economic links between 
Russia and the United States and Canada are limited. 
Other factors also have a significant impact on the 
outlook for the two economies. The forecast for the 
United States was already downgraded in January, 
largely reflecting non-passage of the Build Back Better 
fiscal policy package and continued supply chain dis-
ruptions. The additional 0.3 percentage point forecast 
markdown for 2022 in the current round reflects faster 
withdrawal of monetary support than in the previous 
projection—as policy tightens to rein in inflation—and 
the impact of lower growth in trading partners because 
of disruptions resulting from the war. The forecast for 
Canada is marked down 0.2 percentage point, reflect-
ing the withdrawal of policy support and weaker exter-
nal demand from the United States, which outweigh 
the lift from favorable terms of trade effects.
Latin America and the Caribbean: With fewer direct 
connections to Europe, the region is also expected to 
be more affected by inflation and policy tightening. 
Brazil has responded to higher inflation by increasing 
interest rates 975 basis points over the past year, which 
will weigh on domestic demand. To a lesser extent, 
this is also the case in Mexico. The downgrades to the 
forecasts for the United States and China also weigh 
on the outlook for trading partners in the region. 
Overall growth for the region is expected to moderate 
to 2.5 percent during 2022–23.
The fluid international situation means that quanti-
tative forecasts are even more uncertain than usual. Yet 
some channels through which the war and associated 
sanctions will affect the global economy seem relatively 
clear, even if their magnitudes are difficult to assess. The 
following sections explore these channels in some detail.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
6
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Projections
Difference from January 
2022 WEO Update1
Difference from October 
2021 WEO1
2021
2022
2023
2022
2023
2022
2023
World Output
6.1
3.6
3.6
–0.8
–0.2
–1.3
0.0
Advanced Economies
5.2
3.3
2.4
–0.6
–0.2
–1.2
0.2
United States 
5.7
3.7
2.3
–0.3
–0.3
–1.5
0.1
Euro Area
5.3
2.8
2.3
–1.1
–0.2
–1.5
0.3
Germany
2.8
2.1
2.7
–1.7
0.2
–2.5
1.1
France
7.0
2.9
1.4
–0.6
–0.4
–1.0
–0.4
Italy
6.6
2.3
1.7
–1.5
–0.5
–1.9
0.1
Spain
5.1
4.8
3.3
–1.0
–0.5
–1.6
0.7
Japan 
1.6
2.4
2.3
–0.9
0.5
–0.8
0.9
United Kingdom
7.4
3.7
1.2
–1.0
–1.1
–1.3
–0.7
Canada
4.6
3.9
2.8
–0.2
0.0
–1.0
0.2
Other Advanced Economies2
5.0
3.1
3.0
–0.5
0.1
–0.6
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.8
3.8
4.4
–1.0
–0.3
–1.3
–0.2
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.3
5.4
5.6
–0.5
–0.2
–0.9
–0.1
China
8.1
4.4
5.1
–0.4
–0.1
–1.2
–0.2
India3
8.9
8.2
6.9
–0.8
–0.2
–0.3
0.3
ASEAN-54
3.4
5.3
5.9
–0.3
–0.1
–0.5
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
6.7
–2.9
1.3
–6.4
–1.6
–6.5
–1.6
Russia
4.7
–8.5
–2.3
–11.3
–4.4
–11.4
–4.3
Latin America and the Caribbean 
6.8
2.5
2.5
0.1
–0.1
–0.5
0.0
Brazil
4.6
0.8
1.4
0.5
–0.2
–0.7
–0.6
Mexico
4.8
2.0
2.5
–0.8
–0.2
–2.0
0.3
Middle East and Central Asia
5.7
4.6
3.7
0.3
0.1
0.5
–0.1
Saudi Arabia
3.2
7.6
3.6
2.8
0.8
2.8
0.8
Sub-Saharan Africa 
4.5
3.8
4.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.1
Nigeria
3.6
3.4
3.1
0.7
0.4
0.7
0.5
South Africa
4.9
1.9
1.4
0.0
0.0
–0.3
0.0
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
5.8
3.5
3.1
–0.7
–0.3
–1.2
0.0
European Union
5.4
2.9
2.5
–1.1
–0.3
–1.5
0.2
Middle East and North Africa
5.8
5.0
3.6
0.6
0.2
0.9
0.1
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
7.0
3.8
4.3
–1.0
–0.3
–1.3
–0.3
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.0
4.6
5.4
–0.7
–0.1
–0.7
–0.1
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
10.1
5.0
4.4
–1.0
–0.5
–1.7
–0.1
Imports
Advanced Economies
9.5
6.1
4.5
–0.2
0.0
–1.2
0.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
11.8
3.9
4.8
–1.7
–0.9
–3.2
–0.9
Exports
Advanced Economies
8.6
5.0
4.7
–1.1
0.0
–1.6
0.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
12.3
4.1
3.6
–1.7
–1.5
–1.7
–1.4
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
67.3
54.7
–13.3
42.8
–5.5
56.5
–8.3
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import 
weights) 
26.8
11.4
–2.5
8.3
–0.6
12.3
–1.0
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
3.1
5.7
2.5
1.8
0.4
3.4
0.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
5.9
8.7
6.5
2.8
1.8
3.8
2.2
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during February 7, 2022–March 7, 2022. Economies are listed on 
the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2022 WEO Update, and October 2021 WEO forecasts. 
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as 
a base year.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
7
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (continued)
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Year over Year
Q4 over Q48
Projections
Projections
2020
2021
2022
2023
2020
2021
2022
2023
World Output
–3.1
6.1
3.6
3.6
–0.3
4.6
2.5
3.5
Advanced Economies
–4.5
5.2
3.3
2.4
–2.7
4.7
2.5
2.0
United States 
–3.4
5.7
3.7
2.3
–2.3
5.6
2.8
1.7
Euro Area
–6.4
5.3
2.8
2.3
–4.3
4.6
1.8
2.3
Germany
–4.6
2.8
2.1
2.7
–2.9
1.8
2.4
2.5
France
–8.0
7.0
2.9
1.4
–4.3
5.4
0.9
1.5
Italy
–9.0
6.6
2.3
1.7
–6.1
6.2
0.5
2.2
Spain
–10.8
5.1
4.8
3.3
–8.8
5.5
2.3
4.0
Japan 
–4.5
1.6
2.4
2.3
–0.8
0.4
3.5
0.8
United Kingdom
–9.3
7.4
3.7
1.2
–6.3
6.6
1.1
1.5
Canada
–5.2
4.6
3.9
2.8
–3.1
3.3
3.5
2.2
Other Advanced Economies2
–1.8
5.0
3.1
3.0
–0.4
4.5
2.5
2.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–2.0
6.8
3.8
4.4
1.7
4.4
2.5
4.9
Emerging and Developing Asia
–0.8
7.3
5.4
5.6
3.7
4.2
4.4
5.8
China
2.2
8.1
4.4
5.1
6.4
3.5
4.8
4.7
India3
–6.6
8.9
8.2
6.9
1.5
5.6
2.7
9.0
ASEAN-54
–3.4
3.4
5.3
5.9
–2.5
4.5
5.1
5.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
–1.8
6.7
–2.9
1.3
0.0
6.3
–6.0
3.3
Russia
–2.7
4.7
–8.5
–2.3
–1.7
5.0
–14.1
3.3
Latin America and the Caribbean 
–7.0
6.8
2.5
2.5
–3.2
3.8
1.6
2.5
Brazil
–3.9
4.6
0.8
1.4
–1.0
1.6
0.8
1.9
Mexico
–8.2
4.8
2.0
2.5
–4.4
1.1
3.3
1.9
Middle East and Central Asia
–2.9
5.7
4.6
3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
–4.1
3.2
7.6
3.6
–3.8
6.7
6.9
3.6
Sub-Saharan Africa 
–1.7
4.5
3.8
4.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
–1.8
3.6
3.4
3.1
–0.2
2.4
2.1
2.3
South Africa
–6.4
4.9
1.9
1.4
–3.4
1.8
2.3
1.1
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
–3.5
5.8
3.5
3.1
–0.9
4.5
2.6
2.9
European Union
–5.9
5.4
2.9
2.5
–4.1
5.0
1.8
2.7
Middle East and North Africa
–3.3
5.8
5.0
3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
–2.2
7.0
3.8
4.3
1.8
4.5
2.4
4.9
Low-Income Developing Countries
0.2
4.0
4.6
5.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
–7.9
10.1
5.0
4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Imports
Advanced Economies
–8.7
9.5
6.1
4.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–7.9
11.8
3.9
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Exports
Advanced Economies
–9.1
8.6
5.0
4.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–4.8
12.3
4.1
3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
–32.7
67.3
54.7
–13.3
–27.6
79.2
28.6
–11.6
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import weights)
6.8
26.8
11.4
–2.5
15.4
17.3
9.4
–2.5
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies6
0.7
3.1
5.7
2.5
0.4
4.9
4.8
2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7
5.2
5.9
8.7
6.5
3.3
6.0
8.8
5.3
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
5Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $69.07 in 
2021; the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $106.83 in 2022 and $92.63 in 2023.
6The inflation rates for 2022 and 2023, respectively, are as follows: 5.3 percent and 2.3 percent for the euro area, 1.0 percent and 0.8 percent for Japan, and 
7.7 percent and 2.9 percent for the United States.
7Excludes Venezuela. See the country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8For world output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market 
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
8
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
International Implications of the 
War in Ukraine
The ongoing war in Ukraine and sanctions on 
Russia are expected to generate substantial economic 
spillovers, principally through five channels.
Global commodity markets: War-related interruptions 
to production, sanctions, and strongly impaired access 
to cross-border payment systems will disrupt trade 
flows, notably for energy and food. The magnitude 
of these changes depends not only on the decline in 
exports as a result of the conflict and sanctions, but 
also on the elasticity of global supply and demand. 
Although the price of oil has risen sharply, spare 
capacity in other countries and the release of petroleum 
reserves will likely mean that these increases will be 
contained over the medium term. In contrast, the rel-
atively inflexible infrastructure needed to transport gas 
(pipelines are more important for gas than for oil, for 
example) means that global supply can adjust less easily, 
raising the prospect of higher prices for longer. Prices 
of agricultural commodities are likely to rise further—
particularly wheat (together, Russia and Ukraine 
account for close to 30 percent of global wheat exports) 
and, to a lesser extent, corn. These changes will add 
to already soaring prices of staple foods (­Figure 1.6) 
and mean that disruptions to Russian exports may be 
windfalls for other commodity exporters.
The sharp increases in commodity prices echo those 
in the 1970s, when a regional conflict also prompted a 
spike in fossil fuel prices. At that time, several years of 
high inflation and low growth followed. The experi-
ence of that period has raised the specter of “stagfla-
tion” in the current situation—commonly defined as a 
period of low growth (stagnation) and high inflation. 
Now, however, circumstances differ in important 
ways (Figure 1.7). The size of the oil price shock is 
smaller so far, and today’s economy is less reliant on 
oil (between August 1973 and January 1974, the 
Corn
Rice
Sorghum
Wheat
60
100
140
180
220
260
Jan.
2020
Jul.
20 
Jan.
21
Jul.
21
Feb.
22
Figure 1.6.  International Cereal Prices
(US dollars, index, January 2020 = 100)
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations.
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Exchange Rate Weights
(Percent change)
Projections
Difference from January 
2022 WEO Update1
Difference from October 
2021 WEO1
2021
2022
2023
2022
2023
2022
2023
World Output
5.8
3.5
3.1
–0.7
–0.3
–1.2
0.0
Advanced Economies
5.1
3.3
2.3
–0.6
–0.2
–1.2
0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.8
3.8
4.2
–0.8
–0.3
–1.2
–0.3
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.4
5.0
5.4
–0.5
–0.2
–1.0
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
6.4
–2.1
0.8
–5.6
–2.1
–5.8
–2.1
Latin America and the Caribbean 
6.6
2.4
2.4
0.2
–0.1
–0.6
–0.1
Middle East and Central Asia
5.1
4.6
3.4
0.5
0.2
0.7
0.0
Sub-Saharan Africa 
4.5
3.8
3.9
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
Memorandum
European Union
5.3
2.8
2.4
–1.1
–0.2
–1.5
0.2
Middle East and North Africa
5.0
4.8
3.2
0.7
0.2
0.9
0.1
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
7.0
3.7
4.2
–0.8
–0.3
–1.3
–0.3
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.0
4.6
5.3
–0.6
–0.1
–0.6
–0.1
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, in which a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years 
is used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2022 WEO Update, and October 2021 WEO forecasts.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
9
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
oil price almost tripled, from about $20 to $60, in 
2021 dollars, and remained high; moreover, the global 
economy’s oil intensity was about 3.5 times greater 
than today). Wage setting mechanisms are different 
as well, with generally lower prevalence of indexation. 
The conduct of monetary policy has also changed 
since the 1970s. More central banks are independent 
today and monetary policy credibility has generally 
strengthened over the decades. As discussed below, 
medium-term inflation expectations remain reason-
ably well-anchored at central bank targets in most 
countries. Moreover, despite the significant downward 
revision to global growth, the baseline forecast is for 
output to expand close to its pre-pandemic average 
of 3.5 percent. Nonetheless, as discussed in the risks 
section below, growth could slow further than forecast 
in the baseline, and inflation could turn out higher 
than expected. This may be particularly salient for 
parts of Europe, given their relatively higher reliance 
on Russian gas imports.
Direct trade and remittances linkages with Russia and 
Ukraine: Although the broadest global spillovers are 
likely through commodity prices, direct trade linkages 
add a further layer of disruptions. These will depend 
on countries’ trade balances with Russia and Ukraine. 
Countries that send a large share of exports to Russia, 
such as Belarus, some Baltic states, and Caucasus 
countries, will suffer reduced external demand for 
their products (Figure 1.8). Importers will face higher 
import prices and possible shortages. The effects are 
likely to be concentrated in specific markets, such 
as metals and minerals, noble gases, and agricultural 
exports, especially wheat. Some countries, particularly 
Oil intensity
Oil revenue share of GDP (right scale)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Oil intensity is deﬁned as barrels of oil needed to produce $1 million in real 
GDP. Real GDP is based on constant 2017 purchasing-power-parity international 
dollars.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1970
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
22
Figure 1.7.  Global Oil Intensity and Oil Revenue Share
(Barrels, percent on right scale)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 1.8.  Trade Exposures to Russia and Ukraine, 2020
1. Exports of Goods to Russia
    (Percent of total exports)
2. Imports of Goods from Russia
    (Percent of total imports)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
3. Energy Imports from Russia
    (Percent of total energy imports)          
4. Food Imports from Russia and Ukraine
    (Percent of total food imports)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Sources: Direction of Trade Statistics; United Nations, Comtrade database; and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: Energy includes crude petroleum, reﬁned petroleum, petroleum gas, and 
coal. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
ESP
GBR
NLD
FRA
ITA
DEU
MDA
UZB
KAZ
KGZ
LVA
GEO
LTU
ARM
BLR
ESP
FRA
DEU
ITA
NLD
GBR
MDA
AZE
UZB
TKM
MNG
TJK
ARM
KAZ
KGZ
BLR
GRC
CZE
UKR
ROU
TUR
SRB
UZB
EST
HUN
TJK
BGR
LTU
FIN
POL
SVK
ARM
KGZ
KAZ
MNG
BLR
ALB
LKA
IND
PAK
COD
COG
LBN
TZA
EGY
TUR
UZB
MNG
MDA
TJK
KGZ
BLR
GEO
ARM
AZE
KAZ
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
10
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
in the Caucasus and Central Asia region, will also see 
remittances from Russia decline.
Propagation through cross-border production networks: 
The integration of Russia and Ukraine into global value 
chains extends beyond typical commodity linkages (Fig-
ure 1.9). Disruptions in upstream sectors can therefore 
cascade beyond bilateral trading partners. For instance, 
production of neon gas—an input in the manufac-
ture of silicon chips—is concentrated in Russia and 
Ukraine. This will be interrupted, compounding silicon 
chip shortages, which have already caused production 
bottlenecks further downstream in automobiles and 
electronics. Global car production is also affected by the 
war in other ways: disruptions to Ukraine’s production 
of electronic wiring systems have already contributed 
to automobile plant shutdowns in Germany. Protracted 
shortages of metals exported from Russia, such as palla-
dium and nickel, will increase the cost of items includ-
ing catalytic converters and batteries. And disruptions 
of exports of potash fertilizers from Belarus will affect 
food production elsewhere and exacerbate food price 
increases. In the near term, there is limited scope for 
downstream producers to substitute alternative inputs. 
The initial shock in Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus can 
therefore quickly amplify across sectors and borders, 
magnifying the impact of the war on global activity. In 
particular, supply disruptions can have a wider impact 
by reducing demand in other sectors if affected firms 
reduce orders for complementary inputs from other sup-
pliers. Finally, reputational risks and investor and cus-
tomer disapproval may cause firms to avoid commercial 
transactions with Russian counterparts, even in sectors 
not directly affected by sanctions—further severing 
cross-border production ties.
Financial markets: Sanctions have induced direct 
financial stress on firms with outstanding payments 
for recent shipments or financial assets abroad. 
Beyond this, sanctions have also added operational 
challenges to market functioning and increased 
volatility. Counterparty risk and the risk of sovereign 
default have increased. However, direct financial con-
nections between Russia and other major economies 
appear relatively small and concentrated in just a few 
countries, mostly in Europe. Of these, Austrian and 
Italian banks are most exposed to Russian counter-
parties (see Figure 1.10). European bank exposures 
to Russia appear manageable also because a large 
share of European banks’ direct exposure is through 
their locally funded Russian subsidiaries. More 
generally, a wider increase in geopolitical uncertainty 
could prompt a more severe repricing of risk by 
investors. This would likely affect emerging market 
and developing economies, especially those with 
Forward linkages
Backward linkages
Figure 1.9.  Global Value Chain Participation, 2018
(Share of exports)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Sources: Eora Global Value Chain Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Global value chain participation is the sum of backward and forward 
linkages. The former measure imported intermediate inputs that are used to 
generate output for exports. The latter measure exports of intermediate goods that 
are used as inputs for the production of exports of other countries. See Casella 
and others (2019) for methodological details.
Fuel
exporters
Nonfuel
exporters
Russia
Ukraine
Immediate counterparty basis
Guarantor basis
Figure 1.10.  Ratio of Banks’ Exposure to Russia to Total
Assets, end-September 2021
(Percent)
Sources: Bank for International Settlements, Consolidated Banking Statistics; and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: For immediate counterparty basis, claims are allocated to the country and 
sector of the entity to which the funds were lent. For guarantor basis, claims are 
allocated to the country and sector of the entity that guarantees the claims (in the 
case of claims on branches, the country of the parent bank). Countries with 
immediate counterparty basis number higher than 0.0085 percent are shown. 
Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
ESP
GBR
GRC
USA
NLD
ITA
TWN
TUR
PRT
KOR
DEU
FRA
AUT
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
11
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
large external debt. Additional complications, such 
as the removal of Russian assets from global equity 
and bond indices, and—critically—high volatility 
and disruptions in commodity markets point to 
longer-term challenges for financial markets, includ-
ing increased fragmentation.
Humanitarian impact: A very large number of 
refugees have fled the war already, and many more may 
follow. The UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency, reports 
that over 4.5 million refugees have left Ukraine since 
February 24: half have arrived in Poland, and many 
more are expected to flee. In the short term, refugee 
arrivals will strain local services, including for shelter 
and health care. In the longer term, the dispersion 
of a large number of refugees across the European 
Union will have important social and economic effects, 
increasing labor supply but potentially exacerbating 
anti-immigrant sentiment.
Policy responses: The international economic trans-
mission of the war and sanctions will also depend on 
policies in countries not directly involved. Deci-
sions to increase oil and gas supply or release energy 
reserves could alleviate price pressures. Expanded 
fiscal support in Europe could help compensate for 
shrinking demand (see Box 1.2 in the April 2022 
Fiscal Monitor). Moreover, the response of central 
banks, particularly those in large advanced econ-
omies, will also shape the economic impact of the 
war. Many will have to weigh rising inflation (due 
to higher international commodity prices and supply 
disruptions) against weakening activity (due to lower 
trade and heightened uncertainty).
Elevated Inflation Expected to 
Persist for Longer
Inflation forecast: With the impact of the war in 
Ukraine and broadening of price pressures, inflation 
is expected to remain elevated for longer than in 
the previous forecast. The conflict is likely to have a 
protracted impact on commodity prices, affecting oil 
and gas prices more severely in 2022 and food prices 
well into 2023 (because of the lagged impact from the 
harvest in 2022). For 2022, inflation is projected at 
5.7 percent in advanced economies and 8.7 percent 
in emerging market and developing economies—1.8 
and 2.8 percentage points higher than in the January 
World Economic Outlook. Inflation in 2023 is pro-
jected at 2.5 percent for the advanced economy group 
and 6.5 percent for emerging market and developing 
economies (0.4 and 1.8 percentage points higher than 
in the January forecast). However, as with the growth 
outlook, considerable uncertainty surrounds these 
inflation projections.
The main factors shaping the baseline inflation outlook 
are the following.
The war in Ukraine has aggravated spikes in commod-
ity prices. Energy and food prices were a major contrib-
uting factor to headline inflation in 2021, to varying 
degrees across regions (Figure 1.11). The sharp spike 
in oil and gas prices—reflecting tight fossil fuel supply 
after years of subdued investment (see the Commod-
ities Special Feature in this chapter) and geopolitical 
uncertainty—led to a significant increase in energy 
costs. These increases were the main driver of headline 
inflation in Europe and to a lesser extent the United 
Inﬂation
Energy
Food
Other
Food and
nonalcoholic
beverages
Other items
Total
Figure 1.11.  Changes in Inﬂation Drivers
(Percentage points, unless noted otherwise)
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Change in inﬂation” refers to the difference in year-over-year growth of the 
consumer price index between December 2020 and December 2021. Stacked 
bars show the contribution of each component to that change. Sample includes 
countries for which all components are available. This covers 26 European 
countries and 2 other AEs. Purchasing-power-parity weights are used for 
aggregation. Panel 2 shows median inﬂation and contributions from food and 
other items in 17 low-income countries, 13 in sub-Saharan Africa and 4 in Asia 
and the Paciﬁc. Inﬂation is a 12-month comparison, measured at year-end. 
AEs = advanced economies.
0
2
4
6
US
Europe
Other AEs
0
2
4
6
1. Change in Inﬂation, December 2020—December 2021
2. Median Inﬂation in Selected Low-Income Countries
(Percent)
2019
20
21
19
20
21
Sub-Saharan Africa
Asia and Paciﬁc
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
12
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
States. In most emerging market and developing 
economies rising food prices also played a significant 
role, as poor weather hit harvests and rising oil and 
gas prices drove up the cost of fertilizer. Higher prices 
for international food commodities impact countries 
differently depending on the food share of house-
holds’ consumption baskets and the types of foods 
consumed. Households in low-income countries are 
particularly exposed to changes in the price of staple 
cereals, with diets often concentrated in just one type 
of grain. Low-income countries where wheat, corn, 
and sorghum are a large part of the diet (especially in 
sub-Saharan Africa) have seen inflation almost wholly 
driven by rising food prices. Some emerging market 
economies, including in the Middle East and Central 
Asia, have also been similarly affected by higher global 
food prices. The war in Ukraine and sanctions on 
Russia and Belarus will reinforce this effect, disrupting 
both the supply of food and agricultural inputs such 
as potash fertilizer. But in Asia, the falling price of 
rice mitigated cost-of-living increases for consumers 
in low-income countries. Looking ahead, commodity 
price increases are expected to persist through 2022 
before easing somewhat in 2023. Futures markets 
indicate oil and gas prices will grow quickly in 2022 
(55 and 147 percent, respectively) and then decline 
in 2023 as supply adjusts. Similarly, food inflation 
is expected to be robust (about 14 percent) in 2022, 
before declining modestly in 2023. The war has added 
to the uncertainty around these forecasts, and com-
modity prices are likely to be volatile over 2022–23.
Aggregate demand-supply imbalances: Demand grew 
rapidly in 2021, due in part to policy support. Mean-
while, a host of bottlenecks held back supply, including 
outbreak-induced factory closures; restrictions at ports; 
congested shipping lanes; container shortfalls; and 
worker shortages because of quarantines, possible shifts 
in preference, and dependent care responsibilities (see 
Box 1.1). As a result, core inflation, which excludes 
food and energy prices, has surpassed pre-pandemic 
rates across most economies, rising most where recov-
eries have been strongest (Figure 1.12). During 2022, 
demand is expected to soften in line with the mod-
erating recovery and the withdrawal of broad-based 
extraordinary policy support. Although supply bottle-
necks are generally anticipated to ease as production 
responds to higher prices, recurrent lockdowns in 
China as a result of the zero-COVID strategy, the 
war in Ukraine, and sanctions on Russia are likely to 
prolong disruptions in some sectors into 2023. This is 
expected to add to shortages not just of energy supply 
but also of key manufacturing inputs such as rare 
metals and gases.
Rebalancing of demand from goods toward services: As 
in-person services were more disrupted by pandemic 
restrictions, spending shifted toward goods. Coinciding 
with supply bottlenecks, this rotation put pressure on 
goods prices (Figure 1.13). Although service inflation 
started to recover in 2021, pre-pandemic spending 
patterns have not fully reset, and goods inflation has 
remained prominent in most countries. Provided 
the pandemic eases, services demand will pick up, 
and the overall consumption basket should return to 
pre-pandemic configurations.
Labor supply upsides remain limited. Labor markets 
have tightened significantly in some advanced econ-
omies, particularly the United States and (to a lesser 
extent) the United Kingdom (see Box 1.1). Labor 
supply shortfalls—particularly in contact-intensive 
sectors—mean that nominal wage growth has picked 
up rapidly. Real wages have however fallen in general 
because consumer price inflation has risen faster than 
nominal wages. Meanwhile, labor force participation 
rates in advanced economies generally remain below 
pre-pandemic levels. In part, these developments 
appear related to a reluctance (or inability) of workers 
Figure 1.12.  Core Inﬂation versus Private Domestic Demand
(Percent)
–2
0
2
4
6
Deviation in core inﬂation from pre-COVID-19 level,
end-2021
Deviation in 2021 private domestic demand from pre-COVID-19 trend
(2015–19)
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Core inﬂation is headline consumer price inﬂation excluding food and 
energy. Private domestic demand is private consumption plus private gross ﬁxed 
capital formation (GFCF) (or total GFCF if private unavailable). Average over 2021 
data available. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
country codes.
PHL
MYS
IDN
POL
RUS BRA
IND
USA
GBR
ESP
DEU
ZAF
PER
MEX
COL
CHL
THL
TWN
SGP
JPN
FRA
AUS
CHN
KOR
ITA
CAN
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
13
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
to return to work while the pandemic continues and 
earlier-than-planned retirements. Moreover, in some 
cases, even as workers are returning to employment they 
are working fewer hours. The baseline assumes that labor 
supply will gradually improve over 2022 as the health 
crisis abates, constraints on dependent care ease, and 
savings run down. The overall effect on labor supply, 
however, is expected to be moderate, and this is therefore 
unlikely to soften nominal wage increases significantly.
Inflation expectations remain reasonably well anchored 
at longer horizons, even as they have increased in the near 
term. In advanced economies, near-term inflation expec-
tations have risen significantly, while pressures over lon-
ger horizons have generally been more contained (albeit 
with some increase in recent weeks). A similar pattern 
was seen in emerging markets before the war in Ukraine 
started, although with more variation across countries 
(Figure 1.14). The data suggest that the tightening 
stance and shift in central bank communications in 
recent months were viewed as enough to tame inflation 
over the medium term. Provided medium-term expec-
tations continue to remain well anchored during the 
unfolding of the current conflict, price- and wage-setting 
should adjust to the developments in commodity prices, 
supply-demand imbalances, and labor supply described 
in this chapter. This would help ease inflationary 
pressure, even as elevated inflation is expected to persist 
longer than had been anticipated.
A combination of these factors could drive inflation 
higher than in the baseline forecast. The inflation forecast 
is subject to high uncertainty, principally related to the 
war, the pandemic, and the attendant implications for 
prices of commodities and inputs to production. Pro-
longed supply disruptions because of continued fighting 
or renewed flare-ups of the pandemic would further 
drive up costs of intermediate inputs. Against a backdrop 
of high inflation, sustained further increases in commod-
ity prices could cause medium-term inflation expec-
tations to rise—in particular in emerging market and 
developing economies. In a context of tight labor mar-
kets, nominal wage growth could accelerate to catch up 
with consumer price inflation as workers seek (and get) 
higher wages to account for increased living costs. This 
would further intensify and broaden inflation pressures.
Rising Interest Rates: Implications for 
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
An increase in core sovereign interest rates before 
the war in Ukraine had already placed pressure on 
borrowers in some emerging market and developing 
economies. Markets have so far differentiated between 
Core goods—advanced economies
Core goods—emerging markets (excl. China)
Services—advanced economies
Services—emerging markets (excl. China)
Figure 1.13.  Goods and Services Inﬂation
(Deviation from pre–COVID-19 averages, percent)
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Lines show the difference between the year-over-year percentage change in 
price indices each month and the average observed during 2018 and 2019 for 
each sector. Core goods exclude energy and food. Countries are aggregated using 
purchasing-power-parity weights. Advanced economies include United States, 
Euro Area, Japan, Korea, Canada, and Australia. Emerging markets include 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Chile, Russia, and South Africa.
Jan.
2019
July
19
Jan.
20
July
20
Jan.
21
July
21
Dec.
21
Short term (one-year)
Medium term (three-year)
Figure 1.14.  Changes in Inﬂation Expectations: January 21–
January 22
(Percentage points)
Sources: Consensus Economics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
–1
0
1
2
3
–3
0
3
6
9
AUS
EUR
GBR
CAN
JPN
USA
CHN
IND
POL
ZAF
BRA
COL
MEX
RUS
TUR
(right scale)
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
14
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
countries directly and indirectly implicated in the 
conflict. Sovereign and credit default swap spreads 
have widened the most for Belarus, Russia, and 
Ukraine. Smaller extensions in spreads have occurred 
in other regional economies, such as Hungary and 
Poland. A generalized flight to safety as the war 
continues could put other economies under stress 
too. More broadly, average spreads had—prior to the 
war—looked similar to previous tightening cycles, 
in 2018 and in the 2013 taper tantrum. Since then, 
spreads have generally increased moderately (Fig-
ure 1.15). And compared with previous episodes, 
there is also more differentiation across borrowers, 
with greater dispersion of spreads now than in 2013 
or 2018. This reflects heterogeneity in country 
circumstances, including in the buildup of private 
debt and contingent liabilities (see Chapter 2; the 
sovereign-bank nexus in emerging market and devel-
oping economies is studied in Chapter 2 of the April 
2022 Global Financial Stability Report).
Past episodes suggest that rapid interest rate increases 
in advanced economies can tighten external financial 
conditions for emerging market and developing economies. 
Surprise tightening, particularly in the United States, 
has been associated with capital flow reversals from 
emerging market and developing economies, widening 
spreads, currency depreciations, and tighter external 
financial conditions (see Chapter 4 of the April 2021 
World Economic Outlook). The effects have varied 
across countries depending on their debt exposures 
and trade linkages to advanced economies. Countries 
with higher debt levels and larger gross financing needs 
have usually been vulnerable to more extreme stress in 
such episodes. In these countries, increases in domestic 
long-term yields largely reflect increases in risk premia, 
over and above the effects of increases in domestic 
policy rates. To the extent that higher core rates may 
reflect more robust nominal demand in advanced 
economy trading partners, countries with stronger 
trade ties to advanced economies are less exposed.
Record debt levels induced by the pandemic leave emerg-
ing market and developing economies more vulnerable to 
interest rate hikes this time around. As discussed in Chap-
ter 2, the April 2022 Fiscal Monitor, and Gaspar, Medas, 
and Perrelli (2021), the pandemic has led to unprece-
dented increases in sovereign debt. Figure 1.16 shows 
that in the median emerging market middle-income 
Taper tantrum (May–Dec. 2013)
Fed tightening cycle (Apr.–Dec. 2018)
Fed signals shift in stance (Dec. 2021–Jan. 2022)
Pre-conﬂict (Feb. 1–Feb. 23, 2022)
Latest since onset of conﬂict (Feb. 24–Apr. 8, 2022)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Box denotes upper quartile, median, and lower quartile. Whiskers show 
maximum and minimum values within the boundary of 1.5 times interquartile 
range from upper and lower quartiles respectively. Fed = Federal Reserve; 
EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income economies; LIDCs = low-income 
developing countries.
0
250
500
750
1,000
1,250
1,500
1,750
2,000
2,250
EMMIEs
LIDCs
Figure 1.15.  Sovereign Spreads at Tipping Points
(Basis points)
2013
2018
2021
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Box denotes upper quartile, median, and lower quartile. Whiskers show 
maximum and minimum values within the boundary of 1.5 times interquartile 
range from upper and lower quartiles respectively. Import and external debt 
service are for the following year. EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income 
economies; FX = foreign exchange; LIDCs = low-income developing countries.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
EMMIEs
LIDCs
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
EMMIEs
LIDCs
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
EMMIEs
LIDCs
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
EMMIEs
LIDCs
1. Government Debt to GDP
2. Government Debt Service
to Tax Revenue 
3. FX Reserves to Imports
4. FX Reserves to External
Debt Service 
Figure 1.16.  Emerging Market and Developing Economy
Vulnerabilities
(Percent)
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
15
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
economy, the debt-to-GDP ratio reached 60 percent in 
2021, up from about 40 percent at the time of the 2013 
taper tantrum. For low-income countries, which often 
have less debt-carrying capacity, the median debt is now 
nearly double that of 2013. With borrowing costs set to 
increase, interest expenses could rise significantly, placing 
pressure on national budgets and making it increasingly 
difficult to service debt.
External buffers generally remain healthy, but with 
variation across measures. Compared with a standard 
benchmark—as a ratio of imports—emerging mar-
ket foreign exchange reserves look relatively healthy, 
exceeding their levels in either the 2013 taper tan-
trum and the 2018 tightening cycle. This difference 
is particularly pronounced for low-income developing 
countries, where the reserves-to-imports ratio has risen 
the most in relative terms—in part reflecting the 2021 
allocation of Special Drawing Rights. However, when 
compared with external debt service, reserves have 
improved little for middle-income emerging market 
economies over the past decade and have deteriorated 
for low-income developing countries.
Key differences relative to past episodes further amplify 
current emerging market vulnerabilities. Emerging 
market and developing economies enter this tightening 
cycle with a larger fraction already under considerable 
stress. Some 60 percent of low-income developing 
countries are already in debt distress or at high risk of 
distress. Moreover, past episodes generally occurred at a 
time when large emerging markets—notably China—
were expected to maintain high growth rates over the 
medium term, with favorable spillovers. In contrast, 
the current tightening episode is unfolding amid a 
more tentative medium-term outlook and slower 
potential growth than in previous episodes, especially 
for key emerging markets, such as China. Geopolitical 
tensions mean that the overall external backdrop is also 
considerably more difficult now. And rising food and 
energy prices increase the risk of domestic social unrest 
(see paragraph on increased social tensions below). All 
these elements potentially increase the sensitivity of 
these economies’ assets to souring investor sentiment.
Economic Slack to Narrow in the Medium Term; 
Significant Scarring Expected
Beyond short-term output losses, the pandemic and 
geopolitical conflict are likely to leave longer-lasting 
footprints. First and foremost, the displacement of 
people and destruction of physical capital will mean 
that activity in Ukraine will remain well below prewar 
projections for some time. Elsewhere, sanctions can 
induce permanent dismantling of trade and supply 
chain linkages, entailing productivity and efficiency 
losses along the way. This is most prominent in Russia, 
where output is expected to remain below pre-war pro-
jections in the medium term. And scarring effects from 
the pandemic are likely to materialize through several 
other channels—including corporate bankruptcies, 
productivity losses, lower capital accumulation due to 
a drag on investment, slower labor force growth, and 
human capital losses from school closures (Chapter 2 
of the April 2021 World Economic Outlook).
The drag on output is expected to be more salient in 
emerging market and developing economies. The United 
States is expected to reach its pre-pandemic trend 
output path by 2022. In other advanced economies, 
the shortfall relative to the pre-pandemic trend will 
narrow (Figure 1.17)—although further fallout from 
the war can slow this process in Europe. Scarring 
effects from the pandemic are expected to be much 
larger in emerging market and developing economies 
because of relatively larger human capital and invest-
ment losses along with more limited telework adapt-
ability, more limited policy support, and generally 
slower vaccination (Figure 1.18). In those economies, 
economic activity and employment are expected to 
remain below the pre-pandemic trend throughout the 
forecast horizon. Overall, the pattern of forecast revi-
sions indicates that the pandemic shock to advanced 
economies has been relatively more transitory; while 
in emerging market and developing economies it has 
been relatively more permanent. Both groups are more 
aligned in their cyclical position, comparing the evolu-
tion of output gaps (which, in part, helps account for 
rising inflation pressure in both sets of economies, as 
discussed earlier).
Limiting scarring will depend on public investment and 
health and education policy responses, as well as on the 
path of the war in Ukraine. For advanced economies, 
recent upward revisions to potential output stem not 
only from a reassessment of the long-lasting impacts 
of the pandemic, but also from the expected impact of 
public infrastructure investment programs in the United 
States and of the European Union’s Next Generation 
EU funds. These initiatives may raise medium-term 
productivity through infrastructure upgrades and tech-
nological adaptation—including that associated with 
the green energy transition. This assumes that the war 
will not significantly derail those plans and that scarring 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
16
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
effects from the conflict remain largely contained to 
the countries directly involved. More limited public 
investment responses and relatively bigger challenges 
to remedy learning losses mean that upward potential 
output revisions are not as large in emerging market and 
developing economies. Importantly, improvements in 
vaccination rates have also been associated with upward 
revisions to output projections across the forecast horizon 
(Figure 1.19). This pattern reinforces the importance of 
continuing pandemic mitigation policies.
Trade Growth to Moderate, External Imbalances to 
Narrow over Medium Term
Global trade: Reflecting the significant slowdown 
in overall activity, global trade growth is expected to 
decline notably in 2022. Global goods demand is 
expected to moderate because of the war as extraor-
dinary policy support is withdrawn and as demand 
rebalances back toward services. Cross-border services 
trade—especially tourism—is however expected to 
remain subdued because of the war and lingering 
effects of the pandemic. Overall, global trade growth 
is projected to slow from an estimated 10.1 percent in 
2021 to 5 percent in 2022 and further to 4.4 percent 
in 2023 (1 and 0.5 percentage points lower than in the 
January forecast). Over the medium term, trade growth 
is expected to decline to about 3.5 percent.
Average, 2020–21
Average, 2022–23
October 2021 World Economic Outlook
October 2020 World Economic Outlook
October 2021 World Economic Outlook
October 2020 World Economic Outlook
Figure 1.17.  Medium-Term Prospects: Output and 
Employment
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
1. Average Output Gap Projections
2. Output Losses Relative to Pre-Pandemic Trend, 2024
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
3. Employment Losses Relative to Pre-Pandemic Trend, 2024
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Output gap in panel 1 is the difference between real and potential GDP as a 
percent of potential GDP. Output in panel 2 is real GDP. Medium-term losses in 
panels 2 and 3 are the difference between forecasts of the indicated variable (for 
2024) relative to the January 2020 WEO Update vintage. The sample of countries 
in panel 3 comprises those that have comparable employment projections in both 
vintages. The EMDE employment aggregate excludes China and India due to 
changes in employment deﬁnitions across vintages. Data labels use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. AEs (ex. USA) = advanced 
economies (excluding the United States); EMs = emerging market economies; 
EMs (Asia ex. CHN/EUR) = emerging market economies (in Asia excluding China, 
in Europe); EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; LAC = Latin 
American and Caribbean economies; LICs = low-income countries; 
ME&CA = Middle Eastern and Central Asian economies; SSA = sub-Saharan 
African economies. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
World
EMDEs
AEs ex. USA
USA
ESP
ITA
FRA
AUS
GBR
JPN
DEU
CAN
USA
ZAF
IND
IDN
MEX
CHN
BRA
POL
RUS
TUR
Advanced economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
EMs Asia
ex. CHN
LAC
SSA
EMDEs ME&
CA
World
CHN
 AEs
ex. USA
EMs
EUR
USA
AEs:
EMDEs:
Oct. 2019 WEO
Oct. 2020 WEO
Apr. 2022 WEO
Oct. 2019 WEO
Oct. 2020 WEO
Apr. 2022 WEO
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Potential real GDP projections indexed to 2019 values. Each line reﬂects a 
different vintage of World Economic Outlook (WEO) projections. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
95
100
105
110
115
120
2018
19
20
21
22
Figure 1.18.  Potential GDP
(Index, 2019 = 100)
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
17
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Global current account balances—the sum of coun-
try surpluses and absolute levels of deficits—widened 
for a second successive year in 2021 largely because 
of pandemic-related factors. These include a contin-
ued high export volume of medical equipment and 
work-from-home electronics as the pandemic main-
tained its grip and remote work prevailed for the most 
part. Across regions, the widening reflected a bigger 
deficit in the United States—in part related to contin-
ued large fiscal support—and higher surpluses among 
its main trading partners, notably China and the euro 
area. The strong oil price rebound in 2021 also contrib-
uted to a widening of external surpluses for exporters 
and deficits for importers. Current account balances are 
expected to remain elevated in the near term. Although 
projected to narrow subsequently (Figure 1.20, panel 1), 
the future path is uncertain because of the effects of the 
war, the path of the pandemic, and the related effects on 
commodity prices and trade patterns.
Global creditor and debtor positions: External 
assets and liabilities narrowed slightly in 2021 as a 
share of global GDP, returning close to 2019 levels 
(Figure 1.20, panel 2). This reflects the recovery in 
global activity—which strengthened the denominator 
of the ratio—and valuation changes. External assets 
and liabilities are however projected to remain close to 
all-time highs, posing risks to both debtor and creditor 
economies (see the 2021 External Sector Report).
Risks Are Large and to the Downside
The risks to the outlook are to the downside. 
Although a fast resolution of the war in Ukraine would 
lift confidence, ease pressure on commodity markets, 
Sources: IMF, Database of Country Fiscal Measures in Response to the COVID-19 
Pandemic; Our World In Data; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows point estimates and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals (with 
heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors) for coefﬁcients of a cross-sectional, 
cross-country regression (unweighted) of forecast revisions at different horizons 
since the October 2021 World Economic Outlook on the set of explanatory variables 
(ﬁscal support, vaccinations, and cases) and region ﬁxed effects. Fiscal support 
refers to additional above-the-line spending and forgone revenues and liquidity 
support in response to COVID-19 between June 5, 2021, and September 27, 2021, 
as a share of GDP. Vaccinations and cases are the difference in the cumulative 
share of population either fully vaccinated or diagnosed with COVID-19 between 
Septempber 30, 2021, and April 8, 2022. Explanatory variables are standardized 
to have zero mean and unit standard deviation.
–0.6
–0.3
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
2022
23
24
25
26
Figure 1.19.  Correlates of Projected Output Revisions to
Vaccinations
(Percentage points)
United States
Em. Asia
Oil exporters
Afr. and ME
CEE
Adv. Asia
Other adv.
China
Euro debtors
Japan
Eur. creditors
Lat. Am.
Discrepancy
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
Figure 1.20.  Current Account and International Investment
Positions
(Percent of global GDP)
1. Global Current Account Balance
2. Global International Investment Position
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan 
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South 
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, 
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, 
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, 
Sweden, Switzerland); Euro debtors = euro area debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, 
Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, 
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab 
Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, 
France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom).
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
18
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
and reduce supply bottlenecks, it is more likely that 
growth could slow further and inflation turn out 
higher than expected. Overall, risks are elevated and 
broadly comparable to the situation at the start of the 
pandemic—an unprecedented combination of factors 
shapes the outlook, with individual elements interacting 
in ways that are inherently difficult to predict. Many 
of the risks described below are essentially an intensifi-
cation of forces already present in the baseline. More-
over, the realization of near-term risks can precipitate 
medium-term risks and make it harder to address 
longer-term challenges. The most prominent negative 
risks include the following.
•• A worsening of the war would exacerbate the direct 
and indirect effects factored in the baseline forecast. 
Principally, these include further amplifications of 
the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and the influx 
of refugees into neighboring countries. In addition, 
tighter sanctions could lead to additional ruptures 
of trade connections—including crucial energy 
links between Russia and Europe—with detrimen-
tal effects on cross-border investment. This would 
lead to more supply disruptions, global price rises, 
and volatility in commodity markets, with further 
declines in regional and global output (see Scenario 
Box). Although direct foreign claims on Russian 
institutions appear limited, a default on obligations 
would impact balance sheets abroad and possibly 
reveal indirect exposures elsewhere in the financial 
system, with adverse effects beyond immediate 
partners. This includes a potential further sharp 
repricing of emerging market risk (see below). The 
risk of cybersecurity breaches has also increased, 
with the potential to cripple critical infrastructure 
and financial intermediation.
•• Increased social tensions: Following a dramatic 
decline during the pandemic, unrest has reemerged 
in recent years, although it has not yet reached 
its pre-pandemic peak (Figure 1.21). The war in 
Ukraine has increased the probability of wider social 
tensions in the near term through two main chan-
nels. The first is a further sharp rise in global fuel 
and food prices—a particular concern in emerging 
market and developing economies with limited fiscal 
space that are highly dependent on energy and food 
imports for basic consumption. This could intensify 
commodity hoarding, export controls, and domes-
tic restrictions—with further knock-on effects on 
supply disruptions, prices, and social unrest. The 
second is the longer-term impact of the humani-
tarian crisis. Although host nations have responded 
with immense generosity, the sheer volume of 
refugees could overwhelm local support. And such 
pressures will be amplified should the conflict spread 
or persist. In the longer term, large refugee inflows 
may exacerbate preexisting social tensions and 
fuel unrest.
•• A resurgence of the pandemic: Although conditions 
are improving, the pandemic may yet take another 
turn for the worse—as seen, for example, with 
recent rising caseloads in China and elsewhere in the 
Asia-Pacific region. Although the original Omicron 
strain ended up being relatively mild in terms of 
severe illness for the vaccinated, it is too soon to 
assess the threat its subvariants pose. A more dan-
gerous mutation, perhaps one that retains Omicron’s 
ability to dodge immunity but with enhanced lethal-
ity, would be a significant blow.
•• A worsening slowdown in China: A prolonged 
downturn in China is another immediate risk that 
could expose structural weaknesses such as high local 
government liabilities, property developer leverage, 
household debt, and a fragile banking system. Such 
a scenario would also result in reduced demand 
for exports from many middle- and low-income 
countries in the region and—in the case of more 
prolonged lockdowns—could disrupt goods supply 
for the rest of the world. In addition, the combi-
nation of more transmissible variants and the strict 
zero-COVID policy could continue to hamper 
Three-month rolling average
Twelve-month rolling average
Figure 1.21.  Fraction of Countries with a Major Unrest Event
(Percent)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2016
17
18
19
20
21
Source: Barrett and others (2020).
Note: Social unrest events are inferred from exceptionally large increases in 
country media coverage of key terms related to protests, riots, and other forms of 
civil disorder. The ﬁgure shows the one-sided 3- and 12-month rolling averages of 
the fraction of countries with unrest events.
Feb.
22
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
19
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
economic activity and increase uncertainty. Larger 
disruptions could impact key commercial activities, 
including through port lockdowns.
•• Rising medium-term inflation expectations: Infla-
tion expectations remained reasonably well 
anchored in most economies during the pandemic. 
Despite recent rises, markets expect inflation to 
moderate over the medium term as central banks 
around the world respond. Inflation expecta-
tions have so far risen substantially in only a few 
emerging market and developing economies. Yet 
with already high inflation and rising energy and 
food prices, higher inflation expectations could 
become more widespread and, in turn, lead to 
further increases in prices. Moreover, with nominal 
wage growth still running behind price inflation in 
most countries, there is a risk that pent-up wage 
increases will materialize and add to overall price 
pressures. In such a scenario, monetary policy 
would need to respond more aggressively than cur-
rently expected, further weighing on the outlook.
•• Higher interest rates leading to widespread debt distress: 
The pandemic led to record levels of public debt 
around the world. As interest rates rise, this will 
strain public budgets with tough choices around fiscal 
consolidation over the medium term, as pressures 
for social and, in some cases, defense spending may 
remain high. A successful transition will require 
credible fiscal frameworks. Should adjustment fail and 
the credibility of these frameworks be undermined, 
a confidence crisis might emerge leading to cor-
related capital outflows—particularly from emerging 
markets—and could create simultaneous debt crises. 
The probability of this outcome would increase sig-
nificantly if monetary policy in advanced economies 
has to react even more strongly to inflation pressures 
than anticipated. More generally, higher interest rates 
could lead to a disorderly correction of currently 
stretched asset prices, including housing.
•• A wider deterioration of the geopolitical environment: In 
the longer term, the war in Ukraine risks destabilizing 
the rules-based frameworks that have governed inter-
national relations in the post–World War II period. 
Increased international polarization, or a more wide-
spread conflict, would worsen the humanitarian crisis 
and impede the global economic integration essential 
for long-term prosperity. Technological exchange may 
be limited, production networks and technology stan-
dards could coalesce into distinct blocks, and welfare 
gains from globalization could be reversed if countries 
adopt more protectionist policies. Reorganization is 
also possible in the international monetary system: a 
segmentation of global reserve assets and emergence 
of alternative cross-border payment systems could 
arise as a result of fragmented production blocks. 
Moreover, fracturing international relationships could 
also undermine the trust and cooperation vital to 
addressing long-term structural challenges, including 
climate change, debt resolution, and trade barriers. If 
this risk materializes, the global economy will likely 
suffer through an unpredictable transition to a new 
political reality, with financial volatility, commodity 
price fluctuations, and dislocation of production and 
trade along the way.
•• The ongoing climate emergency: Despite some steps 
on the path toward a green transition, global 
emissions are—on current trends—very likely to 
overshoot the Paris Agreement temperature goals 
by the end of the century and lead to catastrophic 
climate change (with low-likelihood outcomes such 
as the ice sheet collapse, abrupt ocean circulation 
changes, and some extreme events and warming that 
cannot be ruled out). Indeed, the effects of warm-
ing are already starting to show: droughts, forest 
fires, floods, and major hurricanes have become 
more frequent and more severe. And it is often 
those least able to cushion the blows of such events 
who are also most exposed to them. Depending on 
their implementation, policies to speed the green 
transition could have near-term inflationary effects 
(see the Commodities Special Feature)—which 
could weaken support for the vital climate policy 
agenda. The overall effect on inflation will also 
depend on whether carbon pricing is accompa-
nied by lower labor taxation (for example, as part 
of a budget-neutral shift to fossil fuel taxation). 
Meanwhile, the war in Ukraine will likely have an 
important bearing on the energy transition. In the 
short term, war-induced energy supply shortfalls and 
higher prices could mean an increased reliance on 
dirtier fossil fuels, such as coal, as a stopgap. But in 
the longer term, the fallout from the conflict and 
strategic motives for energy independence could also 
speed investment in renewables. Current geopolitical 
tensions, however, risk derailing the global coopera-
tion necessary for an orderly energy transition.
Interconnectedness of the risks to the outlook: Risks 
that most directly affect the short-term outlook (for 
example, inflation and interest rates) can still have 
cascading effects in the longer term (for example, 
undermining the climate agenda and harming fiscal 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
20
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
solvency, respectively). Moreover, efforts to support 
vulnerable groups and mitigate the fallout from the 
war can limit the space available to insure against 
more medium-term risks, such as catastrophic 
climate change.
Policies to Sustain the Recovery and Improve 
Medium-Term Prospects
The war in Ukraine has exacerbated difficult policy 
trade-offs: between fighting inflation and safeguarding 
the pandemic recovery; and between supporting those 
impacted by rising living costs and rebuilding fiscal 
buffers. Meanwhile, the pandemic remains stubbornly 
persistent, and structural issues, such as inequality and 
climate change, remain unresolved. And with high 
public debt, space to respond is severely constrained. 
The war in Ukraine also poses new multilateral policy 
challenges—most pressing is the growing human-
itarian crisis in the region. How should policy-
makers respond?
Fighting inflation: As noted, global inflation to 
an extent reflects supply-demand imbalances, which 
intensified during the recovery last year, partly as a 
result of policy support. However, some of the factors 
contributing to high inflation have been largely beyond 
the control of central banks, with prices of energy and 
food driven by global supply shocks—including the 
war in Ukraine. Monetary authorities should carefully 
monitor the pass-through of rising international prices 
to domestic inflation expectations in order to calibrate 
their responses. In some places, including the United 
States, inflationary pressure had strengthened con-
siderably and become more broad-based even before 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine—buoyed by strong 
policy support. In other countries, the prominence of 
fuel- and war-affected commodities in local consump-
tion baskets could lead to broader and more persistent 
price pressures. In both cases, tighter monetary policy 
will be appropriate to check the cycle of higher prices 
driving up wages and inflation expectations, and wages 
and inflation expectations driving up prices.
Central banks should continue to clearly articulate 
the policy outlook and adjust the monetary stance in 
a data-dependent manner. The transmission of the 
shock of the war in Ukraine will vary across countries, 
depending on trade and financial linkages, exposure 
to commodity price increases, and the strength of the 
preexisting inflation surge. The appropriate monetary 
policy response will therefore differ across economies. 
In the United States—where moderate direct war 
effects are expected, inflationary pressure has been 
broadening, labor markets continue to tighten, and 
nominal wage growth has been robust—the rate-hiking 
cycle should continue. The decision to tighten will 
be tougher in countries where adverse growth effects 
from the war are more prominent and yet inflation is 
rising—particularly in Europe. In those cases, the pace 
of policy tightening should be calibrated to the severity 
of the war’s adverse impact on activity, and forward 
guidance should signal readiness to shift the monetary 
stance in a data-dependent way to maintain the credi-
bility of inflation-targeting frameworks.
Inflation expectations will be an important signal 
of this credibility. As such, the recent upward drift in 
inflation expectations is of concern, even though they 
have generally been concentrated at relatively short 
horizons (Figure 1.14). Expectations must remain well 
anchored over longer horizons to ensure the credibility 
of policy frameworks. In countries where expectations 
have risen more sharply, central banks should clearly 
communicate the importance of inflation stabilization 
in their objectives, backing this with policy action 
where necessary. Some emerging market central banks 
have already taken aggressive action to get ahead of 
price pressures, while others are only just getting 
started. Nonetheless, as advanced economy central 
banks tighten policy, any resulting currency deprecia-
tions in emerging markets could cause higher infla-
tion expectations and necessitate further increases in 
policy rates.
A key issue for the medium term is where interest rates 
will settle after the pandemic. Even with the antici-
pated increases in policy rates, given the outlook for 
inflation, short-term real interest rates at the end of 
2022 are likely to be negative (Figure 1.22). With 
inflation at multidecade highs in the United States, 
the United Kingdom, and the euro area, a crucial 
question is how high policy rates will have to rise in 
order to stabilize inflation. In past episodes, lengthy 
periods of tighter policy were needed to bring infla-
tion under control. For example, during the 1980–82 
disinflation in the United States, the federal funds rate 
exceeded headline consumer price inflation long after 
price pressures started to ease.2 Currently it is not yet 
2Annual US headline consumer price inflation peaked at 14 per-
cent in the first half of 1980, but the federal funds rate reached its 
peak of 19 percent only in the first half of 1981. US inflation had 
declined to 3 percent by 1983, but the effective real federal funds 
rate remained positive long into the second half of the 1980s.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
21
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
clear whether and for how long the real rate will need 
to be positive (that is, when the policy rate exceeds 
the rate of expected inflation). How far interest rates 
will ultimately rise depends to an important extent 
on the post-pandemic neutral rate. Since the global 
financial crisis of 2008, neutral interest rates have been 
thought to be very near zero, cramping (conventional) 
monetary policy space. Their future level depends on 
structural developments that influence saving and 
investment, which are currently in flux (Box 1.2). 
Given high uncertainty around the policy path beyond 
2022–23, central banks should communicate clearly 
their perspective on the post-pandemic neutral rate 
and, if needed, their readiness to maintain policy rates 
above that benchmark for as long as needed to bring 
inflation down to target—giving markets some clarity 
on the likely endpoint for rate hikes.
Preparing for tighter financial conditions and spillovers 
from geopolitical volatility: Regulators should take early 
action and tighten selected macroprudential tools to 
target pockets of elevated vulnerabilities (see the April 
2022 Global Financial Stability Report). This is partic-
ularly important with monetary policy on a tightening 
path and elevated geopolitical uncertainty, which raise 
the potential for sudden risk repricing that would 
bring those vulnerabilities to the fore. Insolvency 
frameworks may also need to be strengthened in some 
cases, including with more reliance on out-of-court 
mechanisms to expedite processes. Emerging market 
borrowers should reduce near-term rollover risks by 
extending debt maturities where possible and contain 
the buildup of currency mismatches. Exchange rate 
flexibility can in general help absorb shocks. But in 
economies with shallow foreign exchange markets, 
sudden capital flow reversals can jeopardize finan-
cial stability. In those economies, foreign exchange 
intervention may be needed to address disorderly 
conditions; in imminent crisis circumstances, tem-
porary capital flow management measures may be 
warranted—but should not substitute for needed 
macroeconomic policy adjustment.
Supporting the vulnerable while maintaining fiscal 
soundness: Fiscal policies should depend on exposure 
to the war, the state of the pandemic, and the strength 
of the recovery. Following a huge and necessary fiscal 
expansion in many countries during the pandemic, 
debt levels are at all-time highs. The need for con-
solidation should not prevent governments from 
prioritizing spending to protect and help vulnera-
ble populations affected by the war in Ukraine and 
the pandemic.
In countries facing large price increases, targeted 
income support can be used to alleviate stress on 
household budgets. But as with pandemic-induced 
transfers, this support should be designed to deliver 
maximum relief to the most vulnerable at lower cost 
(for example, through means testing and gradual 
phaseout above certain income thresholds). In coun-
tries facing refugee inflows, integration support should 
be adequately funded with strong multilateral support 
(see paragraph on providing a coordinated response 
to the humanitarian crisis, below). On the health 
side, funding for vaccine production and distribution, 
campaigns to encourage take-up, testing, and therapies 
should all remain protected. Pandemic-era transfers 
will need to be better targeted.
Where the pandemic is subsiding, previous support 
measures can be phased out to recover fiscal space. 
Firms affected by war-related disruptions (including 
shortages of inputs or diminished access to trade 
finance) may however require temporary, targeted 
support through credit guarantees or transfers. But it 
is essential that these measures be directed to affected 
firms with operations that are viable over the medium 
term; otherwise, such initiatives would hinder the 
reallocation of resources needed for the recovery. 
Indeed, the post-pandemic future will likely require 
cross-sectoral labor reallocation (see Chapter 3 for 
one aspect, the energy transition). Labor market and 
income support policies should be designed to provide 
United States
Euro area
Japan
Other AEs
Other EMs excluding China, Russia, Turkey
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
2019:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
22:Q1
22:Q4
Figure 1.22.  Real Policy Rates
(Percent)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Euro area’s projection part is estimated by using 16 individual euro area 
countries’ projections. Other AEs and other EMs comprise 12 and 10 economies, 
respectively. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
22
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
a safety net for workers in transition without hindering 
future employment growth. Training programs, hiring 
subsidies, and programs that match workers and firms 
should remain a priority, along with limited and tem-
porary public support for displaced workers.
The ability to fund these initiatives will be limited by 
available fiscal space. Revenue mobilization and expen-
diture measures can help alleviate these constraints—
broadening the tax base and enhancing compliance, 
scaling back broad subsidies and recurrent expendi-
tures, and strengthening public financial management. 
Many countries will thus need to develop credible 
plans to stabilize their finances over the medium term 
(see Chapter 2 of the October 2021 Fiscal Monitor). 
This would also create space for near-term priority 
spending—particularly in the case of emerging mar-
ket and developing economies facing the prospect of 
higher borrowing costs as monetary policy tightens in 
advanced economies. Fiscal frameworks with simple 
rules that promote debt sustainability but are still flexi-
ble enough to manage shocks (including well-designed 
escape clauses) can help achieve such consolidations.
Where fiscal space permits and when monetary pol-
icy is constrained at the national level—for instance by 
the Effective Lower Bound or in a monetary union—
broader fiscal support may be warranted, depending 
on the severity of the decline in aggregate demand. But 
this support should be deployed in ways that avoid 
exacerbating ongoing demand-supply imbalances and 
price pressures.
Health policies and preparedness: The virus continues 
to evolve, and COVID-19 could be around for the long 
term. The best defense is to ensure that each country 
has equitable access to a comprehensive COVID-19 
toolkit with vaccines, tests, and treatment. Yet the roll-
out of many COVID-19 tools continues to proceed at 
unequal speeds. Over 100 countries are not on track to 
reach the IMF pandemic proposal’s mid-2022 vaccina-
tion target of 70 percent, and similar inequality persists 
in access to tests and treatments. Regarding vaccines, 
substantial supply increases in recent months mean 
that in-country absorptive capacity is emerging as the 
key barrier. Keeping a broad set of tools updated as the 
virus evolves will require ongoing investments in med-
ical research, disease surveillance, and health systems 
that reach the last mile in every community.
Embracing positive structural changes: Structural 
change is essential for countries looking to grow after 
the pandemic. Improvements in digital communica-
tions will allow businesses to reap the benefits of new 
technologies, particularly in emerging market and 
developing economies. Likewise, retooling and reskill-
ing workers are crucial to allow them to participate in 
the digital economy. The pandemic has interrupted 
schooling for many children across the world, but most 
critically in low-income countries, where online alterna-
tives are less readily available. Without action to offset 
these learning losses, this setback to global education 
will affect productivity, earnings, and growth for many 
years. In the short term, lower tariffs and fewer bar-
riers to trade would not only allow for more efficient 
allocation of productive resources but may also help 
ease supply bottlenecks and inflation pressure. With 
possible long-lasting disruptions to trade and reconfig-
urations of supply chains in the aftermath of the war in 
Ukraine, such measures are even more essential.
Tackling the climate emergency: Recent geopolitical 
events have brought into sharp relief the need for 
a coordinated approach to bring about the steady 
replacement of fossil fuels with renewables and other 
low-carbon energy sources. According to the Inter-
national Energy Agency a threefold increase in clean 
energy investment is needed by 2030 to accelerate 
decarbonization of the power sector and electrify end 
uses of energy. In the medium term a step change is 
needed in fiscal policy—notably involving carbon pric-
ing (or equivalent mechanisms) and fossil fuel subsidy 
reform to shift private investment. Pricing should be 
supplemented with supportive policies; for example, 
subsidies for renewables, public investment in enabling 
infrastructure such as smart grids, and feebates to 
reinforce incentives without further raising energy costs 
and bosting inflation. Some revenue could fund transi-
tion measures (for example, targeted compensation to 
those who are harmed) and to ensure buy-in. Reforms 
when energy prices are high may be less popular, but 
the surge in global fossil fuel prices underscores the 
need to shift economies toward cleaner energy that 
depends less on fluctuations in international prices. 
Permanent carbon and fuel subsidies (or tax relief) 
motivated by short-term price spikes must be avoided.
Multilateral cooperation: Given the international 
and mutual nature of many of the policy challenges, 
international cooperation and multilateral agencies will 
be essential. Main tasks include:
•• Providing a coordinated response to the humanitarian 
crisis: The magnitude of refugee flows from Ukraine 
calls for a coordinated response. Given the greater 
burden on neighboring countries—particularly in 
the short-term—assistance must come from both 
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
23
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
European and multilateral institutions. This includes 
emergency assistance as well as access to budget 
support financing to facilitate the integration of 
migrants if they are not able to return home. Once 
the war ends, concerted international efforts will be 
needed to support reconstruction in Ukraine.
•• Maintaining liquidity in the global financial sys-
tem: International cooperation will be essential to 
manage the coming monetary tightening cycle. 
Access to emergency liquidity is a crucial backstop 
against international financial spillovers. During the 
pandemic, rapid financing instruments and credit 
facilities extended a lifeline to many economies, and 
a new Special Drawing Rights allocation boosted 
reserves. As the pandemic subsides, IMF facilities 
will continue to address imbalances, help devise 
credible adjustment paths to macroeconomic sta-
bility, and create conditions for sustained, inclusive 
medium-term growth. Central banks should be 
prepared to activate emergency swap lines as needed 
to reduce the risk of foreign currency liquidity 
hoarding and deposit withdrawals in overseas 
jurisdictions.
•• Guaranteeing an orderly system for resolving debt: 
Some cases call for more than liquidity support 
alone to avoid debt distress. For these, a timely and 
orderly resolution of debt is the best way to miti-
gate the economic consequences. Yet complicated 
claims with many lenders can hinder this process 
(Figure 1.23). To address this problem, the Group of 
Twenty (G20) has endorsed the Common Frame-
work for Debt Treatments, setting out a consis-
tent approach to international debt resolution. Its 
application must be stepped up; the three countries 
that have requested relief under the terms of this 
agreement have experienced significant delays. And 
the expiration in 2021 of the G20’s Debt Service 
Suspension Initiative program—which allowed 
low-income countries to suspend debt service pay-
ments temporarily without penalty—makes orderly 
debt resolution even more pressing.
•• Climate policies: Despite almost 140 countries set-
ting long-term net zero emissions targets, there is 
still a large gap between global mitigation ambi-
tion and policy action on climate change. Green-
house gas emissions need to be cut by one-quarter 
to one-half by 2030 to be consistent with lim-
iting warming to 1.5 to 2 degrees Celsius. At 
COP26, almost 140 countries committed to net 
zero emissions sometime around midcentury. 
However, only a third of countries increased their 
near-term targets substantively, mostly advanced 
economies (­Figure 1.24). And there is an even 
larger gap in policy action. Policies equivalent to 
a global carbon price of at least $75 are required 
by 2030 to limit warming to 2C—and even more 
for 1.5C. Scaling up ambition and action to nar-
row these gaps could be done in an equitable way, 
with advanced economies delivering the deepest 
cuts and emerging market and developing econo-
mies increasing their commitments. International 
coordination regimes, such as price floors among 
large emitters, and multilateral climate finance 
initiatives will likely be needed to address com-
petitiveness and policy uncertainties that hinder 
unilateral action.3
•• Providing global public health goods: As the world 
winds down from an emergency response to the 
pandemic, the focus should return to other global 
health priorities that have received less attention 
over the past two years. The world should not 
face a painful trade-off between saving lives from 
3On the proposal for an international carbon price floor, see Parry, 
Black, and Roaf (2021). Also see Chateau, Jaumotte, and Schwerhoff 
(forthcoming), who show that the proposal helps scale up reduc-
tions in global emissions and improves international burden sharing 
(relative to a uniform carbon price) while addressing competitive-
ness effects.
Paris Club
China
India
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Kuwait
Other
Figure 1.23.  Public External Debt, by Creditor
(Billions US dollars)
0
50
100
150
200
250
2006
08
10
12
14
16
18
20
Source: World Bank, International Debt Statistics.
Note: The ﬁgure shows public and privately guaranteed debt of countries eligible 
for the Debt Service Suspension Initiative. In terms of International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes, the Paris Club is composed of AUS, AUT, BEL, 
BRA, CAN, CHE, DEU, DNK, ESP, FIN, FRA, GBR, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, NLD, NOR, 
RUS, SWE, USA.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
24
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
COVID-19 and from other diseases, such as malaria 
and tuberculosis. In this context, up-front financing 
from international donors is still an urgent priority. 
And closing the $23.4 billion funding gap for the 
Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator is an 
important first step. In addition, enhanced coor-
dination between finance and health ministries is 
essential to increasing resilience—in the face both of 
potential new SARS-CoV-2 variants and of future 
pandemics that could pose systemic risk.
•• Cooperation on taxation and cross-border trade: 
Policymakers should continue to cooperate on 
cross-border tax matters to support revenue 
and equity (Chapter 2 of the April 2022 Fiscal 
Monitor) and avoid export controls and barriers to 
cross-border trade that will exacerbate supply disrup-
tions. In a more difficult multilateral environment, 
countries should also avoid adding to the long list 
of existing trade disputes that further imperil global 
economic prospects.
Business as usual
Country pledges after COP21
Country pledges after COP26
Illustrative scenarios with 1.5 and 2
degrees Celsius warming
Figure 1.24.  Changes in Emissions in 2030 versus 2021 under
NDCs and Warming Scenarios
(Percent change a year)
–80
–70
–60
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
10
20
30
0
Ambition
gap 
Stated
ambition
World
LIDCs
EMMIEs
AEs
Source: Black and others (2021).
Note: AEs = advanced economies; COP26 = United Nations Climate Change 
Conference 2021; COP21 = United Nations Climate Change Conference 2015; 
EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income economies; LIDCs = low-income 
developing countries; NDCs = nationally determined contributions.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
25
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
The IMF’s G20 model is used to explore the 
global macroeconomic implications of a scenario in 
which the sanctions on Russia arising from the war 
in Ukraine escalate further. In the scenario sanc-
tions are broadened mid-2022 to include additional 
embargoes on oil and gas and the disconnection 
of Russia from much of the global financial and 
trade system.
In such a scenario the impact would propagate 
to the rest of the world through higher commod-
ity prices, disruptions to supply chains, and tighter 
financial conditions. The resulting supply shock, 
at a time when commodity prices and inflationary 
pressures are already high, would lead to an upward 
shift in inflation expectations and require a greater 
tightening in monetary policy, further amplifying the 
negative impact on global activity. Except for oil and 
some commodity exporters, most countries would 
be negatively impacted by the economic fallout, with 
countries in the European Union more affected than 
other advanced and emerging market economies given 
their larger exposure.
The scenario assumptions are presented in three 
separate layers for ease of exposition.
Commodities, Supply Chain, and Inflation
Russian trade and productivity. Russia’s current 
baseline forecast is for existing sanctions to produce 
a large contraction in non-energy exports, while 
energy exports decrease moderately. Under the adverse 
scenario the decline in energy exports is instead 
larger, with oil and gas export volumes decreasing by 
10 percent in 2022 and 20 percent in 2023 relative to 
the current baseline, and with volumes remaining at 
their lower 2023 levels through the rest of the forecast 
horizon. The additional sanctions also affect Russia’s 
non-oil exports, which decline by 7 percent in 2022 
and 15 percent in 2023, again relative to the current 
baseline, and remaining at their 2023 level through 
2027. Russia’s loss of access to foreign technology and 
investment is amplified, triggering a persistent decline 
in total factor productivity growth.
Commodity prices. The global supply of several 
commodities decreases in this scenario. As a result, oil 
prices increase by 10 percent in 2022 and 15 percent 
in 2023, while metal prices increase by 5 percent in 
2022 and 7.5 percent in 2023 (all relative to base-
line). Food commodity prices also increase, including 
because of the impact of higher energy prices on 
fertilizer costs, with a broad food index increasing by 
4 percent in 2022 and 6 percent in 2023. Natural 
gas prices in Europe are assumed to rise by roughly 
20 percent above baseline in 2022; Asian countries 
experience a similar increase due to the integration 
between the two markets. The increase in commodity 
prices is assumed to fade gradually beyond 2023 as 
supply responds and demand decreases.
Supply disruptions and confidence. Shortages of 
several commodities lead to additional disruption of 
supply chains, most notably in Europe, and add to the 
impact on inflation and activity. The combination of 
supply disruptions and higher energy prices in Europe, 
and Asia to a lesser extent, leads to weakened confi-
dence, further dampening activity in those regions.
Inflation Expectations
The supply shock in the scenario triggers an increase 
in short-run inflation expectations over 2022–23. 
The increase is more pronounced in countries where 
inflation is initially higher, such as the US and some 
EMs, or where the supply shock is expected to be 
larger, such as in Europe and developing countries. 
For reference, the increase in one-year ahead inflation 
expectations in the US is around 70 bp in 2023. 
The fading of the commodity shock, the endogenous 
monetary policy response, and the impact from lower 
demand bring short-term expectations back to target 
after 2023. An increase in longer-term inflation expec-
tations would amplify the negative macro impact but 
is not considered here.
Financial Conditions
A broadening of sanctions will tighten domestic 
financial conditions in Russia further than has been 
the case so far. It is also assumed that sanctions halve 
the value of Russia’s positive net foreign asset position, 
further dampening domestic demand. In the rest of 
the world, a risk-off episode also generates further 
tightening in financial conditions. Emerging markets 
experience an increase in both corporate and sovereign 
spreads; advanced economies face higher corporate 
spreads. The magnitude of the tightening is assumed 
larger in European countries.
Finally, regarding the fiscal policy response, auto-
matic stabilizers are assumed to operate in the scenario 
but no additional discretionary response is included. 
The economic impact from the adverse scenario would 
be lower should such a response take place.
Scenario Box
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
26
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Global Macro Impact
Scenario Figure 1 presents the effect from each 
layer cumulatively and as deviation from baseline. For 
Russia, broader sanctions lead to a large, continued 
contraction in activity, reflecting the hit to exports, 
lower productivity, and tighter financial conditions. 
The cumulative impact implies that GDP is about 
15 percent lower than baseline by 2027, coming on 
top of the large decrease in GDP already in the base-
line relative to pre-conflict projections.
The impact on the European Union is sizable, with 
the level of GDP close to 3 percent below baseline by 
2023, reflecting the impact from higher commodity 
prices but also from higher inflation expectations. 
Advanced economies excluding the EU and emerging 
economies excluding Russia see an impact on the level 
of activity of around –1.5 percent, by 2023, with 
greater variation among emerging market economies as 
those that are net oil exporters (not shown separately) 
benefit. Global GDP decreases by about 2 percent by 
2023; the decrease is somewhat persistent, and global 
activity remains about 1 percent lower than in the 
baseline by 2027, with more than half of that decline 
coming from the hit to activity in Russia.
The scenario also results in higher inflation in both 
2022 and 2023. Global headline inflation increases by 
more than 1 percentage point in both 2022 and 2023. 
Core inflation increases by half a percentage point in 
2023, again on top of high inflation in the baseline. 
The disinflationary effect of the underlying decrease 
in global activity starts to dominate after that, and 
inflation eventually falls below baseline by 2024.
Effects of commodity prices and supply chain
disruptions 
Plus inﬂation expectations
Plus tightening of global ﬁnancial conditions
Oil
Metals
Food
Scenario Figure 1.  Downside Scenario
(Percent deviation from baseline, unless noted
otherwise) 
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1. Global
    Real GDP
2. Commodity
    Prices  
0
5
10
15
20
2021
23
25
27
2021
23
25
27
3. Russia Real
    GDP 
4. EU Real GDP
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2021
23
25
27
2021
23
25
27
5. AEs excl. EU
    Real GDP
6. EMDEs excl.
    Russia
    Real GDP 
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
2021
23
25
27
2021
23
25
27
7. Global Core
    CPI Inﬂation1 
8. Global
    Headline
    CPI Inﬂation1
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2021
23
25
27
2021
23
25
27
Sources: IMF, Group of 20 model simulation; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; CPI = consumer price 
index; EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies; EU = european union.
1Percentage point deviation from baseline.
Scenario Box (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
27
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Two years into the COVID-19 pandemic, a puzzle 
has emerged in several advanced economies: unfilled 
job vacancies have increased sharply even though 
employment has yet to fully recover.1 The United 
States and the United Kingdom are two cases in 
point: most recent vacancies-to-unemployment ratios 
are significantly above pre–COVID-19 levels, but 
employment rates are not (Figure 1.1.1). This box 
sheds light on several factors that have contributed to 
this puzzling labor market phenomenon, including 
(1) labor market mismatch—discrepancies between 
the types of vacant positions and the skills of job 
seekers; (2) health-related concerns, which may be a 
strong driver of the withdrawal of older workers from 
the workforce; (3) changing job preferences among 
workers, which may account in part for historically 
high quit rates—a phenomenon sometimes called the 
“Great Resignation”; and (4) school and childcare 
center disruptions leading mothers of young children 
to exit the labor force—the “She-cession.”
Mismatch: The impact of the pandemic and lock-
down measures differed markedly among industries 
and occupations. They hit particularly hard in sectors 
that require in-person interaction, such as accommo-
dation and food services and arts and entertainment; 
“teleworkable” jobs fared substantially better. This 
resulted in mismatch that, however, receded gradually 
as hard-hit industries recovered from the COVID-19 
shock and hired again throughout 2020 and 2021 
(see also Pizzinelli and Shibata 2022). As of the third 
quarter of 2021, labor market mismatch accounted for 
at most one-fifth of the shortfall in the employment 
rate vis-à-vis the pre-COVID level in both the United 
Kingdom and the United States.
COVID-driven fall in labor force participation among 
specific demographic groups: The inactivity rate of older 
workers rose markedly above its pre–COVID-19 
trend after 2020, with no subsequent reversion 
(Figure 1.1.2). Health concerns and, to a lesser 
extent in 2020–21, pension plan valuation gains have 
contributed to this labor force withdrawal, which by 
the fourth quarter of 2021 accounted for a third of 
the employment gap in the United Kingdom and the 
United States relative to pre-pandemic levels. Likewise, 
prolonged school closures and scarce childcare oppor-
The authors of this box are Myrto Oikonomou, Carlo Pizzi-
nelli, and Ippei Shibata.
1For a broader analysis of labor market tightness in advanced 
economies, see Duval and others (2022).
tunities kept some women with young children home 
in the United States. This was not the case in the 
United Kingdom, possibly because nurseries largely 
remained open throughout the pandemic.2
Changing worker preferences: Rates of voluntary job 
quits have reached historic highs in both countries. 
There is tentative evidence that, beyond seizing new 
opportunities to move up the job ladder in tight labor 
markets, workers’ preferences may have partly shifted 
toward jobs that bring not only higher pay but also 
greater safety and flexibility. In particular, several 
industries in which job quit rates have risen the most 
2Besides older workers and women with young children, 
Duval and others (2022) document that the employment recov-
ery is particularly lagging for low-skilled workers and that the 
decline in immigration has also contributed to labor shortages in 
low-skill occupations.
Employment rate (percent)
VU ratio (right scale)
Figure 1.1.1.  Employment Rate and Labor
Market Tightness
(Percent, ratio)
55
60
65
70
75
80
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.8
Jan.
2020
July
20
Jan.
21
July
21
Nov.
21
1. United States
74
75
76
77
78
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2019:Q4
20:Q2
20:Q4
21:Q2
21:Q4
2. United Kingdom
Sources: Current Population Survey and Job Opening and 
Labor Turnover Survey for United States; Labour Force 
Survey and Ofﬁce of National Statistics for United Kingdom; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: VU ratio = vacancies-to-unemployment ratio.
Box 1.1. The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
28
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
involve a disproportionate share of contact-intensive, 
physically strenuous, less flexible, and low-paying 
jobs, such as in accommodation and food services and 
retail trade.
Rising labor market tightness has spurred faster 
nominal wage growth, particularly for low-paying 
jobs.3 Since the start of the pandemic, the increase 
in tightness alone is estimated to have directly 
increased overall nominal UK and US wage inflation 
3In the United Kingdom and the United States, nominal 
wages are already growing faster than before the pandemic, 
although these gains have been largely or more than fully eroded 
by price inflation. (See Duval and others [2022] for more 
discussion.)
by ­approximately 1.5 percentage points. In low-pay 
industries, this impact has been much greater, reflect-
ing both above-average increases in labor market tight-
ness and a stronger historical link between tightness 
and wage growth in these industries (Figure 1.1.3). So 
far, overall implications of increased tightness for wage 
inflation have been muted, partly because low-wage 
workers account for a relatively small share of firms’ 
total labor costs. To the extent that tightness remains 
concentrated primarily in these jobs, the pass-through 
from wage growth in low-pay occupations to 
economy-wide price inflation is likely to remain 
limited. However, with price inflation largely or (more 
than) fully outpacing wage increases so far, and given 
persistent labor markets, overall nominal wage growth 
is likely to remain solid. Workers’ demands for a pay 
raise to compensate for fast-rising prices, along with an 
increase in their inflation expectations, could intensify 
inflation pressure, more so than tight labor markets.
United States
United Kingdom
United States trend
United Kingdom trend
Figure 1.1.2.  Inactivity Rates
(Percent)
48
50
52
54
56
58
2019:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
21:Q4
1. Older Workers
15
20
25
30
35
2019:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
21:Q4
2. Mothers with Young Children
Sources: Current Population Survey and Job Opening and 
Labor Turnover Survey for United States; Labour Force 
Survey and Ofﬁce of National Statistics for United Kingdom; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Older workers are aged 55–74; young children are 
aged 5 or younger. Linear trends are estimated over 
2015–19.
Sources: Current Population Survey; Job Opening and Labor 
Turnover Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Wage growth is year-over-year quarterly nominal 
hourly wage inﬂation. Tightness (measured as the 
vacancy-to-unemployment ratio) is lagged one quarter 
between 2003:Q1 and 2020:Q1. Each dot represents the 
mean of the x-axis and y-axis variables for each of the 40 
equal-sized bins of the x-axis variable. Low-pay industries 
are accommodation and food services, retail trade, and arts 
and entertainment.
Wage growth (percent)
Low-pay industries
Other industries
Figure 1.1.3.  United States Wage Growth and
Tightness across Sectors
(Percent, ratio)
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Labor market tightness (ratio)
Box 1.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
29
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
The endpoint of the monetary tightening cycle that 
started in many economies over the first months of 
2022 is heavily contingent on the evolution of the 
neutral rate of interest—the real interest rate consistent 
with a closed output gap and stable inflation. If neutral 
rates continue to decline as they have over the past four 
decades, inflation stabilization can be achieved with 
relatively less tightening. Given such policy relevance, it 
is crucial to revisit the long-term dynamics and determi-
nants of neutral rates to project their future path.
The fall in neutral interest rates has been a common 
phenomenon in many advanced economies since the 
1980s. Despite some cross-country differences, the 
decline became more homogenous over the years, 
converging to very low values (Figure 1.2.1). The 
literature identifies some factors that can explain such 
decline. Lower fertility rates and longer life expec-
tancy led to an increase in the share of older people 
in the population, boosting the supply of savings and 
depressing interest rates (Platzer and Peruffo 2022). At 
the same time, slower productivity growth (Eggerts-
son, Mehrotra, and Robbins 2019) and the decline in 
the price of capital goods (Sajedi and Thwaites 2016; 
Chapter 3 of the April 2019 World Economic Outlook) 
slowed investment spending and, consequently, led to 
a reduction in savings demand. High income inequal-
ity in many advanced economies has also contributed 
to lower interest rates, due to higher saving rates at the 
top of the income distribution (Straub 2019; Mian, 
Straub, and Sufi 2021a). Last, capital flows have upset 
the savings-investment balance in individual countries. 
Increased demand for safe assets, notably in emerging 
market economies (Bernanke 2005; Caballero and 
Farhi 2014), and higher risk premiums (Kopecky and 
Taylor 2020) are argued to put downward pressure on 
interest rates. Descriptive evidence generally supports 
these explanations (Figure 1.2.2).
Predicting neutral rates is a challenging task, in 
part because neutral rates are unobservable, and 
there is estimation uncertainty even about the past. 
In addition, the role of each determinant is hard to 
disentangle, and their future development is under 
debate.1 Some argue that continued improvements 
The authors of the box are Francesco Grigoli, Josef Platzer, 
and Robin Tietz.
1The determinants of neutral rates often exhibit similar time 
trends, making it difficult to quantify the contribution of each 
one of them.
in life expectancy (Blanchard 2022) and the ongoing 
global demographic transition (Auclert and others 
2021) will maintain downward pressure on interest 
rates. Goodhart and Pradhan (2020), however, argue 
for a demographic reversal, which will raise neutral 
rates. Unless inequality increases revert, downward 
pressure on neutral rates is bound to continue (Mian, 
Straub, and Sufi 2021b). If China were to resume 
consumption-led growth, this may reduce the so-called 
savings glut and could have global effects. Slower 
reserve accumulation by emerging and developing 
market economies may have a similar impact. In addi-
tion, to the extent that pandemic-related uncertainty is 
resolved, liquidity preferences could shift and precau-
tionary saving may decline as a result, leading to an 
increase in neutral rates. Rachel and Summers (2019) 
note that more generous social insurance and higher 
debt across Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development countries were a major counter-
acting force in the past and prevented neutral rates 
from falling even further. In this regard, Blanchard 
(2022) points out that increases in demand that are 
only temporary—such as the stimulus package in the 
United States—are unlikely to lead to long-lasting 
increases in neutral rates.
Median
Interquartile range
Interdecile range
Figure 1.2.1.  Estimated Neutral Rates Since
1980
(Percent)
1980
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
–1
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: In terms of International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes, the sample comprises: 
AUS, BEL, CAN, CHE, DNK, ESP, FIN, FRA, GBR, ITA, JPN, 
NLD, NOR, SWE, USA.
Box 1.2. Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
30
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Taking a more long-term view holds additional 
lessons. Borio and others (2017), using data ranging 
as far back as 1870, argue that changes in monetary 
regimes have an impact on neutral rates. Grigoli, 
Platzer, and Tietz (forthcoming) find evidence that 
structural shifts in policy frameworks, as well as finan-
cial intermediation, can be relevant for neutral rates 
of interest. Recent strategy reviews by the European 
Central Bank and the Federal Reserve highlight the 
relevance of these conclusions by showing how policy 
frameworks continue to evolve. Relatedly, the terminal 
size of central bank balance sheets could also affect 
prospects for the neutral interest rate. To conclude, 
forecasting neutral rates calls for extra caution given 
ongoing structural transformation involving the rise of 
shadow banking, fintech, and the climate transition.
Average 1980–84
Average 2014–19
Figure 1.2.2.  Neutral Rate Factors
(Percent)
1. Old-Age Dependency Ratio
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
10
20
30
40
50
2. Share of Income Held by Top 1 Percent
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
3. Total Factor Productivity Growth
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The title of each panel represents the units on the 
x-axis, in percent. For example, panel 1 shows the old-age 
dependency ratio on the x-axis in the range of 10–50 
percent. The y-axis for each panel is the neutral interest rate. 
In terms of International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) country codes, the sample comprises AUS, BEL, CAN, 
CHE, DEU, DNK, ESP, FIN, FRA, GBR, IRL, ITA, JPN, NLD, 
NOR, USA.
Box 1.2 (continued)
31
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Special Feature 
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment
Primary commodity prices rose 24 percent between 
August 2021 and February 2022. Energy commod-
ities, especially natural gas, drove the increase, due 
first to rising geopolitical tensions and later to Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine, while the Omicron COVID-19 
variant created short-term volatility in late 2021. Base 
metal prices increased by 2 percent and precious metal 
prices rose by 3 percent, while agricultural commodi-
ties increased by 11 percent. This special feature also 
analyzes the pace of fossil fuel divestment. Anticipation 
of lower fossil fuel demand has likely reduced capital 
expenditures in oil and gas globally over the past three to 
four years—especially for publicly traded companies—
reducing their investment by about 20 percent.
Oil and Gas Prices Up amid Ukraine War
Crude oil prices increased by 36 percent between 
August 2021 and February 2022, driven by a strong 
recovery in oil demand, with short-lived effects of the 
Omicron variant in late 2021, followed by geopolitical 
tensions and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 
2022. Brent crude oil temporarily reached $140 in early 
March as markets started to shun Russia’s Urals oil and 
several countries banned imports of Russian oil.
Supply was already tight before the war, as 
OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries, plus Russia and other non-OPEC oil 
exporters) members continued to ease supply curbs at 
a measured pace and production in major non-OPEC+ 
countries increased slowly. Non-OPEC+ producers had 
been focused on cash generation rather than investment, 
partly because of the energy transition. More countries 
are now seeking to reduce dependence on Russian 
energy, so supply disruptions have so far been buffered 
by globally coordinated releases of strategic petroleum 
reserves, while spare capacity has not been tapped.
Global demand for oil in 2022 is projected to 
increase to 99.7 million barrels a day (mb/d) in 2022 
(up 2.1 mb/d from 2021), according to the Inter-
national Energy Agency—a downward revision of 
1.1 mb/d compared with demand before the war in 
Ukraine. The risk of a major decline in Russian oil 
exports has caused a significant upward shift of the 
futures curve, with a spike in front-month futures 
prices (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 2). Futures markets suggest 
All commodities
Food
Energy
Base metals
October 2020 WEO
October 2021 WEO
April 2021 WEO
April 2022 WEO
Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval
Aluminum
Copper
Iron ore
Nickel
Cobalt 
Lithium
Figure 1.SF.1.  Commodity Market Developments
1. Commodity Price Indices With Forecast
(Index; 2016 = 100)
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Forecast
16
2014
15
17
18
19
20
21 Q1
22
Q4
23
2. Brent Futures Curves1
(US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2020
21
22
23
24
25
3. Brent Price Medium-Term Prospects2
(US dollars a barrel, four-year futures)
0
37
73
110
147
183
220
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
4. Base Metal Price Indices
(Jan. 1, 2016 = 100)
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Forecast
Jan.
2019
July
19
Jan.
20
July
20
Jan.
21
July
21
Q1
22
Q4
23
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Reﬁnitiv 
Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and are derived from 
futures prices. April 2022 WEO prices are based on March 3, 2022 closing.
2Derived from prices of futures options on March 3, 2022.
Special Feature: Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
32
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
crude oil prices will increase 55 percent in 2022 and 
fall slightly thereafter, while short- and medium-term 
upside risks to oil prices remain elevated and include 
long-term downside risks from the energy transition 
(Figure 1.SF.1, panel 3).
Natural gas markets were driven by energy security 
concerns in Europe and low average storage levels going 
into last winter (Figure 1.SF.2). This led to greater com-
petition with northeast Asia for spot cargoes of liquid 
natural gas, resulting in a global increase in natural gas 
prices, except in North America. Natural gas prices are 
expected to remain high until mid-2023 amid supply 
and energy security concerns, while Europe plans to 
reduce dependence on Russian natural gas. Coal prices 
rose 55 percent and reached historic highs in early 
March, reflecting tight supply-demand balances, pro-
duction disruptions, and the shunning of Russian coal.
Metal Prices Rise to 10-Year Highs
The base metal index initially retreated from a 10-year 
high in July 2021, mainly owing to iron ore prices 
falling 13.8 percent amid temporary restrictions on steel 
production and slowing construction activity in China 
(Figure 1.SF.1, panel 4). The index began to recover in 
December as steel production curbs were lifted. Increased 
demand for electric vehicle batteries sent prices higher 
for cobalt, nickel, and lithium. The war in Ukraine and 
sanctions partially disrupted metal and mineral exports 
from Russia and Belarus. Precious metal prices increased 
thanks to an upward shift in inflation expectations.
Base metal prices are expected to rise by 9.9 percent 
in 2022, compared with a decline of 6.5 percent in the 
October 2021 World Economic Outlook, and to remain 
unchanged in 2023. Risks to the outlook are to the 
upside due to continued disruptions of trade in metals 
with Russia and higher energy costs. Precious metal 
prices are expected to rise 5.8 percent in 2022 and 
2.1 percent in 2023.
Agricultural Prices Rise on War, Weather, and  
Higher Fertilizer Costs
An increase of 17.2 percent in beverage prices and a 
21.8 percent rise in cereal prices drove up the cost of 
food but was partially offset by a 5.3 percent decline in 
sugar prices and a 4.8 percent fall in vegetable prices. 
Wheat prices rose by 26.4 percent, as a severe drought 
in Canada and across the northern plains of the United 
States reduced spring wheat supplies. Looking ahead, 
a continuation of war in Ukraine—a major producer 
of wheat and corn—and falling Russian exports could 
fuel an additional surge in world cereal prices; adverse 
weather and fertilizer prices remain sources of upside 
risk for all food prices.
Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment and 
Effect on Prices
The clean energy transition requires a substantial 
reduction in fossil fuel investment. The recent energy 
crisis, however, has raised concerns that, relative to the 
speed of adoption of renewable energy, the pace of 
divestment from fossil fuels is too fast, especially for oil 
and gas.1 The next sections present recent trends in oil 
and gas investment and study their main drivers, exam-
ining the role of the shale boom, climate policies, and, 
more generally, the energy transition. They illustrate the 
starkly different effects that supply- and demand-side 
climate policies may have on prices of fossil fuels.
1Fossil fuels still account for more than 80 percent of primary 
energy consumption, globally (IEA 2021a). Three-quarters of 
the CO2 reductions from a globally efficient mitigation in the 
next decade would come from reduced use of coal rather than of 
oil and gas.
2021–22 inventory
Dutch TTF gas price (right scale)
Past decade average
Past decade range
Figure 1.SF.2.  European Gas Inventory and Gas Price
(Percent; US dollars per million British thermal units)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Jan.
2021
Mar.
21
May
21
July
21
Sep.
21
Nov.
21
Jan.
22
Mar.
22
Sources: Argus Media; Gas Infrastructure Europe; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Last observation is Mar. 29, 2022. Past decade refers to 2011–20. 
TTF = Title Transfer Facility.
33
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Special Feature 
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment
Oil and Gas Investment Has Declined Sharply since 2014
About half of total energy investment in 2021 was 
in fossil fuels—half of which was oil and gas upstream 
investment (IEA 2021a). The latter shapes the future 
production capacity of natural gas, crude oil, and 
condensates—and, thus, the supply of petroleum prod-
ucts, ranging from petrochemicals (such as ethylene 
and benzene) to jet fuel and motor gasoline.
After booming during the so-called shale revolution, 
global upstream oil and gas investment peaked at 0.9 
(3.6) percent of global GDP (investment) in 2014. 
Since then, it declined to less than 0.5 (1.5) percent 
of global GDP (investment) in 2019, falling further 
during the pandemic (Figure 1.SF.3). The cyclical 
reversal disproportionately affected publicly traded 
companies, which cut oil and gas investment more 
than national oil companies—consistent with invest-
ment declining more notably in the Americas and 
Africa, as opposed to the Middle East and Russia.2
Swings in capital expenditure are not unusual in the 
oil and gas industry, though. Using data from 1970 to 
2The oil and gas investment share of the Americas and Africa 
(Middle East and Russia) combined declined (increased) by 2 (4) 
percentage points from 2010–14 to 2015–21, on average.
2019, an empirical analysis shows that oil and gas prices 
are the main drivers of capital expenditure (Online 
Annex 1.SF.1). A 10 percent increase in oil and gas 
prices typically raises global oil and gas investment 
3 percent in the same year and 5 percent after two 
years, cumulatively (Figure 1.SF.4). National oil compa-
nies tend to be less reactive since their investment deci-
sions are often driven by a broader set of considerations.
Fossil fuel investment followed a typical boom-bust 
cycle over the past decade. However, since oil and gas 
prices declined 50 percent between 2014 and 2016 
and then recovered partially, the 40 percent decline 
in capital expenditure between 2014 and 2019 was 
deeper than the model’s prediction, which suggests a 
20 to 25 percent decline. While many factors could 
have been involved, the next section explores the role 
the clean energy transition may have played.
Climate Policies, the Energy Transition, and the Rise of 
Sustainable Investing
The energy transition affects oil and gas investment 
through three main channels: a demand-side chan-
nel related to existing demand-side climate policies 
(that is, carbon taxes on fossil fuel consumption); an 
expectation channel related to future fossil fuel demand 
Unconventional US and Canada
Price (right scale)
Public
Private
NOC
Figure 1.SF.3.  Oil and Gas Investment as Share of World GDP
(Percent; US dollars a barrel)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
1970
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
21
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; International Energy Agency; Rystad Energy 
UCube; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: The oil and gas price is the average of West Texas Intermediate crude oil 
and Henry Hub natural gas prices weighted by global oil and gas production, 
divided by US GDP deﬂator. NOC = national oil company.
Figure 1.SF.4.  Price Elasticity of Global Oil and Gas Capital
Expenditure 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
National oil
companies 
Public companies
Private companies
Yearly horizons
Total
Sources: Rystad Energy UCube; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results are based on a regression of global nominal capital expenditures (in 
log differences) on two lags of an oil and gas price index (in log differences) plus 
controls, over the sample years 1971–2020. See Online Annex 1.SF.1 for details.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
34
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
(for example, solar and wind investment subsidies or 
announced demand-side policies such as future bans 
on internal combustion engines); and a supply-side 
channel. Top-down supply-side policies (such as 
regulatory restrictions and bans on fossil fuel produc-
tion) and bottom-up shifts in public preferences (such 
as portfolio shifts related to sustainable investment) 
increase the cost of capital for fossil fuel projects (see 
the April 2022 Global Financial Stability Report).
Supply- and Demand-Side Effects on Capital Expenditure
To study the three channels, a set of climate-related 
policy indicators based on hard and soft data was 
collected (Figure 1.SF.5 and Online Annex 1.SF.1). 
Text-based analysis captures public awareness of the 
energy transition (the expectation channel)—which 
increased sharply after 2018. The demand-side channel 
is captured by carbon taxes (CO2 prices and green-
house gas emission coverage by emission trading sys-
tems). Their increase slowed in 2019. The supply-side 
channel is captured by sustainable investing awareness 
and portfolio inflows into sustainable funds, which 
have both increased sharply since 2018.
A firm-level regression (see Online Annex 1.SF.1) is 
then used to assess the impact of the climate indicators 
on fossil-fuel-producing companies’ capital expenditure 
(treatment group). Non-energy companies are used as 
the control group. Data are from 2012 to 2020, but 
the estimation sample excludes the pandemic period:
​y​ ist​  =  a + λ ​D​ s​ + ​(​β​ 1​ ​C​ t​ + ​β​ 2​ ​P​ oil,t​)​ ​D​ s​ + γ ​X​ ist​ + ​ε​ ist​,  
	
​(1.SF.1)​
in which yist is log capital expenditure in firm i, group 
s, year t; ​a​ is a constant; Ds is the “treatment dummy,” 
equal to 1 for oil and gas companies and 0 otherwise; 
Poil,t is the oil and gas price; and Xist includes log total 
assets, debt-to-equity ratio, asset turnover, Altman 
credit strength, region, industry, and year fixed effects. 
Ct represents either a dummy since the Paris-Agreement 
on climate change in 2016 or a climate policy indicator. 
Energy companies in the treatment group derive most of 
their revenue from the upstream oil and gas sector and 
show little ability to diversify into green energy.
Estimation Results Point to Capital Investment Slump
After the Paris Agreement, capital expenditure of 
a typical oil and gas company was 35 percent lower 
than that of the control group, even when factoring 
in firm-level variables, according to results shown in 
detail in Online Annex 1.SF.1. Part of that decline 
is explained by the effect of lower oil prices, which 
is related mostly to the shale boom-bust cycle and 
accounts for about half of the investment decline 
between 2014 and 2017 (Figure 1.SF.6). Between 
2018 and 2020, however, the energy transition expec-
tation channel was also a factor: if public awareness 
of the energy transition had been the same as in 
2014, “brown” investment would have been 38 per-
cent higher in 2020. The inflows into sustainable 
funds (supply-side channel) show a slightly smaller 
effect, even though their coefficient is not signifi-
cant. The demand channel (that is, CO2 prices and 
greenhouse gas coverage) is not significant, because 
its effect is either small or already subsumed by oil 
prices. The pandemic has likely further penalized 
brown investment, probably through unprecedented 
uncertainty, given that 18 percent of the 2020 decline 
is not fully explained by the econometric model.
Supply-Side Policies Could Propel Prices
How might climate supply- and demand-side policies 
affect prices? It is typically assumed that the energy 
transition would work as a negative demand shock 
GHG coverage (right scale)
CO2 price (right scale)
Energy transition awareness
Sustainable funds awareness
Sustainable funds inﬂows (right scale)
Figure 1.SF.5.  Climate Policy and Energy Transition
Indicators  
Paris Agreement
(Dec. 2015)
COVID-19
0
2
4
6
8
–1
0
1
2
3
2012
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Sources: Google Trends; World Bank; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The proxies for energy transition and sustainable funds as well as the GHG 
coverage (in percent) were divided by 10 to adjust the scale. The price of CO2 is 
expressed in dollars per ton. Sustainable funds inﬂows are presented as share of 
global gross ﬁxed capital formation, in percent. GHG = greenhouse gas.
35
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Special Feature 
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment
to fossil fuel prices. Subsidies for electric cars, for 
­example, are a negative crude-oil-specific demand 
shock, since crude oil is replaced by electricity, leading 
to lower prices. However, a declining fossil fuel path 
can also stem from restricting investment flows into oil 
and gas because of sustainable investing pressures and 
other supply-side policies.
The case of crude oil highlights quantitatively how 
two different driving forces work in the International 
Energy Agency (2021b) Net Zero Emissions Scenario, 
in which crude oil production declines from 85 mb/d 
in 2020 to 66 mb/d in 2030. First, only demand-side 
policies are considered. In this hypothetical scenario, 
oil prices could decline to the $20s in 2030, with 
dire consequences for oil exporters (Figure 1.SF.7, 
blue line). Rents would diminish, and oil produc-
tion would come under pressure in high-cost regions 
(Figure 1.SF.8).
Reductions in oil production that are driven 
hypothetically only by supply-side measures would, 
instead, exert strong upward pressure, taking prices 
to roughly $190 a barrel (Figure 1.SF.7, red line), 
benefiting producing countries at the expense of 
consuming countries. Since oil production would be 
profitable for all producers, the main determinants 
for the distribution of production and rents would be 
country restrictions, environmental regulations, and 
access to capital.
Actual
Oil price in 2014
Sustainable capital inﬂows in 2014
Energy transition awareness in 2014
Figure 1.SF.6.  Counterfactuals for Oil and Gas Captial
Expenditure
(Index) 
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2014
15
16
17
18
19
20
Sources: Compustat; Google Trends; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The dashed lines show in-sample scenarios for oil and gas captial 
expenditure in which either the oil price, the energy transition awareness proxy, or 
the sustainable funds inﬂow were held at their 2014 values.
1975
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
20
25
30
Historical real crude oil price
Net zero emissions scenario—demand-side policies only
(median and 40 percent HPD credible sets) 
Net zero emissions scenario—supply-side policies only
(median and 40 percent HPD credible sets) 
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
Sources: Boer, Pescatori, and Stuermer (2021); British Petroleum; International 
Energy Agency; Schwerhoff and Stuermer (2020); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Brent crude oil spot prices were adjusted for inﬂation using the United States 
Consumer Price Index with the base year 2020. See Boer and others (2021) and 
Online Annex 1.SF.1 for underlying data and methodology. HPD = highest 
posterior density.
Figure 1.SF.7.  Oil Prices Rise in a Net Zero Emissions 
Scenario Driven by Supply Policies, Decline when Driven by 
Demand Policy
(US dollars a barrel)
Figure 1.SF.8.  Production in High-Cost Regions Would Be 
under Pressure in Demand-Side Scenario, Uncertain in 
Supply Side Scenario
(US dollars a barrel; million barrels a day)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
SAU
RUS
USA
CHN
CAN
MEX
Middle East
South America
North Africa
Crude oil production
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Sources: Rystad Energy UCube; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Production includes crude oil but excludes condensates and other liquids. The 
data set does not include all countries. Production costs refer to country averages. 
Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
country codes.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
36
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Consequently, the two hypothetical scenarios show 
that it is wrong to assume that fossil fuel prices will 
necessarily decline because of the energy transition. 
Instead, supply-side policies could exert upward price 
pressure, while demand-side policies would do the 
opposite. The reality is, of course, a mix of the two. If 
country policies are unpredictable and uncoordinated, 
the price effects of the energy transition are ultimately 
hard to determine, and this raises uncertainty.
Conclusions
Anticipation of lower fossil fuel demand and—
possibly, but to a lesser extent—supply-side climate 
policies (including shifting public preferences for 
sustainable investing) have sapped capital expendi-
tures in oil and gas globally over the past three to 
four years—especially for publicly traded compa-
nies, whose investment may have shrunk 20 percent 
during that time. This can put persistent upward 
pressure on oil and other fossil fuel prices, move 
production to less regulated producers, and add 
substantial uncertainty to the outlook for oil and gas 
prices. A coordinated climate effort among fossil fuel 
consumer and producer countries and divestment 
from fossil fuels at a pace commensurate with the 
speed of adoption of renewable energy would help 
reduce the risk of high and volatile energy prices. 
And less policy uncertainty would help countries 
make necessary adjustments.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
37
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
2021
Projections
2021
Projections
Projections
Projections
2022
2023
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Europe
5.9
1.1
1.9
4.9
12.6
7.5
3.0
2.0
2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Europe 
5.5
3.0
2.2
2.6
5.5
2.7
3.2
1.8
2.1
6.9
6.5
6.4
Euro Area4,5
5.3
2.8
2.3
2.6
5.3
2.3
2.4
1.8
2.2
7.7
7.3
7.1
Germany
2.8
2.1
2.7
3.2
5.5
2.9
7.4
5.9
6.9
3.5
3.2
3.2
France
7.0
2.9
1.4
2.1
4.1
1.8
–0.9
–1.8
–1.7
7.9
7.8
7.6
Italy
6.6
2.3
1.7
1.9
5.3
2.5
3.3
1.8
2.4
9.5
9.3
9.4
Spain
5.1
4.8
3.3
3.1
5.3
1.3
0.9
0.3
0.4
14.8
13.4
13.1
The Netherlands
5.0
3.0
2.0
2.8
5.2
2.3
9.5
7.4
7.3
4.2
4.0
4.0
Belgium
6.3
2.1
1.4
3.2
8.0
1.3
0.9
0.5
0.9
6.3
6.0
5.8
Ireland
13.5
5.2
5.0
2.4
5.7
2.7
13.9
10.2
8.4
6.3
6.0
5.4
Austria
4.5
2.6
3.0
2.8
5.6
2.2
–0.6
–0.6
0.8
6.2
5.2
4.9
Portugal 
4.9
4.0
2.1
0.9
4.0
1.5
–1.1
–2.6
–1.4
6.6
6.5
6.4
Greece
8.3
3.5
2.6
0.6
4.5
1.3
–6.4
–6.3
–6.1
15.0
12.9
12.4
Finland
3.3
1.6
1.7
2.1
3.8
2.7
0.9
0.4
0.0
7.6
7.0
6.7
Slovak Republic
3.0
2.6
5.0
2.8
8.4
4.1
–2.0
–5.0
–4.8
6.8
6.4
6.2
Lithuania
4.9
1.8
2.6
4.6
13.3
4.3
2.7
–0.7
–2.1
7.1
7.3
7.0
Slovenia
8.1
3.7
3.0
1.9
6.7
5.1
3.3
–0.5
–1.4
4.7
4.5
4.5
Luxembourg
6.9
1.8
2.1
3.5
5.6
2.0
2.8
2.0
2.7
5.7
5.0
5.0
Latvia
4.7
1.0
2.4
3.2
10.0
3.9
–2.9
–1.6
–1.7
7.6
8.1
8.1
Estonia
8.3
0.2
2.2
4.5
11.9
4.6
–1.1
1.6
1.8
6.2
7.2
6.9
Cyprus 
5.5
2.1
3.5
2.2
5.3
2.3
–7.6
–9.4
–8.3
7.5
8.5
7.5
Malta
9.4
4.8
4.5
0.7
4.7
2.8
–5.1
–1.7
–1.4
3.6
3.5
3.5
United Kingdom
7.4
3.7
1.2
2.6
7.4
5.3
–2.6
–5.5
–4.8
4.5
4.2
4.6
Switzerland
3.7
2.2
1.4
0.6
2.5
1.6
9.3
6.3
7.0
3.0
2.6
2.7
Sweden
4.8
2.9
2.7
2.7
4.8
2.2
5.5
4.9
4.4
8.8
7.8
7.2
Czech Republic
3.3
2.3
4.2
3.8
9.0
2.3
–0.8
–0.7
–1.2
2.8
2.5
2.3
Norway
3.9
4.0
2.6
3.5
3.5
1.8
15.3
19.9
16.8
4.4
3.9
3.8
Denmark
4.1
2.3
1.7
1.9
3.8
2.1
8.4
7.3
7.1
5.1
5.1
5.1
Iceland
4.3
3.3
2.3
4.5
6.9
5.5
–2.8
0.6
1.0
6.0
4.7
4.0
Andorra
8.9
4.5
2.7
1.7
2.9
1.3
15.9
16.9
17.4
2.9
2.0
1.8
San Marino
5.2
1.3
1.1
2.1
4.9
2.0
2.7
0.3
1.2
6.2
5.8
5.7
Emerging and Developing Europe6
6.7
–2.9
1.3
9.5
27.1
18.1
1.7
3.2
1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Russia
4.7
–8.5
–2.3
6.7
21.3
14.3
6.9
12.4
8.1
4.8
9.3
7.8
Turkey
11.0
2.7
3.0
19.6
60.5
37.2
–1.8
–5.7
–2.0
12.0
11.3
10.6
Poland
5.7
3.7
2.9
5.1
8.9
10.3
–0.9
–2.9
–2.7
3.5
3.2
3.0
Romania
5.9
2.2
3.4
5.0
9.3
4.0
–7.1
–7.0
–6.5
5.3
5.6
5.5
Ukraine7
3.4
–35.0
. . .
9.4
. . .
. . .
–1.1
. . .
. . .
9.8
. . .
. . .
Hungary
7.1
3.7
3.6
5.1
10.3
6.4
–0.9
–1.3
0.1
4.1
4.3
4.2
Belarus
2.3
–6.4
0.4
9.5
12.6
14.1
2.7
–1.2
–1.0
3.9
4.5
4.3
Bulgaria5
4.2
3.2
4.5
2.8
11.0
3.3
–2.0
–2.2
–2.0
5.3
4.9
4.6
Serbia
7.4
3.5
4.0
4.1
7.7
4.7
–4.4
–6.1
–5.7
10.1
9.9
9.7
Croatia
10.4
2.7
4.0
2.6
5.9
2.7
2.0
–0.4
0.3
8.2
7.7
7.4
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia. 
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.
7See the country-specific note for Ukraine in the "Country Notes" section of the Statistical Appendix.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
38
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Asia
6.5
4.9
5.1
2.0
3.2
2.7
2.2
1.5
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Asia
3.6
2.8
2.8
1.2
2.4
1.7
5.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.1
3.0
Japan
1.6
2.4
2.3
–0.3
1.0
0.8
2.9
2.4
2.7
2.8
2.6
2.4
Korea 
4.0
2.5
2.9
2.5
4.0
2.4
4.9
2.2
3.2
3.7
3.6
3.5
Taiwan Province of China
6.3
3.2
2.9
1.8
2.3
2.2
14.7
13.2
11.6
4.0
3.6
3.6
Australia
4.7
4.2
2.5
2.8
3.9
2.7
3.5
3.0
0.5
5.1
4.0
4.3
Singapore
7.6
4.0
2.9
2.3
3.5
2.0
18.1
13.0
12.7
2.6
2.4
2.4
Hong Kong SAR
6.4
0.5
4.9
1.6
1.9
2.1
11.2
10.9
9.4
5.2
5.7
4.0
New Zealand
5.6
2.7
2.6
3.9
5.9
3.5
–5.8
–6.5
–5.3
3.8
3.6
3.9
Macao SAR 
18.0
15.5
23.3
0.0
2.8
2.7
13.8
3.5
14.9
3.0
2.6
1.8
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.3
5.4
5.6
2.2
3.5
2.9
1.0
0.6
0.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
China
8.1
4.4
5.1
0.9
2.1
1.8
1.8
1.1
1.0
4.0
3.7
3.6
India4
8.9
8.2
6.9
5.5
6.1
4.8
–1.6
–3.1
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
ASEAN-5
3.4
5.3
5.9
2.0
3.5
3.2
–0.1
2.0
0.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Indonesia
3.7
5.4
6.0
1.6
3.3
3.3
0.3
4.5
0.5
6.5
6.0
5.6
Thailand
1.6
3.3
4.3
1.2
3.5
2.8
–2.1
–0.1
2.0
1.5
1.0
1.0
Vietnam
2.6
6.0
7.2
1.9
3.8
3.2
–0.5
–0.1
0.8
2.7
2.4
2.3
Philippines
5.6
6.5
6.3
3.9
4.3
3.7
–1.8
–2.7
–2.2
7.8
5.8
5.4
Malaysia
3.1
5.6
5.5
2.5
3.0
2.4
3.5
3.9
3.9
4.7
4.5
4.3
Other Emerging and Developing Asia5
3.0
4.9
5.5
5.0
8.7
7.2
–2.5
–2.5
–2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Emerging Asia6
7.4
5.4
5.6
2.1
3.2
2.8
1.1
0.7
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, 
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 economies, China, and India.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
39
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
North America
5.5
3.6
2.3
4.7
7.4
2.9
–3.1
–3.0
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
United States 
5.7
3.7
2.3
4.7
7.7
2.9
–3.5
–3.5
–3.2
5.4
3.5
3.5
Mexico
4.8
2.0
2.5
5.7
6.8
3.9
–0.4
–0.6
–0.7
4.1
4.1
3.9
Canada
4.6
3.9
2.8
3.4
5.6
2.4
0.1
1.1
–0.1
7.4
5.9
5.0
Puerto Rico4
1.0
4.8
0.4
2.3
4.4
3.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
7.9
6.9
7.9
South America5
7.2
2.3
2.1
12.1
13.7
10.1
–2.0
–1.3
–1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Brazil
4.6
0.8
1.4
8.3
8.2
5.1
–1.7
–1.5
–1.6
14.2
13.7
12.9
Argentina
10.2
4.0
3.0
48.4
51.7
43.5
1.3
0.5
0.4
9.3
9.2
8.1
Colombia
10.6
5.8
3.6
3.5
7.7
4.2
–5.7
–3.3
–3.4
13.7
11.9
10.6
Chile
11.7
1.5
0.5
4.5
7.5
4.5
–6.7
–4.5
–3.4
8.9
7.0
6.9
Peru
13.3
3.0
3.0
4.0
5.5
3.6
–2.8
–1.5
–1.4
10.9
9.3
8.8
Ecuador
4.2
2.9
2.7
0.1
3.2
2.4
2.5
2.9
2.5
4.2
4.0
3.8
Venezuela
–1.5
1.5
1.5
1,588.5
500.0
500.0
–1.4
9.0
6.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Bolivia
6.1
3.8
3.7
0.7
3.2
3.6
0.5
–1.5
–2.0
5.2
4.5
4.0
Paraguay
4.2
0.3
4.5
4.8
9.4
4.5
0.8
–2.9
0.4
7.7
7.2
6.3
Uruguay
4.4
3.9
3.0
7.7
7.0
5.6
–1.9
–0.2
0.0
9.4
7.0
7.0
Central America6
11.0
4.8
4.0
4.5
5.8
4.3
–1.8
–3.1
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Caribbean7
3.5
10.5
9.1
8.6
11.3
7.4
–5.0
3.1
3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Latin America and the Caribbean8
6.8
2.5
2.5
9.8
11.2
8.0
–1.6
–1.2
–1.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9
3.4
7.6
5.5
1.5
5.0
3.4
–17.2
–17.8
–12.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix. Aggregates exclude 
Venezuela.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, 
Nicaragua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and 
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as Anguilla 
and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
40
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and 
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Middle East and Central Asia
5.7
4.6
3.7
13.2
12.8
10.5
3.0
8.3
5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
6.5
5.0
3.3
11.6
10.9
8.8
5.1
12.0
8.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
3.2
7.6
3.6
3.1
2.5
2.0
6.6
19.5
14.8
6.7
. . .
. . .
Iran 
4.0
3.0
2.0
40.1
32.3
27.5
2.0
3.5
2.0
9.8
10.2
10.5
United Arab Emirates
2.3
4.2
3.8
0.2
3.7
2.8
11.7
18.5
14.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kazakhstan
4.0
2.3
4.4
8.0
8.5
7.1
–3.0
3.0
0.3
4.9
4.9
4.8
Algeria
4.0
2.4
2.4
7.2
8.7
8.2
–2.8
2.9
–0.2
13.4
11.1
9.8
Iraq
5.9
9.5
5.7
6.0
6.9
4.7
5.9
15.8
10.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
1.5
3.4
2.5
2.3
3.5
3.2
14.7
19.9
15.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kuwait
1.3
8.2
2.6
3.4
4.8
2.3
16.1
31.3
27.2
1.3
. . .
. . .
Azerbaijan
5.6
2.8
2.6
6.7
12.3
8.7
15.2
37.2
28.5
6.0
5.9
5.8
Oman
2.0
5.6
2.7
1.5
3.7
2.2
–3.7
5.9
5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Turkmenistan
4.9
1.6
2.5
15.0
17.5
10.5
2.0
5.8
5.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Importers5,6
4.5
3.9
4.4
16.0
15.9
13.3
–4.0
–6.0
–5.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Egypt
3.3
5.9
5.0
4.5
7.5
11.0
–4.6
–4.3
–4.6
7.3
6.9
6.9
Pakistan
5.6
4.0
4.2
8.9
11.2
10.5
–0.6
–5.3
–4.1
7.4
7.0
6.7
Morocco
7.2
1.1
4.6
1.4
4.4
2.3
–2.9
–6.0
–4.0
11.9
11.7
11.1
Uzbekistan
7.4
3.4
5.0
10.8
11.8
11.3
–7.0
–9.5
–7.4
9.5
10.0
9.5
Sudan
0.5
0.3
3.9
359.1
245.1
111.4
–5.9
–6.6
–7.0
28.3
30.2
29.3
Tunisia7
3.1
2.2
. . .
5.7
7.7
. . .
–6.2
–10.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Jordan
2.0
2.4
3.1
1.3
2.8
2.5
–10.1
–5.9
–4.6
24.4
. . .
. . .
Georgia
10.4
3.2
5.8
9.6
9.9
5.1
–9.8
–11.4
–7.5
20.3
18.5
19.2
Armenia
5.7
1.5
4.0
7.2
7.6
6.0
–2.4
–6.2
–5.9
18.5
19.5
19.0
Tajikistan
9.2
2.5
3.5
8.7
10.0
10.5
2.8
–1.4
–2.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kyrgyz Republic
3.7
0.9
5.0
11.9
13.2
10.1
–5.2
–12.2
–9.3
6.6
6.6
6.6
West Bank and Gaza
6.0
4.0
3.5
1.2
2.8
2.4
–12.7
–12.8
–12.4
26.4
25.7
25.0
Mauritania
3.0
5.0
4.4
3.8
4.9
4.0
–2.2
–14.0
–13.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Caucasus and Central Asia 
5.6
2.6
4.2
9.2
10.7
8.6
–0.8
5.6
3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan6
5.7
4.8
3.7
13.8
13.1
10.8
3.3
8.5
5.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East and North Africa
5.8
5.0
3.6
14.6
13.4
10.8
3.6
9.5
6.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Israel8
8.2
5.0
3.5
1.5
3.5
2.0
4.6
3.2
3.1
5.0
3.9
3.8
Maghreb9
22.2
2.2
3.2
5.0
6.8
5.7
–1.2
1.2
–0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mashreq10
2.9
5.2
4.8
9.0
10.2
11.5
–5.8
–5.2
–5.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, and Yemen. 
5Includes Djibouti, Lebanon, and Somalia. See the country-specific note for Lebanon in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Excludes Afghanistan and Syria because of the uncertain political situation. See the country-specific notes in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7See the country-specific note for Tunisia in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is shown for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
9The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia. 
10The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and West Bank and Gaza. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
41
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3 
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.5
3.8
4.0
11.0
12.2
9.6
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
2.9
3.4
3.1
16.8
16.3
12.4
0.7
1.9
0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
3.6
3.4
3.1
17.0
16.1
13.1
–0.8
–1.1
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Angola
0.7
3.0
3.3
25.8
23.9
13.2
11.3
11.0
4.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Gabon
0.9
2.7
3.4
1.1
2.9
2.6
–6.9
1.7
–0.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Chad
–1.1
3.3
3.5
–0.8
4.1
3.1
–4.5
1.3
–2.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Equatorial Guinea
–3.5
6.1
–2.9
–0.1
4.0
3.9
–3.4
–1.6
–2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle-Income Countries5
5.0
3.3
3.3
5.6
7.2
5.3
0.6
–1.1
–2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
4.9
1.9
1.4
4.5
5.7
4.6
3.7
1.3
–1.0
34.2
35.2
37.0
Ghana
4.2
5.2
5.1
10.0
16.3
13.0
–3.0
–3.6
–3.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Côte d’Ivoire 
6.5
6.0
6.7
4.2
5.5
2.3
–3.7
–4.8
–4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Cameroon
3.5
4.3
4.9
2.3
2.9
2.3
–3.3
–1.6
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Zambia
4.3
3.1
3.6
20.5
15.7
9.2
6.7
4.4
4.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Senegal
6.1
5.0
9.2
2.2
3.0
2.2
–11.8
–13.0
–8.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income Countries6
5.6
4.8
5.6
11.2
13.6
11.3
–5.0
–6.5
–6.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ethiopia
6.3
3.8
5.7
26.8
34.5
30.5
–3.2
–4.5
–4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kenya
7.2
5.7
5.3
6.1
7.2
7.1
–5.4
–5.8
–5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tanzania
4.9
4.8
5.2
3.7
4.4
5.4
–3.3
–4.3
–3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Uganda
5.1
4.9
6.5
2.2
6.1
4.1
–7.9
–7.0
–9.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Democratic Republic of the Congo
5.7
6.4
6.9
9.0
6.4
6.1
–1.0
–0.3
–0.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Burkina Faso
6.9
4.7
5.0
3.9
6.0
2.0
–3.1
–5.7
–5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mali
3.1
2.0
5.3
4.0
8.0
3.0
–4.5
–5.3
–4.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A6 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP. 
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Republic of Congo and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles.
6Includes Benin, Burundi, Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, São Tomé 
and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
42
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 
(Annual percent change; in constant 2017 international dollars at purchasing power parity)
Average
Projections 
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
World
2.5
2.1
2.1
1.8
2.5
2.4
1.7
–4.2
5.4
2.8
2.5
Advanced Economies
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.3
2.0
1.9
1.3
–5.0
5.0
3.0
2.1
United States
0.9
1.6
2.0
0.9
1.6
2.4
1.8
–4.2
5.4
3.3
1.8
Euro Area1
0.5
1.2
1.7
1.6
2.4
1.6
1.3
–6.7
5.3
2.7
2.2
Germany
1.4
1.8
0.6
1.4
2.3
0.8
0.8
–4.6
2.7
2.0
2.6
France
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.8
2.2
1.5
1.4
–8.3
6.7
2.7
1.1
Italy
–0.9
–0.1
0.9
1.5
1.8
1.1
0.7
–8.8
7.4
2.4
1.7
Spain
–0.4
1.7
3.9
2.9
2.8
1.9
1.3
–11.3
5.0
4.4
2.9
Japan
0.7
0.5
1.7
0.8
1.8
0.8
0.0
–4.2
1.9
2.7
2.8
United Kingdom
0.5
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.1
–9.7
6.7
3.3
0.8
Canada
0.9
1.8
–0.1
0.0
1.8
1.4
0.4
–6.4
3.9
2.7
1.7
Other Advanced Economies2
2.6
2.2
1.5
1.8
2.5
2.0
1.3
–2.4
5.1
2.8
2.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.1
2.8
2.8
3.3
3.3
2.4
–3.3
5.9
2.7
3.3
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.3
5.8
5.9
5.8
5.7
5.6
4.4
–1.5
6.5
4.7
5.0
China
9.7
6.7
6.5
6.2
6.4
6.3
5.6
2.1
8.0
4.4
5.1
India3
6.2
6.2
6.8
7.1
5.7
5.4
2.6
–7.3
7.9
7.1
5.9
ASEAN-54
4.0
3.4
3.7
3.9
4.3
4.3
3.7
–4.5
2.5
4.3
4.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.1
1.5
0.5
1.6
3.9
3.3
2.4
–1.7
6.7
4.0
0.8
Russia
4.2
–1.1
–2.2
0.0
1.8
2.9
2.2
–2.3
5.1
–8.5
–2.2
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.7
0.1
–0.8
–1.9
0.3
0.2
–1.3
–8.1
5.9
1.7
1.6
Brazil
3.0
–0.4
–4.4
–4.1
0.5
1.0
0.4
–4.6
4.2
0.2
0.8
Mexico
0.8
1.6
2.1
1.5
1.0
1.1
–1.2
–9.0
3.8
1.1
1.6
Middle East and Central Asia
2.2
0.6
0.5
1.0
–0.3
0.5
0.2
–5.0
6.1
2.7
1.9
Saudi Arabia
1.3
2.5
1.7
–0.6
–3.3
0.1
–2.0
–6.3
1.9
5.5
1.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.7
2.3
0.5
–1.2
0.3
0.6
0.4
–4.3
1.9
1.2
1.4
Nigeria
4.5
3.5
0.0
–4.2
–1.8
–0.7
–0.4
–4.3
1.1
0.9
0.6
South Africa
1.9
–0.1
–0.2
–0.8
–0.3
0.0
–1.3
–7.8
4.0
0.4
–0.1
Memorandum
European Union
0.9
1.5
2.1
1.9
2.8
2.1
1.8
–6.1
5.4
2.7
2.4
Middle East and North Africa
1.6
0.0
0.2
2.1
–1.0
0.0
–0.2
–5.5
2.5
3.1
1.8
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.9
3.2
3.0
3.1
3.5
3.6
2.5
–3.2
6.1
3.1
3.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.6
3.8
2.2
1.5
2.6
2.7
2.9
–2.1
2.5
2.4
3.1
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 
1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4ASEAN-5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
43
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
References
Atif Mian, Ludwig Straub and Amir Sufi .2021 “The Saving 
Glut of the Rich”.
Atif Mian and Ludwig Straub and Amir Sufi 2021b: What 
explains the decline in r*? Rising income inequality versus 
demographic shifts. Proceedings of the 2021 Jackson 
Hole Symposium
Auclert, Adrien, Hannes Malmberg, Frédéric Martenet, and 
Matthew Rognlie. 2021. “Demographics, Wealth, and Global 
Imbalances in the Twenty-First Century.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 29161, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Barrett, Philip, Maximiliano Appendino, Kate Nguyen, and 
Jorge de Leon Miranda, 2020, “Measuring Social Unrest 
Using Media Reports,” IMF Working Paper 20/129.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. “The Global Saving Glut and the US 
Current Account Deficit.” Remarks at the Homer Jones 
Lecture, St. Louis, MO, April 14.
Black, Simon, Ian Parry, James Roaf, and Karlygash Zhunussova. 
2021. “Not Yet on Track to Net Zero: The Urgent Need for 
Greater Ambition and Policy Action to Achieve Paris Tem-
perature Goals.” IMF Staff Climate Note 2021/005, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Blanchard, Olivier. 2022. Fiscal Policy under Low Interest Rates. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boer, Lukas, Andrea Pescatori, and Martin Stuermer. 2021. 
“Energy Transition Metals.” IMF Working Paper 21/243, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Borio, Claudio, Piti Disyatat, Mikael Juselius, and Phurichai 
Rungcharoenkitkul. 2017. “Why So Low for So Long? A 
Long-Term View of Real Interest Rates.” BIS Working Papers, 
Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
British Petroleum. 2021. Statistical Review of World Energy 
2021. London.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Emmanuel Farhi. 2014. “The Safety 
Trap.” NBER Working Paper 19927 National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Casella, Bruno, Richard Bolwijn, Daniel Moran, and 
Keiichiro Kanemoto. 2019. “Improving the Analysis of 
Global Value Chains: The UNCTAD-Eora Database.” 
Transnational Corporations 26(3). United Nations, 
New York and Geneva.
Celasun, Oya, Niels-Jakob H. Hansen, Aiko Mineshima, 
Mariano Spector, and Jing Zhou. 2022. “Supply Bottle-
necks: Where, Why, How Much, and What Next?” IMF 
Working Paper 22/31, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Chateau, J., F. Jaumotte, and G. Schwerhoff. Forthcom-
ing. “Economic and Environmental Benefits of Interna-
tional Cooperation on Climate Policies.” IMF Research 
Department Paper, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Duval, Roman, Yi Ji, Longji Li, Myrto Oikonomou, Carlo Pizzi-
nelli, Ippei Shibata, Alessandra Sozzi, and Marina M. Tavares. 
2022. “Labor Market Tightness in Advanced Economies.” 
IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/2022/001)
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. 
2019. “A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantita-
tive Evaluation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 
11 (1): 1–48.
Gaspar, Medas, and Perrelli, 2021, Global Debt Reaches a 
Record $226 Trillion, IMF blog, https://​blogs​.imf​.org/​2021/​
12/​15/​global​-debt​-reaches​-a​-record​-226​-trillion/​.
Goldman Sachs. 2021. “Supply Chains, Global Growth, and 
Inflation.” Global Economics Analyst (September).
Goodhart, Charles, and Manoj Pradhan. 2020. The Great Demo-
graphic Reversal: Ageing Societies, Waning Inequality, and an 
Inflation Revival. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
Grigoli, Francesco, Josef Platzer, and Robin Tietz. Forthcom-
ing. “A Long-Run View on the Determinants of Neutral 
Interest Rates.”
Harstad, Bard. 2012. “A Case for Supply-Side Environmental 
Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 120 (1): 77–115.
Hoel, Michael. 1994. “Efficient Climate Policy in the Presence 
of Free Riders.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
agement 27 (3): 259–74.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2021a. World Energy 
­Outlook 2021. Paris.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2021b. “Net Zero by 2050: 
A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector.” Paris.
IEA (2021c). World Energy Outlook 2021. International Energy 
Agency. Paris, France.
International Energy Agency (2021). World Energy Outlook 
2021. Paris.
Kemp, Harri, Rafael Portillo, and Marika Santoro. Forthcoming. 
“Quantifying the Macro Effects of Global Supply Disrup-
tions.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Kopecky, Joseph, and Alan M. Taylor. 2020. “The 
Murder-Suicide of the Rentier: Population Aging and the 
Risk Premium.” Trinity College Dublin, Department of 
Economics Trinity Economics Papers tep1220.
Maddison, A. 2010. “Historical Statistics of the World 
Economy:​1​-2008 AD.” http://​www​.ggdc​.net/​maddison/​.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021a. “The Saving 
Glut of the Rich.” Unpublished.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021b. “What 
Explains the Decline in r*? Rising Income Inequality versus 
Demographic Shifts.” Proceedings of the Kansas City Federal 
Reserve Jackson Hole Symposium, August 26–28.
Novta, Natalija and Evgenia Pugacheva, “The Macroeconomic 
Costs of Conflict,” Journal of Macroeconomics 68, 2021.
Parry, Ian, Simon Black, and James Roaf. 2021. “Proposal for 
an International Carbon Price Floor among Large Emitters.” 
IMF Staff Climate Notes 2021/001, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Pizzinelli, C., and I. Shibata. 2022. “Has COVID-19 Induced 
Labor Market Mismatch? Evidence from the US and the 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
44
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
UK.” IMF Working Paper 22/5, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Platzer, Josef, and Marcel Peruffo. 2022. “Secular Drivers of the 
Natural Rate of Interest in the United States: A Quantitative 
Evaluation.” IMF Working Paper 22/030, International Mon-
etary Fund, Washington, DC.
Rachel, Lukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2019. “On Secular 
Stagnation in the Industrialized World,” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity, 1–54, Washington, DC.
Rystad Energy, UCube Database, January 2022.
Sajedi, Rana, and Gregory Thwaites. 2016. “Why Are Real Inter-
est Rates So Low? The Role of the Relative Price of Invest-
ment Goods.” IMF Economic Review 64 (4): 635–59.
Straub, Ludwig. 2019. “Consumption, Savings, and the 
Distribution of Permanent Income.” Unpublished. Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA.
Schwerhoff, Gregor, and Martin Stuermer. 2015. “Non-Renewable 
Resources, Extraction Technology, and Endogenous Growth.” 
Dallas Federal Reserve Working Paper 1506, updated version, 
August 2020. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
45
During the pandemic, and in particular its most acute 
phase, government policies helped maintain private 
access to credit, staving off a deeper recession in 2020. 
This chapter examines whether the resulting increase 
in leverage may affect the pace of the recovery. On 
average, the drag on future GDP growth is estimated 
at 0.9 percent over three years for advanced econo-
mies and at 1.3 percent for emerging markets. How-
ever, analyses based on micro-level data show that the 
recovery is likely to be slower in countries where (1) 
leverage is concentrated among vulnerable firms and 
low-income households, (2) insolvency procedures are 
inefficient, (3) public and private deleveraging coincide, 
and (4) monetary policy must be tightened rapidly. As 
countries prepare to normalize monetary policy, assess-
ing how leverage is distributed is key to forecasting the 
pace of the recovery and calibrating the unwinding of 
pandemic-time support. In some advanced economies 
where the recovery is well underway and private balance 
sheets are in good shape, fiscal support can be reduced 
faster, facilitating the work of central banks. Elsewhere, 
targeted fiscal support—within the limit of a credi-
ble medium-term fiscal framework—could be relied 
on to minimize the risk of disruptions and scarring.
Introduction
Accommodative policies during the acute phase of 
the COVID-19 crisis mitigated its overall economic 
cost by providing ample and cheap liquidity to affected 
households and firms. But these policies also led to 
rapid debt buildup, extending a steady rise in overall 
leverage encouraged by supportive financial condi-
tions since the global financial crisis of 2008. The 
surge in global private debt in 2020—13 percent of 
GDP—was widespread, faster than during the global 
financial crisis and almost as large as the rise in public 
debt (Figure 2.1, panel 1). Nonfinancial corporations, 
which entered the pandemic with already-elevated debt 
The authors of this chapter are Silvia Albrizio, Sonali Das, 
Christoffer Koch, Jean-Marc Natal (lead), and Philippe Wingender, 
with support from Evgenia Pugacheva and Yarou Xu. They thank 
Ludwig Straub for very helpful comments on an earlier draft.
(Global Financial Stability Report [GFSR], April and 
October 2021), saw larger increase in debt ratios than 
households. This was especially the case in advanced 
economies thanks to extensive credit guarantees, con-
cessional lending programs, and moratoriums (Fig-
ure 2.1, panel 2).
Will these developments have a bearing on the 
nature of the recovery that lies ahead? After all, 
one person’s debt is another person’s asset, so why 
should it matter?
Answers to these questions require delving deep 
into why private debt matters. First, it matters 
because debtors and creditors are not alike.1 Bor-
rowers are typically constrained financially, with the 
severity of the constraint depending on the financial 
resources at their command. High-net-worth, liquid 
households and firms can sustain large variations in 
indebtedness with minor consequences for spending; 
higher debt often finances the accumulation of assets 
that can later be drawn down to finance consumption 
or investment. Low-net-worth, illiquid households 
and firms, on the other hand, are more constrained. 
They are also more sensitive to leverage cycles and 
more reactive to changes in fiscal and monetary poli-
cies. Such distinction is particularly relevant if rising 
interest rates lead to conditions and financial instabil-
ity (April 2022 GFSR and Chapter 1).
Second, periods of rapidly increasing debt may 
become unsustainable and lead to periods of deleverag-
ing accompanied by subpar growth. In a nutshell, loose 
financial conditions encourage debt buildup, which 
boosts spending, growth, and asset prices and further 
incentivizes credit as collateral values increase. This 
eventually unwinds when returns disappoint or are too 
poor to justify further debt-financed investment, lend-
ers become wary of rolling over credit and extending 
new loans, or financial conditions tighten and rising 
debt-service costs crowd out other spending.
1Tobin (1980) argues that “the population is not distributed 
between debtors and creditors randomly. Debtors have borrowed for 
good reasons, most of which indicate a high marginal propensity to 
spend from wealth or from current income or from any other liquid 
resources they can command.”
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
2
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
46
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Third, national circumstances are also import-
ant. Countries with limited fiscal space may find it 
difficult to support domestic demand; public and 
private sector deleveraging may occur simultaneously, 
compounding the drag on growth. In countries 
where debt restructuring or business liquidation is 
required, the efficiency of the insolvency framework 
may play an important role in reallocating capital 
to productive uses. The strength of the recovery 
will also critically hinge on the strength of finan-
cial intermediaries. Following monetary tightening, 
deleveraging pressures may be stronger where macro-
prudential instruments are ineffective2 and especially 
in countries where the health of the sovereign and 
banking sectors is closely intertwined (April 2022 
GFSR, Chapter 2).
As governments are exiting pandemic-time emer-
gency policies, the burden of debt is among the key 
challenges on the horizon. This chapter aims to answer 
two sets of questions:
•• Will the pandemic’s private debt legacy affect the pace 
of the recovery? How large a drag could there be on 
future private consumption and investment? Does 
it depend on the distribution of debt across house-
holds and firms? On available fiscal space? On the 
solvency framework?
•• What are the main implications for economic policy? 
Does a high level of private debt, or its distribution 
across households and firms, affect the transmission 
and effectiveness of countercyclical policies? What 
does this imply for the pace of normalization and 
consolidation during the recovery, and what should 
the policy mix look like?
The main findings are summarized as follows:
Pandemic debt buildup: Nonfinancial corporate debt 
surged among vulnerable firms (high leverage, low 
liquidity, low profitability) in the worst-hit sectors (for 
example, those that are contact intensive). Household 
debt accumulation, although more modest than that 
of nonfinancial corporations overall, was in some cases 
heavily concentrated among low-income households. 
Differences across countries are large, with important 
implications for future growth.
2For an analysis of the implications of private sector leverage 
buildup for macro-financial stability risks and the role of macropru-
dential policy, see Barajas and others (2021).
Household debt
Public debt
Nonﬁnancial corporation debt
Total debt
Contribution of debt
Contribution of GDP
Leverage increase
Nonﬁnancial corporations
Households
Private debt increased as much as public debt in 2020. The largest increases took 
place in advanced economies, with large variations across countries.
0
5
10
15
20
25
AEs
EMDEs excluding China
China
2. Change in Debt-to-GDP Ratio between 2019 and 2020
(Percentage points)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
1. Global Debt Stock: Total Public and Private Debt, 1970–2020
(Percent of GDP)
0
4
8
12
16
Households
Nonﬁnancial corporations
3. Advanced Economy Decomposition of the Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Increase, 2019:Q4–2020:Q3
(Percentage points)
Sources: Gaspar, Medas, and Perrelli (2021); IMF, Global Debt Database; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, public debt refers to the largest category of debt available 
(nonﬁnancial public sector, general government, and central government, in 
decreasing order). Private debt (households and nonﬁnancial corporations) 
includes only loans and securities. Total debt (as a percent of GDP) is close but not 
exactly equal to the sum of the components of public and private debt. This is 
because of the difference in country coverage for the corresponding variables, 
which causes the corresponding country weights to differ. In panel 2, whiskers 
show one standard deviation for private debt. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 2.1.  Rapidly Mounting Private Debt
1970
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
20
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
47
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Leverage cycles, heterogeneity, and future growth: 
Current levels of private leverage are expected to 
exert some drag on future GDP growth. Estimates 
based on cross-country aggregate data point to a 
cumulative 0.9 percent slowdown over three years 
for advanced economies and a cumulative 1.3 per-
cent slowdown for emerging markets. However, the 
post-pandemic drag on growth could be much larger 
in countries where (1) indebtedness is more concen-
trated among financially constrained households and 
vulnerable firms, (2) the insolvency regime is inef-
ficient, (3) fiscal space is limited, and (4) monetary 
policy needs to be tightened rapidly. For example, 
a surprise tightening of 100 basis points is esti-
mated to slow investment among highly leveraged 
firms by a cumulative 6½ percentage points over 
two years, 4 percentage points more than among 
those with little leverage. The effect could be larger 
if higher interest rates lead to financial instability 
(April 2021 GFSR).
Implications for policy: Stronger emphasis on distri-
butional considerations for macroeconomic forecasting 
and policymaking is needed. For example, where the 
recovery is well underway and private balance sheets 
are in good shape—mainly in advanced economies that 
benefited from generous government support during 
the pandemic—fiscal support can be reduced faster, 
facilitating the work of central banks. Elsewhere, the 
recovery may be weaker, and targeted fiscal support 
could help lessen the risks of disruptions and scarring 
within credible medium-term fiscal frameworks (April 
2022 Fiscal Monitor). Where targeting is difficult and 
fiscal space limited, countries may need to consider 
revenue-enhancing measures to fund various priorities. 
Increasing tax compliance and other reforms to mod-
ernize business taxation are possible avenues; the latter 
could include temporary increases in corporate income 
tax designed to capture pandemic-related excess profits 
(IMF 2021a).
This chapter builds on earlier IMF work (April 
2021 GFSR; April 2012 and April 2020 World 
Economic Outlook [WEO]; October 2020 Regional 
Economic Outlook: Europe; October 2020 Regional Eco-
nomic Outlook: Western Hemisphere) and draws on two 
strands of literature that emphasize the importance 
of heterogeneity (Jappelli and Pistaferri 2014; Cloyne 
and others 2018; Kaplan, Moll, and Violante 2018; 
Ottonello and Winberry 2020) and leverage (Bernanke, 
Gertler, and Gilchrist 1999; Iacoviello 2005; 
Eggertsson and Krugman 2012; Jordà, Schularick, and 
Taylor 2011; Dell’Ariccia and others 2016; Mian, Sufi, 
and Verner 2017; Drehman, Juselius, and Korinek 
2017) in the transmission and amplification of eco-
nomic shocks and policy.
The chapter starts by highlighting recent develop-
ments in households’ and nonfinancial corporations’ 
balance sheets, focusing on the distribution of debt. 
Cross-country panel regressions estimate the macroeco-
nomic impact of leverage buildup on future growth. 
Micro-level data on households and firms then help 
unpack the role of heterogeneity and the importance 
of countercyclical and structural policy.
Private Sector Leverage during the Pandemic
This section sheds light on the historical devel-
opment of household and corporate balance sheets, 
focusing on the COVID-19 recession and buildup of 
leverage among heterogeneous households and firms.
Household Balance Sheets
A Global Cycle in Assets and Liabilities
Household balance sheets have expanded almost 
continuously in recent decades, with net wealth 
increasing globally from an average 225 percent of 
GDP in 1995 to more than 360 percent of GDP in 
2020, in purchasing-power-parity-weighted terms. 
Nevertheless, household debt has passed through two 
distinct phases over the past two decades. Among 
advanced economies, household leverage increased 
steadily in the years before the global financial crisis. 
Since debt was used primarily to finance housing 
investment, this resulted in assets growing in tandem 
with liabilities (Figure 2.2). In the decade after the 
global financial crisis, households gradually reduced 
debt relative to income, and housing assets also fell 
relative to income, with the reductions driven by 
lower valuations and slower investment. House-
hold debt jumped in 2020 because of increased 
borrowing and lower income as a result of the 
pandemic-induced recession. This rise in debt was 
accompanied by a large increase in financial assets. 
Looking ahead, net wealth could contract again as 
governments’ cash transfers to households stop, and 
tighter financial conditions may increase debt-service 
costs and lead to declines in asset prices (see the April 
2022 GFSR).
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
48
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Household Debt across the Income Distribution
It is important to look beyond aggregate figures, 
as these can mask important heterogeneity, especially 
given the high degree of inequality in household 
income and wealth. How debt is distributed and 
changes over time has implications for liquidity con-
straints as well as for future saving rates. For instance, a 
debt buildup at the lower end of the income distribu-
tion, where net wealth is typically lower, is more likely 
to slow future consumption when financial conditions 
are tightened, borrowing costs increase, and asset prices 
decline (Figure 2.3).
Measuring how debt varies across income groups is 
challenging, as it requires household wealth surveys, 
which are available only for a handful of countries 
and are conducted relatively infrequently. To esti-
mate the impact of the COVID-19 recession on 
household indebtedness, a “nowcasting” approach 
is used that relies on macroeconomic and financial 
variables to extrapolate microdata on income and 
debt. Regional and sectoral data for value added, 
wages, employment, unemployment, house prices and 
sales, and bank lending are used to estimate changes 
in income and debt for households. The algorithm 
employed also constrains the nowcast distributions 
to match published aggregate household income and 
debt for 2020.3
Changes in household indebtedness varied across 
countries and income levels during the first year of 
the pandemic. The bar charts in Figure 2.4 show that 
aggregate statistics conceal important dimensions of 
debt accumulation. Among selected countries, the 
nowcasting estimates show that China and South 
Africa had the largest and broadest increases in debt 
ratios. The increases amounted to 5.7 percent of 
annual income on average across income deciles for 
China and 4.5 percent for South Africa. Lower-income 
households saw larger increases in China (except those 
in the bottom decile). In South Africa, the richest 
households saw the largest relative surge in debt, 
amounting to 15 percent of their annual incomes.
3The approach by DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) is used 
to nowcast joint distributions. This involves reweighting kernel 
densities and using regression adjustment to match changes in 
distributions over time. Income and debt distributions are nowcast 
for China, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, South Africa, and 
the United Kingdom. For the United States, income and debt 
distributions are estimated using microdata from the 2019 and 
2020 waves of the Consumer Expenditure Survey. See Online 
Annexes 2.1 and 2.2.
Debt
Financial assets (right scale)
Housing assets (right scale)
Figure 2.2.  Advanced Economies: Aggregate Household 
Balance Sheets
(Percent of GDP)
Household indebtedness jumped in 2020, after a decade of consolidation following 
the global ﬁnancial crisis.
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
140
180
220
260
300
340
380
1995 97
99 2001 03
05
07
09
11
13
15
17
20
Sources: IMF, Global Debt Database; World Inequality Database; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 2.1 for the list of countries included.
ZAF
YEM
USA
SVK
STP
POL
NOR
MLT
ITA
IRL
HUN
GBR
FRA
EST
DEU
CHN
Sources: World Inequality Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 2.1 for the list of countries included. Shares by country 
represent averages over the period from 2010 to 2020. Data labels in the ﬁgure 
use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Countries where household incomes are more unequal also tend to have more 
wealth inequality.
Figure 2.3.  Correlation between Wealth and Income Inequality
(Percent)
Bottom 50 percent wealth share
Bottom 50 percent income share
–5
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
49
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Despite smaller aggregate increases in debt ratios 
in Germany, the United Kingdom, and Hungary and 
even outright decline in the United States, low-income 
households saw comparatively larger increases in debt. 
The buildup exceeded 10 percent of income in the 
United States for households with incomes below 
$15,000. In the United Kingdom, debt increased by 
about 7.5 percent of income for households in the 
lowest tercile. In contrast, France and Italy were able to 
support low- and middle-income households’ balance 
sheets, as seen from the decline in debt ratios in both 
countries for the bottom 50 percent of incomes.
This exercise is possible only for the small number 
of countries that conducted household wealth surveys 
in the past. As attention to inequality and distribu-
tional issues increases, the expansion of data collection 
on household balance sheets will allow a better under-
standing of the impact of shocks and policies.
Firms’ Balance Sheets
Concentrated Vulnerabilities in the Nonfinancial 
Corporate Sector
Abundant liquidity support through loans, credit 
guarantees, and moratoriums on debt repayment con-
tributed to debt buildup and was pivotal in preventing 
widespread corporate failures and related employment 
and output losses, especially among small and medium 
enterprises. The analysis here takes stock of balance 
sheet developments since the pandemic began, with a 
focus on the distribution of leverage and vulnerabilities 
across firms, sectors, and countries.
Figure 2.5 uses publicly listed firms’ quarterly balance 
sheets4 to present revenue growth by sector across 71 
advanced and emerging market economies in 2020 and 
compares this with 2009, at the height of the global 
financial crisis. A clear sectoral contrast emerges. Because 
of lockdowns or materials shortages, the largest losses 
are concentrated in a few sectors, such as consumer 
services, transportation, automobiles, and components. 
In contrast, at the other end of the distribution, some 
sectors gained from the structural pivot imposed by the 
pandemic (semiconductors, software and information 
technology [IT] services, pharmaceuticals and biotech-
nology, and health care equipment and services). This 
is different from what took place during the global 
financial crisis, when the shock hit almost all the sectors 
considered. Moreover, a substantial part of the increase 
in leverage during the pandemic was covered by gov-
ernment guarantees.5 Therefore, the risk of an adverse 
feedback loop in which corporate distress puts stress on 
the financial system—and eventually the public purse—
appears smaller, at least in countries where the govern-
ment can absorb the shock (Chapter 2 in the April 2022 
GFSR analyzes risks associated with the sovereign-bank 
nexus in emerging markets). Figure 2.6 suggests that the 
biggest commitments were made in advanced econ-
omies, where fiscal space is the largest (see Box 2.1). 
However, it is worth noting that regulatory forbearance 
may have masked the real extent of losses.
4Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ data are used in the whole subsection 
for their timeliness. But since they only comprise firms listed on stock 
exchanges, they cover only 7 percent of total employment. This suggests 
the reported share of firms in the worst-hit sectors should be considered 
a lower bound given that small and medium enterprises, which account 
for large labor and value-added shares in some of the economies, are 
not included in the sample. See Online Annex 2.1 for details.
5The share of those guarantees in total credit is highly variable, 
ranging from about 20 percent of all new credit in Germany to 
100 percent (up to a certain limit) in Japan.
USA
FRA
ITA
GBR
DEU
CHN
HUN
ZAF
Figure 2.4.  Change in Debt-to-Income Ratio by Income Decile 
in 2020
(Percent of income)
Household indebtedness varied across countries and household income groups.
1. Advanced Economies
–20
–10
0
10
20
1
3
5
7
9
2
4
6
8
10
2. Emerging Market Economies
–20
–10
0
10
20
1
3
5
7
9
2
4
6
8
10
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Income deciles on x-axes, except for the United States where households 
are grouped by ﬁxed income bands. See Online Annex 2.1. CHN = China; 
DEU = Germany; FRA = France; GBR = United Kingdom; HUN = Hungary; 
ITA = Italy; USA = United States; ZAF = South Africa.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
50
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Higher Leverage for Vulnerable Firms, Especially in 
Worst-Hit Sectors
Leverage by sector group: Based on Figure 2.5, sectors 
can be grouped into three clusters: the worst-hit indus-
tries (the five sectors experiencing the strongest drop in 
revenue growth in 2020), the least-hit industries (the 
five sectors experiencing the highest revenue growth), 
and the middle ones as a residual category. Leverage, 
defined as firms’ debt-to-asset ratio, increased during 
the pandemic in the worst-hit industries. As of the 
second quarter of 2021 (the latest data point available), 
it remained well above precrisis levels (Figure 2.7, 
panel 1). Net debt (gross debt net of cash holdings) 
also increased substantially in vulnerable firms in 
the worst-hit sectors, especially in emerging markets 
(Figure 2.7, panel 2). This is in stark contrast to what 
took place in other sectors that deleveraged during 
the pandemic, reflecting both higher assets and lower 
liabilities.
Assessing the debt burden: Debt accumulation may not 
be detrimental in itself: a highly indebted firm might 
still have a healthy balance sheet—as reflected in ample 
liquid asset holdings and high profits. In contrast, a firm’s 
capacity to invest, innovate, and grow may be compro-
mised if high leverage is coupled with profitability so 
low that the firm cannot make interest payments; in 
that case, the interest coverage ratio is less than 1. In the 
worst-hit industries, profitability dropped to levels com-
parable to those during the global financial crisis and has 
not yet recovered completely. This reflects both earning 
losses (before interest and taxes) and higher interest rate 
payments. The share of firms in worst-hit sectors with an 
interest coverage ratio of less than 1 has yet to revert to 
its pre-pandemic level (Figure 2.7, panel 3).
Vulnerable firms are defined as nonfinancial cor-
porations with high leverage, low profitability, and 
an interest coverage ratio less than 1.6 Not only are 
6Since this analysis considers the distribution of leverage and 
return on assets by sector, high leverage is defined as that above the 
average threshold of the top tercile across industries (35 percent) and 
low profitability as that below the average of the bottom tercile of 
return on assets (0.2 percent).
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
Figure 2.6.  Exposure to Contingent Liabilities Associated 
with Credit Guarantees (50 Percent Scenario)
A combination of high vulnerabilities and generous guarantees is concentrated in 
advanced economies.
0
20
40
60
10
30
50
70
80
Percent of vulnerable ﬁrms (worst-hit industries)
0
5
10
15
20
Guarantees (percent of GDP)
Sources: IMF, COVID-19 Policy Tracker; Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Actual data on take-up rates of government guarantees are not available for 
most countries. The ﬁgure displays governments’ exposures in a scenario in which 
it is assumed that 50 percent of the announced guarantees are contracted. The 
share of vulnerable ﬁrms refers to the mean share of ﬁrms in the worst-hit 
industries in 2021 that were in the top tercile of the debt-to-asset ratio and the 
bottom tercile of the returns on assets distribution and had an interest coverage 
ratio of less than 1.
2009
2020
Figure 2.5.  Uneven COVID-19 Impact on Nonﬁnancial 
Corporations’ Revenue Growth
(Percent)
For nonﬁnancial corporations, a clear sectoral divergence between winners and 
losers emerged, which was not so pronounced in the global ﬁnancial crisis.
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
Health care equipment and services
Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology
Software and IT services
Semiconductors
Retailing
Food, beverages, and tobacco
Telecommunication services
Utilities
Materials
Consumer durables and apparel
Transportation
Consumer services
Household and personal products
Technology hardware and equipment
Food and staples retailing
Media and entertainment
Professional services
Capital goods
Automobiles and components
Energy
Sources: Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The sample consists of 71 countries; see Online Annex 2.1. The ﬁgure 
shows asset-weighted medians for annual revenue growth in 2009 (blue bars) and 
2020 (red bars). IT = information technology.
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
51
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
unprofitable indebted firms with low liquidity more 
exposed to potential asset repricing (Ding and others 
2021) and the withdrawal of policy support, but they 
are also more likely to underinvest (Albuquerque 
2021). Eighteen months into the pandemic, the 
share of vulnerable firms remained higher than 
in the global financial crisis and concentrated in 
the worst-hit sectors, where indebtedness was also 
relatively higher (Figure 2.8, panels 1 and 2). This 
share has declined since its peak at the end of 2020, 
however, reflecting higher returns, better cash flows, 
and lower debt.
How macroeconomically relevant is all this? 
Figure 2.8, panel 3, shows the 2020 share of vulner-
able firms by sector with regard to their contribu-
tion to countries’ value added. One of the worst-hit 
sectors, consumer services (including tourism, 
recreation, entertainment, and education), accounted 
for almost 10 percent of value added and comprised 
about 30 percent of vulnerable firms. Both are sizable 
shares.7 Overall, worst-hit industries represented 
18 percent of value added and a quarter of the 
labor force.8
Extraordinary measures to cushion the impact of 
the pandemic on firms’ cash flow have helped prevent 
corporate failures. Government credit guarantees have 
helped ensure broad access to credit and have pro-
tected bank balance sheets. Whether this extra leverage 
will affect investment remains uncertain. It will 
depend on (1) the strength of the recovery, especially 
in worst-hit sectors, and (2) the tightness of future 
financial conditions as monetary policy is normalized 
(Gourinchas and others 2020, 2021; Cros, Epaulard, 
and Martin 2021).
Private Debt and the Business Cycle
The leverage buildup during the 2020 recession 
can be seen as an efficient reaction to the pandemic, 
perceived as a temporary shock. However, it led to 
large increases in the private-debt-to GDP ratio that 
are liable to affect future consumption and investment. 
This section quantifies the implications of leverage 
buildup for growth. In line with recent literature, it 
shows the quantitative importance of leverage cycles 
7Note that these vulnerabilities may be underestimated, since 
the stylized facts presented are based on data for listed firms, 
which are on average larger and less represented in worst-hit 
sectors than small and medium enterprises, as well as less likely 
to experience distress (Carletti and others 2020; Díez and 
others 2021).
8Value-added and employment figures are based on the Organ-
isation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
STAN STatistical ANalysis Database and are available with a detailed 
sector breakdown only for Austria, Colombia, the Czech Republic, 
Finland, Greece, Iceland, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, 
the Republic of Korea, the Slovak Republic, Sweden, Turkey, and the 
United States.
AE least-hit industries
AE worst-hit industries
EME least-hit industries
EME worst-hit industries
Advanced economies
Emerging market economies
Worst-hit industries
Middle
Least-hit industries
Figure 2.7.  Heterogeneous Effect on Nonﬁnancial 
Corporation Balance Sheets
The pandemic exacerbated weak balance sheet positions only in the worst-hit 
industries.
1. Debt-to-Asset Ratio, Weighted Median
(Percent)
20
25
30
35
40
45
2006:
Q3
08:Q1
12:Q1
16:Q1
10:Q1
14:Q1
18:Q1
20:Q1 21:
Q2
–6
–4
–2
0
4
8
12
2
6
10
14
16
2. Change in Net Debt between 2019:Q4 and 2021:Q2,
Vulnerable Firms, Weighted Median
(Billions of US dollars)
Worst-hit industries
Least-hit industries
20
30
40
50
60
2006:
Q3
08:Q1
12:Q1
16:Q1
10:Q1
14:Q1
18:Q1
20:Q1 21:
Q2
3. Share of Firms with Interest Coverage Ratio Less than 1
(Percent)
Sources: Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample consists of 71 economies; see Online Annex 2.1. Panels 1 and 3 
show a three-quarter moving average; shaded areas indicate the global ﬁnancial 
crisis and COVID-19. Vulnerable ﬁrms have an interest coverage ratio of less than 
1 and are in the top tercile of the debt-to-asset ratio distribution and the bottom 
tercile of the return on assets distribution. Net debt = total liabilities net of cash 
and equivalents. AE = advanced economy; EME = emerging market economy.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
52
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
for growth forecasting.9 It first documents empirical 
regularities based on cross-country aggregate data and 
then digs deeper into the mechanism, highlighting the 
importance of heterogeneity in the financial situations 
of households and firms.
Output Responses to Deleveraging Pressures
Cross-Country Evidence
Following a buildup of private-debt-to-GDP ratios 
over and beyond what a smooth trend would predict—
defined as excess credit—output growth typically slows as 
firms and households reduce debt. Local projections, as 
in Jordà (2005), depict the dynamic responses of output, 
with all else kept constant.10 The empirical approach 
relies on a panel of macroeconomic data for 43 coun-
tries (27 advanced economies and 16 emerging market 
and developing economies) over 52 years from 1969 
to 2020 (see Online Annex 2.4).11 For households, a 
1 percentage point change in the excess-credit-to-GDP 
ratio results in a persistent decline in private consump-
tion of 0.5 percent in advanced economies and 2 per-
cent in emerging market and developing economies five 
years later. Nonfinancial corporate credit swings induce 
a similar investment response.12 Both consumption 
(following excess household credit) and investment 
(following excess nonfinancial corporate credit) decline 
substantially more in emerging market and developing 
economies (Figure 2.9).
9Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017) show that professional economic 
forecasters systematically overpredict GDP growth at the end of house-
hold debt buildup cycles. A rise in household debt over the three years 
preceding a forecast helps predict growth-forecasting errors.
10To focus on large and persistent credit cycles, excess credit is 
defined as the three-year trailing average of the cyclical component 
of the Hamilton (2018) filter of private-debt-to-GDP ratios.
11Because the impact of leverage buildup on future growth might 
be different in different parts of the cycle, the local projection intro-
duces time fixed effects. These make it possible to control for busi-
ness cycle and other time-varying influences common to all countries 
in the sample. Country fixed effects control for country-specific fac-
tors. Potential idiosyncratic effects specifically related to the presence 
of public guarantees are not taken into account. The implications 
for future growth are uncertain and depend in part on governments’ 
propensity and capacity to forgive or restructure those debts before 
the guarantees need to be activated. In the worst-case scenario 
of limited fiscal and monetary space and a large bank-sovereign 
nexus, activating public guarantees could even lead to doom loops 
(April 2022 GFSR).
12The total effect on output will be smaller, because the share 
of investment is smaller than the share of consumption in output 
and because of the generally larger share of imported input 
in investment.
Worst-hit industries
Middle
Least-hit industries
Worst-hit industries
Middle
Least-hit industries
Worst-hit industries
Middle
Least-hit industries
Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology
Semiconductors
Household and personal products
Software and IT services
Health care equipment and services
Capital goods
Retailing
Telecommunication services
Technology hardware and equipment
Media and entertainment
Professional services
Materials
Food, beverages, and tobacco
Utilities
Energy
Transportation
Consumer durables and apparel
Consumer services
Automobiles and components
Figure 2.8.  Concentration of Nonﬁnancial Corporation 
Vulnerabilities
(Percent)
Vulnerable ﬁrms hold a higher share of debt, are concentrated in the hard-hit 
industries, and are macroeconomically relevant.
1. Total Debt Share in Vulnerable Firms
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2. Share of Vulnerable Firms by Industry
GFC (2008–09)
2010–19
COVID-19 (2020:Q1–21:Q2)
5
10
15
20
25
0
10
20
30
5
15
25
35
40
2006:
Q3
08:Q1
12:Q1
16:Q1
10:Q1
14:Q1
18:Q1
20:Q1 21:
Q2
3. Share of Vulnerable Firms and Value Added by Industry
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; STructural 
ANalysis database; Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample consists of 71 economies in panels 1 and 2 and 14 economies for 
which an adequate sectoral breakdown of the value-added data is available in 
panel 3; see Online Annex 2.1. Vulnerable ﬁrms have an interest coverage ratio of 
less than 1 and are in the top tercile of the debt-to-asset ratio distribution and the 
bottom tercile of the return on assets distribution. Panel 2 shows a three-quarter 
moving average; shaded areas indicate the global ﬁnancial crisis and COVID-19. 
Panel 3 shows the share of vulnerable ﬁrms in each sector in 2020 and value 
added corresponding to these sectors as a percent of total value added in these 
economies in 2019. GFC = global ﬁnancial crisis.
Share of value added
0
5
10
15
20
Share of vulnerable ﬁrms
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
53
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Wide heterogeneity is seen across different econo-
mies, but at face value these estimates would imply 
a slower recovery by a cumulative 0.9 percent of 
GDP over the next three years for advanced econo-
mies and 1.3 percent for emerging market economies 
(excluding China) as households and nonfinancial 
corporations reduce debt following the recent surge.13 
These are estimates of averages based on cross-country 
13China is excluded from this estimate because it is not in the 
same cyclical position. Deleveraging of nonfinancial corporations 
started a few years ago, likely already dampening growth.
aggregate data.14 The forces of deleveraging and the 
impact on growth could be stronger for countries with 
debt more concentrated among financially constrained 
households and vulnerable firms, where fiscal space is 
limited, the insolvency regime is inefficient, and infla-
tion is high (requiring tighter financial conditions). 
The mechanisms in play are unpacked in the following 
subsections; they may explain some of the differences 
between emerging markets and advanced economies.15
Private and Public Debt Interactions
The rise in private debt during the COVID-19 
pandemic was accompanied by a substantial increase 
in public debt. The latter rose by almost 15 percent of 
GDP in 2020, and uncertainties remain about contin-
gent claims and the ultimate guarantor of much of the 
private debt buildup (see the April 2022 Fiscal Monitor 
for more details).
Excess credit and subsequent deleveraging are 
expected to have a larger negative effect on output where 
governments struggle to mitigate the drag through pub-
lic spending—that is, those with limited fiscal space.16
Using the same framework as in the previous sub-
section, this subsection explores the question within 
advanced economies and emerging market and devel-
oping economies by using quartiles of a fiscal position 
indicator by year to compare the dynamic responses 
of GDP following excess household credit (see Online 
Annex 2.4). Figure 2.10 contrasts countries in the two 
groups with fiscal positions that are relatively strong 
versus those that are fairly weak. It shows that dynamic 
responses of future aggregate output to private debt 
buildup are substantially more negative in countries 
with weak fiscal positions; they are larger by orders 
14Note that these estimates are not driven by boom-bust 
episodes. The dynamic responses are unaltered by the exclusion 
from the sample of the global financial crisis and its aftermath. 
The sample covers 43 countries over 51 years, and only a minority 
of excess credit episodes led to a recession. For the United States, 
for example, where recessions declared by the National Bureau of 
Economic Research are clearly classified, only about 15 percent of 
excess credit episodes were followed by a recession. Dell’Ariccia 
and others (2016) conduct similar analysis and find that about 
two-thirds of credit booms do not end up as busts but lead to 
subpar growth.
15Dissecting the role of debt maturity and currency denomination 
in emerging markets opens up avenues for future research, but data 
constraints are a limiting factor.
16A mere measure of the public-debt-to-GDP ratio is unlikely to 
be a sufficient statistic for fiscal space, a multidimensional assessment 
(IMF 2018). Different countries can support very different levels of 
public debt and fiscal deficits. See Box 2.1 and Ghosh and others 
(2013) for further discussion.
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
Figure 2.9.  Consumption and Investment Responses to 
Household and Nonﬁnancial Corporate Excess Credit
(Cumulative percentage points)
Excess private credit buildup affects consumption and investment more strongly in 
emerging market and developing economies.
1. Excess Household Credit to Consumption
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
3
4
0
1
2
5
Years
2. Excess Nonﬁnancial Corporate Credit to Investment
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
3
4
0
1
2
5
Years
Sources: Bank for International Settlements; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the impact of a 1 percentage point increase in the three-year 
trailing average excess-household-credit-to-GDP ratio on cumulative consumption 
growth. Panel 2 shows the impact of a 1 percentage point increase in the 
three-year trailing average excess-nonﬁnancial-corporate-credit-to-GDP ratio on 
cumulative investment. Jordà (2005) impulse response functions. Shaded areas 
represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
54
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
of magnitude in emerging market and developing 
economies.17 For emerging market economies with the 
weakest fiscal positions, these numbers imply a drag on 
growth of up to 9 percent cumulative over three years.
Borrower Heterogeneity and Debt-Output Dynamics
This section analyzes the implications of increasing 
leverage among financially constrained households and 
vulnerable firms. It unpacks the mechanism described 
in the introduction by exploiting micro-level data on 
firms and households.
Households: Inequality and the Impact of Private 
Debt on Output
Here the focus is on the cyclical implications of 
debt buildup in countries differentiated according to 
wealth inequality. The analysis is based on the same 
17This analysis should be interpreted as suggestive, since only four 
emerging market economies are included.
empirical framework as in the first section but relies 
on micro-level data on household saving and income 
distribution to sort countries: dissaving among 
low-income households is used as a proxy for (bot-
tom) wealth inequality.18 Figure 2.11 contrasts the 
cumulative future output responses to the buildup 
of excess leverage in countries where households are 
thought to be financially constrained (more wealth 
inequality) and others (with less wealth inequality). 
Countries where households are relatively more 
financially constrained (more wealth inequality) tend 
to see a larger drag on future output following excess 
credit buildup (see Online Annex 2.4).
18To proxy for bottom wealth inequality across countries, a 
three-year trailing average of dissaving of households in the bot-
tom 50 percent of income is computed using data for advanced 
economies from Allen, Kolerus, and Xu (forthcoming). The results 
are then sorted into four quartiles per year. Figure 2.11 compares 
the debt-output dynamics for high- (most dissaving by bottom 
50 percent) and low-inequality groups.
Point estimate, AEs
Point estimate, EMDEs (right scale)
A strong ﬁscal position can mitigate the negative output response following excess 
credit buildup, especially in emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 2.10.  Fiscal Position and Deleveraging
(Cumulative output growth over three years; percentage points)
–2.5
–1.5
–2.0
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
–15
–9
–12
–6
–3
0
3
Strong
Weak
Strong
Weak
Fiscal position
Sources: Bank for International Settlements; Kose and others (2017); World Bank; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the impact of a 1 percentage point increase in the 
three-year trailing average excess-household-credit-to-GDP ratio on cumulative 
output growth over three years. Countries’ ﬁscal position is proxied by within-year 
quartiles of the principal component of six ﬁscal indicators: (1) general 
government gross debt, (2) primary balance, and (3) ﬁscal balance—all three as a 
percent of GDP; (4) cyclically adjusted balance as a percent of potential GDP; and 
(5) general government gross debt and (6) ﬁscal balance—both as a percent of 
average tax revenues. The ﬁgure contrasts the response between the top (strong) 
and bottom (weak) quartiles of the ﬁscal position. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 2.11.  Advanced Economies: Wealth Inequality and 
Deleveraging
(Cumulative output growth over three years; percentage points)
Greater wealth inequality ampliﬁes the output response following excess credit 
buildup.
–2.0
–1.0
–1.5
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Less wealth inequality
More wealth inequality
Extent of wealth inequality
Sources: Allen, Kolerus, and Xu (2022); Bank for International Settlements; World 
Inequality Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure displays the impact of a 1 percentage point increase in the 
excess-household-credit-to-GDP ratio on cumulative output growth over
three years. Countries are ranked by the extent of dissaving among the bottom
50 percent, where more dissaving proxies for greater wealth inequality. High 
wealth inequality denotes countries in the top quartile of dissaving among the 
bottom 50 percent over the preceding three years. Low wealth inequality denotes 
countries in the bottom quartile of dissaving among the bottom 50 percent over 
the preceding three years. Error bars represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
55
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Rising inequality (Chancel and others 2022) may 
also have stark implications for countercyclical policy 
(Mian, Straub, and Sufi 2021a, 2021b, 2021c, 2021d), 
an important consideration for governments as they 
contemplate unwinding exceptional support. Higher 
inequality tends to push down the equilibrium (nat-
ural) interest rate, a key concept for calibrating the 
pace of policy normalization as it affects both fiscal 
(Box 2.1) and monetary (Box 2.2) space.
Corporate Leverage and Investment: The Importance 
of Vulnerable Firms
Drilling down one level deeper than the macroeco-
nomic analysis reported in Figure 2.9, panel 2, this 
subsection turns to the microeconomic drivers linking 
corporate leverage to investment. In so doing, it inves-
tigates the particular role played by vulnerable firms.
Firms’ leverage buildup may hold back investment 
under three circumstances. First, high outstanding debt 
may increase the service cost of future debt, prevent-
ing further borrowing to finance new investment 
(Krugman 1988; Drehman, Juselius, and Korinek 
2017). Second, credit booms lead to more-leveraged 
balance sheets and tighter borrowing constraints when 
firms’ net worth declines (Bernanke and Gertler 1989; 
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist 1999). Finally, for 
firms with excess leverage, the return on future invest-
ment is likely to go toward repaying existing debt, 
decreasing equity holders’ incentive to finance new 
investment projects (Myers 1977). Vulnerable firms—
defined as highly leveraged firms with low profitability 
and low liquidity (interest coverage ratio less than 1)—
are particularly exposed to all these channels.
To quantify the role of vulnerable firms in driving 
investment dynamics following leverage buildup, the 
analysis relies on a local projection estimation based on 
a comprehensive firm-level panel data set (see Online 
Annex 2.3).19 Following Albuquerque (2021), leverage 
buildup is defined as the lagged three-year cumulative 
change in the debt-to-asset ratio. By including firms 
fixed effects, our estimates capture how firms’ invest-
ment responds when the firm has higher (or lower) 
leverage increase than usual; sector-country-year fixed 
effects help pin down the partial equilibrium effect of 
leverage buildup by controlling for other time-varying 
confounding factors, such as the macroeconomic cycle 
and general equilibrium forces at play.
19The analysis is based on Bureau van Dijk Orbis and comprises 
2.5 million listed and unlisted firms from 1998 to 2018.
As reported in Figure 2.12, following leverage buildup, 
vulnerable firms reduce investments the most, generating 
permanent losses to the stock of tangible assets. This is 
true in advanced economies and emerging markets alike. 
The maximum effect is reached after four years.
The Role of Effective Insolvency Frameworks
To mitigate these negative effects and support recov-
ery, vulnerable nonviable firms need to be restructured 
or liquidated to free up resources that can be directed 
to new growth areas. However, coordination frictions 
among creditors, weak contract enforcement, costly 
liquidation procedures, and asymmetric information 
may delay the restructuring process.
Nonvulnerable ﬁrms
Vulnerable ﬁrms
Figure 2.12.  The Role of Vulnerable Firms
(Cumulative investment loss; percentage points)
Cumulative investment losses associated with leverage buildup are larger for 
vulnerable ﬁrms.
1. Advanced Economies
–3.0
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
3
4
0
1
2
5
Years
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3
4
0
1
2
5
Years
Sources: Bureau van Dijk Orbis; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure illustrates the responses of ﬁrms’ investment ratio following a 
one-standard-deviation increase in the debt-to-asset-accumulation ratio, 
conditional on ﬁrms’ being vulnerable. Vulnerable ﬁrms have an interest coverage 
ratio of less than 1 and are in the top tercile of the debt-to-asset ratio distribution 
and the bottom tercile of the return on assets distribution. Shaded areas represent 
90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
56
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
The effectiveness of insolvency frameworks plays 
a key role that can be analyzed using a novel IMF 
indicator that sorts countries according to the pre-
paredness of their insolvency frameworks to face 
systemic crises.20 Figure 2.13 compares the cumulated 
response of investment ratios to firms’ leverage buildup 
in countries with well-prepared insolvency systems in 
place versus others. The findings suggest that inade-
quate insolvency proceedings account for most of the 
long-term decline in the stock of tangible capital.
Countercyclical Policy Effects amid High 
Private Debt
Understanding how private debt and its distribution 
affect the transmission of countercyclical macroeco-
nomic policy is important to help countries calibrate 
20An effective and well-prepared insolvency regime is character-
ized by a comprehensive set of legal tools and institutions relevant 
for widespread restructuring and insolvency proceedings, such as 
out-of-court and hybrid restructuring, rapid reorganization and 
liquidation processes, and a proper institutional framework. For 
a detailed discussion on the construction of the indicator and its 
values, refer to Araujo and others (2022) and Online Annex 2.3.
the exit from the expansionary fiscal and monetary 
policy responses to the COVID-19 recession. This 
section analyzes (1) the importance of countries’ aggre-
gate debt levels for the impact of fiscal consolidation 
and monetary tightening and (2) how policy affects 
different groups of households and firms. In partic-
ular, it investigates whether tightening policies has a 
larger impact on more financially constrained house-
holds and firms.
The analysis uses local projections to estimate the 
effects of policies on real output, household consump-
tion, and corporate investment over time for a sample 
of advanced economies and emerging markets (see 
Online Annex 2.5). Fiscal and monetary policy shocks 
(changes in policy that are exogeneous to the near-term 
economic outlook) are borrowed from previous 
cross-country studies (IMF 2021b, Chapter 2, for fiscal 
consolidations; Furceri, Loungani, and Zdzienicka 
2016 for monetary tightening). The aggregate response 
of output to these fiscal and monetary policy shocks is 
in line with the previous literature (Ramey 2016).21
Private Debt and the Transmission of 
Countercyclical Policy
The increase in private debt before and through the 
COVID-19 recession may have changed how econo-
mies respond to policy tightening, with more-leveraged 
households and firms having greater sensitivity. This is 
first investigated at the country level by interacting the 
policy shock with an indicator variable equal to 1 for 
each country in periods when the ratio of private debt 
to GDP is in the top quartile for each country (Ramey 
and Zubairy 2018 and April 2020 WEO for fiscal pol-
icy; Tenreyro and Thwaites 2016 for monetary policy). 
Figure 2.14 shows that fiscal consolidation is more con-
tractionary when the private-debt-to-GDP ratio is high.
Heterogeneous Transmission of Monetary and 
Fiscal Policies
Recent studies recognize that the effects of mac-
roeconomic policy depend on the characteristics of 
households and firms. For households, policy transmis-
sion is affected by their income, their debt, and the 
21A fiscal consolidation of 1 percent of GDP leads to a ¾ percent 
decline in output, and a monetary policy tightening of 100 basis 
points leads to a ½ percent decline in output after two years. See 
Online Annex 2.5 for details.
Well-prepared insolvency regimes
Others
Figure 2.13.  The Role of Effective Insolvency Frameworks 
(Cumulative percentage points)
Effective insolvency and restructuring proceedings prevent a long-term decline in 
the future stock of tangible capital following ﬁrms’ leverage buildup.
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
3
4
0
1
2
5
Years
Sources: Bureau van Dijk Orbis; IMF, Crisis Preparedness Index; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure illustrates the cumulated response of ﬁrms’ investment ratio 
following a one-standard-deviation increase in leverage buildup, conditional on a 
country’s insolvency regime. Well-prepared insolvency regimes are deﬁned as 
those of countries in the top quartile of the IMF Strategy, Policy, and Review and 
Legal Departments’ indicator of crisis preparedness in 2020. Shaded areas 
represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals.
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
57
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
types of assets they hold (particularly whether illiquid 
or liquid). The intuition is straightforward: house-
holds without liquid assets, and in particular indebted 
households, have a higher propensity to consume out 
of disposable income than savers, who can maintain 
consumption by drawing down savings following neg-
ative shocks to income (Jappelli and Pistaferri 2010, 
2014; Crawley and Kuchler 2018; Kaplan, Moll, and 
Violante 2018). Studies focused on the effects of mon-
etary policy on consumption for the United Kingdom 
and the United States have found that the indirect 
effects of an unexpected change in interest rates, which 
operate through general equilibrium changes in labor 
demand and housing wealth, far outweigh the standard 
direct intertemporal substitution effect (Kaplan, Moll, 
and Violante 2018; Slacalek, Tristani, and Violante 
2020). These indirect effects are particularly large for 
the lowest-income households, with the largest changes 
in income after a monetary policy shock (Lenza and 
Slacalek 2018). With lower-income households having 
the lowest net worth (see Kumhof, Rancière, and 
Winant 2015 for evidence for the United States), one 
would also expect these to be most affected by the 
direct effect of monetary policy tightening on dispos-
able income, through higher debt-service costs.
For firms, the channels are similar, with the literature 
focusing on how firms’ balance sheets affect their access 
to external financing. The financial accelerator model 
(Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist 1999) shows how 
changes to the net worth of firms over the business 
cycle amplify the effects of monetary policy and other 
changes to credit conditions. In the United States, 
the leverage and liquidity of firms have been found 
to affect how responsive they are to monetary policy 
(Ottonello and Winberry 2020; Jeenas 2019).
Figure 2.15, panel 1, reports the results for the effect 
of fiscal consolidation on consumption by income 
quintiles.22 The figure shows the effects on each 
income quintile two years after the shock. It highlights 
that (1) the impact of consolidation is negative for all 
income groups and (2) the largest impact is on the 
consumption of the lowest-income-quintile house-
holds. After two years, the consumption drop among 
the lowest-income quintile is twice as large as the con-
sumption decline among the highest-income quintile.23 
The results are similar for all horizons, and the effect of 
the fiscal consolidation persists in each case.
Figure 2.15, panel 2, reports the results for the 
effect of monetary tightening on corporate invest-
ment by leverage quintiles.24 The figure shows that 
the impact of tightening is again largest for the most 
leveraged quintile of firms. After two years, invest-
ment by the most leveraged quintile is a cumulative 
6½ percent lower in response to a surprise 100 basis 
point rise in the policy rate. This is 4 percentage 
points lower than the decline in investment by the 
least leveraged quintile. As with fiscal consolidation, 
the effects of monetary tightening on investment 
are persistent.
Overall, these results point to potential amplifi-
cation of output costs in countries with private debt 
concentrated in vulnerable households and firms. This 
concern may be lessened in countries where strin-
gent macroprudential measures were in place before 
the COVID-19 recession. Intuitively, measures that 
“lean against the wind,” such as loan-to-value restric-
tions and debt-to-income caps, may have limited the 
22The analysis is based on a sample of 13 European coun-
tries from 1990.
23Income and wealth inequality show close correspondence (see 
Figure 2.3). Low-income households will also have the lowest net 
assets as a share of income and therefore will be the most financially 
constrained. However, a lack of distributional balance sheet data for 
most countries limits the empirical exercise to income distribution.
24This analysis is based on a reduced sample of 25 economies from 
1998 to allow sufficient time coverage.
Bottom three quartiles, debt-to-GDP ratio
Top quartile, debt-to-GDP ratio
Figure 2.14.  Output Sensitivity to Fiscal Consolidation as 
Function of Private Debt
(Percentage points)
Fiscal consolidation leads to a larger contraction in real output when private sector 
debt is high.
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
3
0
1
2
4
Years
Sources: IMF, Global Debt Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The solid lines represent the estimated response of real GDP to a ﬁscal 
consolidation shock. Shaded areas represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. The 
x-axis indicates the number of years after the shock.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
58
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
buildup of debt among vulnerable households and 
helped create buffers for banks, limiting the output 
cost of tightening monetary and financial conditions 
(see the discussion in the April 2021 GFSR and 
Online Annex 2.5).25
25Online Annex 2.5, Figure 2.5.4, estimates the marginal effect 
of macroprudential regime stringency (based on iMaPP, the IMF’s 
integrated macroprudential policy database) in mitigating the output 
decline from monetary tightening. The medium-term (two years) 
effect of tightening is reduced by half in countries where the macro-
prudential regime is the most stringent.
Conclusions and Policy Implications
Soon after the pandemic began in early 2020, 
exceptional measures to save lives and livelihoods were 
deployed. On top of direct fiscal support to households 
and firms, governments helped sustain the flow of 
credit: central banks’ accommodation and temporary 
financial regulatory changes, including repayment 
moratoriums and debt guarantees, offered a lifeline to 
many businesses and households.
Still, the impact of the pandemic on households’ 
and firms’ balance sheets has been unequal across and 
within countries, in large part reflecting differences 
in sectoral composition. Contact-intensive services 
have contracted during the pandemic, while produc-
tion and exports of goods and services substitutes (for 
example, appliances, computer chips, software) have 
thrived. Relatedly, the situation of workers in tourism 
services, restaurants, hospitality, and entertainment 
has in many cases remained precarious two years 
after the start of the pandemic, while labor shortages 
and rapid wage increases have become the norm in 
construction and logistics, for example (IMF 2021c). 
The war in Ukraine has further disrupted global supply 
chains. Large increases in the prices of energy and food 
products are likely to affect low-income households—
especially in emerging markets and developing 
economies—and could spill over to many industries 
via higher input prices if the conflict is prolonged 
(see Chapter 1).
This chapter estimates that recent leverage buildup 
could slow the recovery by a cumulative 0.9 percent 
of GDP in advanced economies and 1.3 percent in 
emerging markets over the next three years. But these 
are average effects based on cross-country aggregate 
data.26 Financially constrained households and vulnera-
ble firms, which have grown in number and propor-
tion during the COVID-19 pandemic, are expected 
to cut spending by more, especially in countries where 
the insolvency framework is inefficient and fiscal 
space limited.
As monetary policies are being normalized amid 
rising inflationary pressures, governments should 
calibrate the pace of fiscal consolidation to country 
circumstances to avoid large disruptions and potential 
scarring. Where the recovery is well underway and 
balance sheets are in good shape, fiscal support can be 
reduced faster, facilitating the work of central banks. 
26The estimates also predate the war in Ukraine and its possible 
consequences for balance sheets.
Figure 2.15.  Effects of Macro Policy Tightening on 
Heterogeneous Households and Firms
(Percent change)
The effect of ﬁscal consolidation on consumption is largest in lower-income 
households. Monetary policy tightening negatively affects corporate investment for 
the most leveraged ﬁrms.
1. Response of Household Consumption by Income Quintile to Fiscal
Shock, Effect Two Years after the Shock
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
3
4
1
2
5
Income quintiles
–15
–10
–5
0
5
2. Response of Corporate Investment by Leverage Quintile to
Monetary Shock, Effect Two Years after the Shock
3
4
1
2
5
Debt quintiles
Sources: Allen, Kolerus, and Xu (2022); Bureau van Dijk Orbis; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The bars in panel 1 represent the estimated effect of a ﬁscal consolidation 
shock of 1 percent of GDP on the consumption of ﬁve groups of households, 
according to their income levels, two years after the shock. In panel 2, the bars 
represent the estimated effect of a monetary policy tightening shock of 100 basis 
points on the real investment of ﬁve groups of ﬁrms, according to their leverage 
ratios, two years after the shock. The x-axis indicates the quintile of corporate 
leverage. Error bars denote 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. Statistically signiﬁcant 
differences between the lowest income quintile in panel 1 (and highest leverage 
quintile in panel 2) and other quintiles at the 1, 5, and 10 percent conﬁdence levels 
are denoted, respectively, by ***, **, and *.
*
***
*
*
*
*
*
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
59
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Elsewhere, targeted support can be considered within 
credible medium-term fiscal frameworks (see Box 2.1).
In particular, government support to firms could 
be limited to circumstances in which there is clear 
market failure (April 2022 Fiscal Monitor). Where 
a wave of bankruptcies in sectors heavily hit by the 
pandemic could spill over to the rest of the economy, 
for example, governments could provide incentives for 
restructuring over liquidation, and where necessary, 
solvency support could be considered. Among possible 
frameworks for such support, debt relief in the form 
of quasi-equity injections into small and medium 
enterprises (for example, through profit participation 
loans) could be considered in countries with adequate 
fiscal space, transparency, and accountability (see Díez 
and others 2021). Of course, targeting the right viable 
businesses—those that are insolvent as a result of the 
pandemic but that have viable business models—is 
hard (see the April 2021 GFSR). To lessen the burden 
on public finances, temporary higher taxes on excess 
profits could be envisaged. This would help claw back 
some of the transfers to firms that did not need them 
(Gourinchas and others 2021).
The analysis presented in this chapter also points 
to the need to enhance restructuring and insolvency 
mechanisms (through, for example, dedicated 
out-of-court restructuring) to promote a rapid 
reallocation of capital and labor toward the most 
productive firms (Araujo and others 2022; Díez and 
others 2021). To address the short-term impact of 
pandemic-related insolvency, countries could prioritize 
the weakest aspects of their regimes while working on 
more long-term comprehensive reforms. Similarly, if 
large household debt threatens the recovery, govern-
ments should consider cost-effective debt-restructuring 
programs aimed at transferring resources to relatively 
vulnerable individuals with a high propensity to 
consume. By design, these programs should seek to 
minimize moral hazard (April 2012 WEO). The debt 
bias in corporate and personal taxation should also be 
eliminated to avoid providing incentivizes for excessive 
debt buildup, resource misallocation, and recurrent 
boom-bust cycles.
Finally, the chapter stresses the importance of dis-
tributional considerations to improve macroeconomic 
forecasting and policymaking. While further research 
is needed to enrich the tools and models available to 
policymakers, the priority is the collection of more 
detailed and real-time data on firms’ and household 
balance sheets.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
60
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
The pandemic has exacerbated income inequality, 
extending a secular trend started in the 1980s (April 
2021 Fiscal Monitor; Azzimonti, de Francisco, and 
Quadrini 2014; Chancel and Piketty 2021; Chancel 
and others 2022). At the same time, interest rates 
have remained low despite steady increases in public 
debt. This apparent contradiction can be rationalized: 
higher-income households tend to save a larger share of 
their revenues. As their proportion to national income 
increases, so do savings and the associated demand for 
both private and public debt securities. This increase in 
savings lowers equilibrium interest rates and eventually 
the cost of borrowing (Mian, Straub, and Sufi 2021a, 
2021b, 2021d; Del Negro and others 2017; Box 2.2). 
Therefore, all else equal, higher top income inequality 
raises the sustainable levels of public debt and primary 
deficit (Mian, Straub, and Sufi 2021c; Reis 2021). 
Rising inequality may require larger social transfers 
(and public debt) after the pandemic, but at the same 
time enhances governments’ ability to finance them. Of 
course, all else is not always equal. Higher inequality 
could lead to lower potential growth, and increases 
in government debt are eventually met with higher 
interest rates as liquidity, regulatory, and safety premi-
ums on government debt erode (Krishnamurthy and 
Vissing-Jorgensen 2012; Lian, Presbitero, and Wiriadi-
nata 2020). Sustainable public debt has its limits.1
This box analyzes the implications of inequality for 
debt sustainability in a framework that allows those 
counteracting forces to play out. As governments 
contemplate exiting pandemic-related support policies, 
assessing the stringency of fiscal budget constraints is 
key to calibrating the pace of consolidation.
A simple calibrated model (based on Mian, Straub, 
and Sufi 2021c) can be used to draw a deficit-debt-phase 
diagram that depicts the set of sustainable combinations 
of primary deficit and debt (as a percent of GDP); 
meaning the combination of primary deficit and debt 
that can be maintained permanently given long-term 
growth and interest rates. The peak of the diagram 
shows the maximum sustainable debt-deficit level, tak-
ing into account economies’ nominal potential growth 
(G) and forces driving the interest rate (R). The region 
to the left of the maximum represents a free-lunch 
The author of this box is Anh Dinh Minh Nguyen.
1Other institutional factors matter, including the effective-
ness and credibility of policy, the interaction with monetary 
policy, and the quality of institutions (October 2021 Fiscal 
Monitor; IMF 2018).
zone: primary deficits—either through lower taxes 
or higher expenditures—can be increased to support 
the economy without going down an unsustainable 
debt path. Because increasing debt eventually raises 
interest rates, the sustainable deficit starts shrinking to 
the right of the peak as debt increases. Eventually, the 
Baseline
Higher inequality
Lower inequality
Figure 2.1.1.  Effect of Income Inequality on 
the Sustainable Level of Debt
(Percent)
1. Advanced Economies
Deﬁcit-to-GDP ratio
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Debt-to-GDP ratio
2. Emerging Markets
Deﬁcit-to-GDP ratio
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Debt-to-GDP ratio
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: The vertical line relates to the maximum sustainable 
primary deﬁcit and its corresponding debt-to-GDP ratio. The 
shaded area indicates the free-lunch zone. The baseline 
calibration identiﬁes savers, with the top 10 percent earning 
a 40 percent share of income in advanced economies and a 
48 percent share of income in emerging markets. The 
advanced economies’ (respectively, emerging markets’) 
model is calibrated with an initial level of debt of 105 percent 
(55 percent) of GDP, an initial nominal interest rate of 
1 percent (4.7 percent), and a nominal long-term trend 
growth of 3.2 percent (6.2 percent). The higher-/lower- 
inequality scenario adds/subtracts a 5 percentage point 
share of income to/from the baseline. In both cases, the 
debt-to-GDP ratio elasticity of interest rates is 0.017, 
implying that a 10 percent increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio 
leads the interest rate to increase by 17 basis points (Mian, 
Straub, and Suﬁ 2021c). A higher (lower) elasticity would 
decrease (increase) debt thresholds.
Box 2.1. Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
61
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
interest-growth differential (R – G) becomes positive, 
and a primary surplus (negative deficit) is required for a 
stable debt-to-GDP ratio.
Figure 2.1.1 highlights differences between advanced 
economies and emerging markets:2 the sustainable 
level of debt is larger in advanced economies, because 
higher convenience premiums for liquidity and 
safety push R down.3 In both advanced economies 
and emerging markets, rising income inequality over 
the past four decades may have helped increase the 
sustainable deficit-debt pairs (Figure 2.1.1, blue lines), 
and the effect may have been sizable. Reasonable 
calibration suggests an increase in sustainable deficit 
of almost a full percentage point in advanced econ-
omies. This estimate is a higher bound, however. In 
countries where inequality undermines progress in 
education or leads to lower investment as a result of 
social unrest, for example, potential growth and the 
sustainable level of debt and deficit may be reduced. 
A country’s resilience to higher debt is also determined 
2Parameters for advanced economies have been calibrated to 
match the purchasing-power-parity-weighted average among 
advanced economy members of the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development in 2019, before the pandemic 
recession of 2020–21. Emerging market parameters have been 
calibrated to match the purchasing-power-parity-weighted aver-
age for Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Hungary, 
India, Indonesia, Mexico, Poland, Russia, South Africa, and 
Turkey in 2019. Also see the note to Figure 2.1.1 for specific 
calibrations in emerging markets and advanced economies.
3Of course, country-specific factors, such as the elasticity of 
interest rates to debt, market access, and the currency denomina-
tion of public debt, matter as well.
by the share of public debt denominated in foreign 
currency. Calibrating the model above to emerging 
markets, the analysis shows that a higher share of 
foreign-currency-denominated debt tends to mean less 
room for fiscal support in the event of depreciation, 
highlighting higher solvency risks in emerging markets 
and the need to build buffers (Figure 2.1.2, blue line).
Local currency
Foreign currency
Figure 2.1.2.  Debt Denomination
(Percent)
Deﬁcit-to-GDP ratio
Debt-to-GDP ratio
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: The model assumes an exchange rate depreciation of 
30 percent in the event of a negative shock. The blue line 
reﬂects the case in which all debt is denominated in foreign 
currency, while the red line is the case in which all debt is in 
local currency. An economy with mixed-denomination debt 
would lie between these two cases.
Box 2.1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
62
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
The “saving glut of the rich” is a term coined 
to describe the substantial rise in saving at the 
very top of the income distribution in the United 
States over the past four decades (Mian, Straub, 
and Sufi 2021d). This phenomenon has coincided 
with rising household indebtedness concentrated 
among lower-income households and rising income 
inequality. It may have also contributed to the secular 
decline of the natural rate of interest (Mian, Straub, 
and Sufi 2021b; Platzer and Peruffo 2022; Rachel 
and Summers 2019). Intuitively, as debt-service pay-
ments transfer income from low-propensity-to-save 
(borrower) households to high-propensity-to-save 
(lender) households, the ensuing rise in net supply 
of savings puts downward pressure on the natural 
interest rate.
The phenomenon may not be limited to the United 
States. This box presents new cross-country evidence 
of a global saving glut of the rich and its implications 
for the natural interest rate. The analysis builds on 
Allen, Kolerus, and Xu (2022) and combines multiple 
sources (raw microeconomic survey data, tax tabu-
lations, and national accounts) for 41 advanced and 
emerging market economies.1
Global Saving Glut of the Rich
Estimating saving out of permanent income or 
wealth is challenging, especially when considering 
a panel of countries. This box relies on indirect evi-
dence that income and wealth inequality are highly 
correlated (Bricker and others 2020; Kuhn, Schula-
rick, and Steins 2020; Figure 2.3) and bases the 
analysis on current income distribution. Figure 2.2.1 
suggests that saving is distributed highly unequally. 
In advanced economies, the richest 10 percent of 
households account for most of aggregate saving, 
about twice that of middle-class households (sixth 
The authors of this box are Cian Allen and Christina Kolerus. 
The analysis extends Allen, Kolerus and Xu (2022) to a larger set 
of countries.
1Given important data limitations, extending the series to 
emerging market economies remains a challenge and relies on 
key assumptions. First, data on the distribution of (after-tax) dis-
posable income is extended over time using growth rates of the 
distribution of before-tax income, which is more widely available 
(for countries with both series available, the time trends are very 
similar). Second, the raw survey data are not adjusted for under-
reporting of the top of the distribution, missing imputed rents 
and retained earnings, as they are for advanced economies.
decile to eighth decile). The poorest 50 percent 
typically dissave at a rate ranging from 4 percent 
to 7 percent of national income a year, consistently 
more in the United States than in Europe.2
Emerging market economies show broadly similar 
saving levels by the rich but slightly smaller dissav-
ing by the bottom 50 percent, possibly because of 
more restricted access to finance. China stands out: 
middle-class saving reaches 20 percent of national 
income, and saving by the bottom 50 is positive.
The global financial crisis triggered sizable increases 
in saving by the rich in the United States, unlike in 
Europe, where the distribution of saving remained 
2Fagereng and others (2019) stress that capital gains explain 
nonhomothetic saving rates across households, which otherwise 
would be constant.
Top 10, Europe
Top 10, United States
Bottom 50, Europe
Bottom 50, United States
Top 10, EMEs excluding China
Bottom 50, EMEs excluding China
Top 10, China
Bottom 50, China
Figure 2.2.1.  Saving by Income Group
(Percent of national income)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Europe: Weighted average for 27 European 
economies; EMEs excluding China: Weighted average of the 
Dominican Republic, India, Korea, Mexico, Peru, Russia, and 
South Africa. EMEs = emerging market economies; 
US = United States.
1. Advanced Economies
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
1995
2000
05
10
15
19
2. Emerging Market Economies
1995
2000
05
10
14
Box 2.2. Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich, and the Natural 
Interest Rate
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
63
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
broadly stable. In the largest emerging markets (China, 
India, Mexico, South Africa), rich households’ saving 
has increased steadily since the 2000s.
Implications for the Natural Interest Rate
Voluminous capital market literature has established 
that the global saving glut may be one of the drivers 
of the secular decline in the global natural interest rate 
(see, for example, Bernanke 2005; Caballero, Farhi, 
and Gourinchas 2008). The preceding discussion 
stresses that rich households across the world may 
have been important contributors to the global saving 
glut. Figure 2.2.2 suggests that these two insights 
could be combined. Relative to the mid-1990s, the 
largest emerging markets have seen exports of savings 
by the rich, along with public savings, feeding the 
global saving glut via current account surpluses. In the 
United States, the situation has been more nuanced. 
Saving by the rich has been associated with financing 
large dissaving by the nonrich and the government 
(Mian, Straub, and Sufi 2021d), but foreign saving has 
also contributed, leading to a current account deficit 
(Figure 2.2.2).
Figure 2.2.2.  Absorption of Accumulated 
Saving
(Percent of national income)
1. United States
0
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
10
20
CA
Top 10
Mid 40
Bottom 50 Gov Sav
2. EMEs Including China
0
–60
–40
–20
20
40
60
80
100
CA
Top 10
Mid 40
Bottom 50 Gov Sav
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the accumulated difference for each 
variable over 1996–2019 for the United States and 
1996–2015 for EMEs, relative to the average levels in 1994 
and 1995, in percent of the national income. CA = current 
account; EMEs = emerging market economies; 
Gov Sav = government saving.
Box 2.2 (continued)
Box 2.2 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
64
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
References
Albuquerque, Bruno. 2021. “Corporate Debt Booms, Financial 
Constraints and the Investment Nexus.” Bank of England 
Working Paper 935, Bank of England, London.
Allen, Cian, Christina Kolerus, and Ying Xu. Forthcoming. 
“Saving across the Income Distribution: An International 
Perspective.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Almgren, Mattias, José Elías Gallegos Dago, John Kramer, 
and Ricardo Lima. 2019. “Monetary Policy and Liquidity 
Constraints: Evidence from the Euro Area.” https://​ssrn​.com​
/abstract​=​3422687 or http://​dx​.doi​.org/​10​.2139/​ssrn​.3422687
Araujo, Juliana, José Garrido, Emanuel Kopp, Richard Varghese, 
and Weijia Yao. 2022. “Policy Options for Supporting and 
Restructuring Firms Hit by the COVID-19 Crisis.” IMF 
Departmental Paper 2022/002, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Azzimonti, Marina, Eva de Francisco, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 
2014. “Financial Globalization, Inequality, and the Rising 
Public Debt.” American Economic Review 104 (8): 2267–302.
Barajas, Adolfo, Woon Gyu Choi, Ken Zhi Gan, Pierre Guérin, 
Samuel Mann, Manchun Wang, and Yizhi Xu. 2021. 
“Loose Financial Conditions, Rising Leverage, and Risks to 
Macro-financial Stability.” IMF Working Paper 2021/222, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2005. “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. 
Current Account Deficit.” Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, 
Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, March 10. 
Speech 77, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, Washington, DC.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler. 1989. “Agency Costs, 
Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations.” American Economic 
Review 79 (1): 14–31.
Bernanke, Ben. S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. 
“The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle 
Framework.” Handbook of Macroeconomics 1 (C): 1341–93.
Bricker, Jesse, Sarena Goodman, Kevin B. Moore, Alice 
Henriques Volz, and Dalton Ruh. 2020. “Wealth and Income 
Concentration in the SCF: 1989–2019.” FEDS Notes 
2020–09–28–1, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, Washington, DC.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier 
Gourinchas. 2008. “An Equilibrium Model of Global Imbal-
ances and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 98 
(1): 358–93.
Carletti, Elena, Tommaso Oliviero, Marco Pagano, Loriana 
Pelizzon, and Marti G. Subrahmanyam. 2020. “The 
COVID-19 Shock and Equity Shortfall: Firm-Level Evidence 
from Italy.” Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9 (3): 534–68.
Chancel, Lucas, and Thomas Piketty. 2021. “Schumpeter 
Lecture 2021: Global Income Inequality, 1820–2020: The 
Persistence and Mutation of Extreme Inequality.” Journal of 
the European Economic Association 19 (6): 3025–62.
Chancel, Lucas, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel 
Zucman. 2022. World Inequality Report 2022. Paris: World 
Inequality Lab.
Cloyne, James, Clodomiro Ferreira, Maren Froemel, and Paolo 
Surico. 2018. “Monetary Policy, Corporate Finance and 
Investment.” NBER Working Paper 25366, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Crawley, Edmund S., and Andreas Kuchler. 2018. “Consump-
tion Heterogeneity: Micro Drivers and Macro Implications.” 
Working Paper 129, Danmarks Nationalbank, Copenhagen.
Cros, Mathieu, Anne Epaulard, and Philippe Martin. 2021. 
“Will Schumpeter Catch Covid-19? Evidence from France.” 
VoxEU, March 4.
Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and 
Andrea Tambalotti. 2017. “Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural 
Rate of Interest.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 
(Spring): 235­–316.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Deniz Igan, Luc Laeven, and Hui Tong. 
2016. “Credit Booms and Macrofinancial Stability.” Economic 
Policy 31 (86): 299–355.
Díez, Federico J., Romain Duval, Jiayue Fan, José Garrido, Sebnem 
Kalemli-Özcan, Chiara Maggi, Soledad Martinez-Peria, and 
Nicola Pierri. 2021. “Insolvency Prospects among Small and 
Medium Enterprises in Advanced Economies: Assessment 
and Policy Options.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 2021/002, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. 
“Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of Wages, 
1973–1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica 
64 (5): 1001–44.
Ding, Wenzhi, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. 2021. 
“Corporate Immunity to the COVID-19 Pandemic.” Journal 
of Financial Economics 141 (2): 802–30.
Drehman, Mathias, Mikael Juselius, and Anton Korinek. 
2017. “Accounting for Debt Service: The Painful Legacy of 
Credit Booms.” Bank of Finland Research Discussion Paper 
12/2017, Helsinki.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, 
Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo 
Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 
(3): 1469–513.
Fagereng, Andreas, Martin Blomhoff Holm, Benjamin Moll, and 
Gisle Natvik. 2019. “Saving Behavior across the Wealth Dis-
tribution: The Importance of Capital Gains.” NBER Working 
Paper 26588, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Furceri, Davide, Prakash Loungani, and Aleksandra Zdzienicka. 
2016. “The Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks on Inequality.” 
IMF Working Paper 16/245, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Gaspar, Vitor, Paulo Medas, and Roberto Perrelli. 2021. “Global 
Debt Reaches a Record $226 Trillion.” IMFBlog, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, December 15.
CHAPTER 2 
PRIVATE SECTOR DEBT AND THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
65
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Ghosh, Atish R., Jun I. Kim, Enrique G. Mendoza, Jonathan D. 
Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi. 2013. “Fiscal Fatigue, Fiscal 
Space and Debt Sustainability in Advanced Economies.” 
Economic Journal 123 (566): F4–F30.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, S·ebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Veronika 
Penciakova, and Nick Sander. 2020. “Covid-19 and SME 
Failures 2020.” NBER Working Paper 27877, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, S·ebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Veronika 
Penciakova, and Nick Sander. 2021. “COVID-19 and SMEs: 
A 2021 Time Bomb?” NBER Working Paper 28418, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hamilton, James D. 2018. “Why You Should Never Use the 
Hodrick-Prescott Filter.” Review of Economics and Statistics 
100 (5): 831–43.
Iacoviello, Matteo. 2005. “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, 
and Monetary Policy in the Business Cycle.” American Eco-
nomic Review 95 (3): 739–64.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018. “Assessing Fiscal 
Space: An Update and Stocktaking.” IMF Policy Paper, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021a. “COVID-19 
Recovery Contributions.” Special Series on COVID-19, Fiscal 
Affairs Department, Washington, DC, April.
_______. 2021b. External Sector Report: Fiscal Policy and Exter-
nal Adjustment: What’s Coming? Washington, DC.
_______. 2021c. World Economic Outlook, April 2021: 
After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for 
Medium-Term Economic Damage.
_______. 2020a. Regional Economic Outlook: Europe. Washington, 
DC, October.
_______. 2020b. Regional Economic Outlook: Western Hemisphere. 
Washington, DC, October.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. “The Consumption 
Response to Income Changes.” Annual Review of Economics 
2 (1): 479–506.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2014. “Fiscal Policy and 
MPC Heterogeneity.” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
nomics 6 (4): 107–36.
Jeenas, Priit. 2019. “Firm Balance Sheet Liquidity, Monetary 
Policy Shocks, and Investment Dynamics.” Unpublished.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse 
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review 
95 (1): 161–82.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. 
“When Credit Bites Back: Leverage, Business Cycles, and 
Crises.” NBER Working Paper 17621, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 
2018. “Monetary Policy According to HANK.” American 
Economic Review 108 (3): 697–743.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Sergio Kurlat, Franziska Ohnsorge, and 
Naotaka Sugawara. 2017. “A Cross-Country Database of 
Fiscal Space.” Policy Research Working Paper 8157, World 
Bank, Washington, DC.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. 
“The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt.” Journal of Politi-
cal Economy 120 (2): 233–67.
Krugman, Paul. 1988. “Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang.” 
Journal of Development Economics 29 (3): 253–68.
Kuhn, Moritz, Moritz Schularick, and Ulrike I. Steins. 2020. 
“Income and Wealth Inequality in America, 1949–2016.” 
Journal of Political Economy 128 (9): 3469–519.
Kumhof, Michael, Romain Rancière, and Pablo Winant. 2015. 
“Inequality, Leverage, and Crises.” American Economic Review 
105 (3): 1217–45.
Leduc, Sylvain, and Jean-Marc Natal. 2018. “Monetary and 
Macroprudential Policies in a Leveraged Economy.” Economic 
Journal 128(609): 797–826.
Lenza, Michele, and Jiri Slacalek. 2018. “How Does 
Monetary Policy Affect Income and Wealth Inequality? 
Evidence from Quantitative Easing in the Euro 
Area.” Working Paper Series 2190, European Central 
Bank, Frankfurt.
Lian, Weicheng, Andrea F. Presbitero, and Ursula Wiriadinata. 
2020. “Public Debt and r − g at Risk.” IMF Working Paper 
20/13, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021a. 
“Indebted Demand.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
136 (4): 2243–307.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021b. “What 
Explains the Decline in r*? Rising Income Inequality versus 
Demographic Shifts.” BFI Working Paper, Becker Friedman 
Institute, University of Chicago.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021c. “A Goldilocks 
Theory of Fiscal Policy.” Unpublished, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Sufi. 2021d. “The 
Saving Glut of the Rich.” Unpublished, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. 2017. “Household 
Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 132 (4): 1755–817.
Myers, Stewart C. 1977. “Determinants of Corporate Borrowing.” 
Journal of Financial Economics 5 (2): 147–75.
Ottonello, Pablo, and Thomas Winberry. 2020. “Financial Het-
erogeneity and the Investment Channel of Monetary Policy.” 
Econometrica 88 (6): 2473–502.
Platzer, Josef, and Marcel Peruffo. 2022. “Secular Drivers of the 
Natural Rate of Interest in the United States: A Quantitative 
Evaluation.” IMF Working Paper 2022/030, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Rachel, Lukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2019. “On Secular 
Stagnation in the Industrialized World.” NBER Working 
Paper 26198, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
66
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Ramey, Valerie A. 2016. “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their 
Propagation.” Chapter 2 in Handbook of Macroeconomics, 
vol. 2, edited by John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, 71–162. 
New York: Elsevier.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. “Government Spend-
ing Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence from US 
Historical Data.” Journal of Political Economy 126 (2): 850–901.
Reis, Ricardo. 2021. “The Constraint on Public Debt When 
r < g but g < m.” BIS Working Paper Series 939, Bank for 
International Settlements, Basel.
Slacalek, J., Oreste Tristani, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2020. 
“Household Balance Sheet Channels of Monetary Policy: A 
Back of the Envelope Calculation for the Euro Area.” Journal 
of Economic Dynamics and Control 115: 103879.
Tenreyro, Silvana, and Gregory Thwaites. 2016. “Pushing on a 
String: US Monetary Policy Is Less Powerful in Recessions.” 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (4): 43–74.
Tobin, James. 1980. Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity: 
Reflections on Contemporary Macroeconomic Theory. Oxford, 
UK: Basil Blackwell.
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
67
The green economic transformation needed to achieve 
net zero emissions will also require changes in employ-
ment. This chapter examines the labor market impli-
cations of this transition, using a mix of empirical and 
model-based analyses. Looking at a sample of largely 
advanced economies, the empirical analysis indicates that 
both greener and more polluting jobs are concentrated 
among small subsets of workers. Individual workers face 
tough challenges in moving to greener jobs from more 
pollution-intensive jobs, complicating labor reallocation. 
Higher skills make job transitions easier, highlighting the 
potential importance of training. Stronger environmental 
policies help green the labor market and appear more 
effective when reallocation incentives are not blunted. 
Finally, a policy package incorporating a green infra-
structure push, phased-in carbon prices, and targeted 
training and an earned income tax credit to provide 
income support and incentivize labor supply could put an 
economy on a path to net zero emissions by 2050, with 
an inclusive transition. Model simulations for a repre-
sentative advanced economy suggest that about 1 percent 
of employment would shift toward greener activities 
over a 10-year period. By contrast, for a representative 
emerging market economy, about 2.5 percent of employ-
ment would shift, reflecting differences in workforce 
skills and greater reliance on higher-emissions-intensive 
production. Delays in policy actions will require sharper 
labor market adjustments to achieve net zero emissions.
Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has generated enormous 
disruptions and dislocations in economies and labor 
markets.1 In shaping the recovery from the pandemic, 
The authors of this chapter are John Bluedorn (co-lead), 
Niels-Jakob Hansen (co-lead), Diaa Noureldin, Ippei Shibata, and 
Marina M. Tavares, with support from Savannah Newman and 
Cynthia Nyakeri. The chapter benefited from comments by M. Scott 
Taylor and internal seminar participants and reviewers.
1See Chapters 1 and 3 of the April 2021 World Economic Outlook 
for evidence and discussion of the impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic and associated recession on economic activity and 
labor markets.
policies can be primed to address key challenges and 
create more productive, resilient, and sustainable econ-
omies (see Georgieva and Shah 2020 for a discussion). 
Of all the urgent issues, tackling human-induced 
climate change is among the most pressing.
Mitigating global warming will require substantial 
reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The 
objective of limiting the average global temperature 
increase to well below 2°C and preferably no more 
than 1.5°C above preindustrial levels was endorsed 
by policymakers around the world in the 2015 Paris 
Agreement (see IPCC 2015, 2018; COP 2015). For 
this goal to be met, net emissions (the difference 
between GHG emissions produced and GHG removed 
from the atmosphere) must decline to zero by 2050.
The green transformation of production structures 
needed to achieve net zero emissions—with large 
changes expected in capital infrastructure for greener 
energy and products—will also entail a transforma-
tion of the labor market, changing the allocation of 
workers across occupations and sectors. Previous World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) analysis has found the policy 
package required to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 
would lead to about 2 percent of the global work-
force changing the sector in which they work over the 
next 30 years, with workers moving from polluting, 
higher-emissions sectors to those that are cleaner and 
generate lower emissions.2
Aiming to better understand the employment 
changes required for the green transformation and 
possible obstacles, this chapter investigates the envi-
ronmental properties of jobs, how easily workers are 
able to move into greener—that is, more sustainable, 
less polluting, and emissions-lowering—employment, 
and how policies may affect the greening of the labor 
market. It makes two key contributions: (1) a new 
cross-country, harmonized set of indicators of the 
environmental properties of jobs, built in part on ear-
lier single-country studies; and (2) a new model-based 
2See Chapter 3 of the October 2020 WEO. The package involved 
a combination of international carbon pricing, a green investment 
push, and targeted cash transfers to groups at higher risk of being 
adversely affected by mitigation measures.
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND 
ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
3
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
68
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
analysis of labor reallocation in the green transition 
with an expanded set of policy instruments. The 
chapter examines the environmental properties of jobs 
through two lenses: what workers do (their occupa-
tions) and where they work (the sectors in which they 
are employed). It takes the perspective that the envi-
ronmental properties of jobs are multidimensional, 
involving the extent to which workers undertake 
tasks that improve environmental sustainability (green 
intensity) and the degree to which their work involves 
activities exacerbating pollution (pollution intensity), 
as well as the level of emissions generated per worker 
(emissions intensity). Among the many occupations 
classified, an example of a more green-intensive 
occupation is an electrotechnology engineer, while a 
more pollution-intensive occupation is a paper mill 
machine operator. An example of a typically more 
emissions-intensive sector is utilities, including elec-
tricity and gas.3
Employment changes have already played an 
important role in improving sustainability, based 
on the recent experience in a sample of advanced 
economies. Between 2005 and 2015, average total 
carbon emissions per worker (the measure of emis-
sions intensity) in the sample declined by 27 percent 
(Figure 3.1).4 The bulk of that decrease was attribut-
able to improved sectoral efficiency, including a mix of 
emission-lowering, within-sector labor reallocation and 
changes in capital and technology. However, almost a 
quarter of the decline was related to workers’ moving 
from higher- to lower-emissions-intensive sectors. 
Therefore, although sectoral labor reallocation has not 
been the primary contributor to emissions reductions, 
it has played a role, alongside within-sector labor 
reallocation.
Drawing both on empirical and model-based analyses, 
the chapter asks:
•• How green is the labor market? What are the 
environmental properties of jobs, and how do those 
3The specific measurement of these three intensity indicators is 
described in the next section.
4Carbon (carbon dioxide or CO2) emissions are more readily 
available and comparable across sectors and economies over a 
longer period of time than the broader category of GHG emissions. 
Moreover, carbon emissions account for the largest share of global 
GHG emissions, at three-fourths of the total (US EPA 2022). 
Carbon emissions are the emission measure used in this chapter. 
Total carbon emissions incorporate both direct and indirect carbon 
emissions. Indirect emissions are counted as the carbon emissions 
embodied in intermediate inputs used in production (see the IMF 
Climate Change Indicators Dashboard and Online Annex 3.1 for 
further details).
properties vary across economies and sectors? How 
are they associated with demographic characteristics 
(such as educational attainment and urbanicity) 
and earnings?
•• How easily do workers transition into greener 
jobs? What are the characteristics of workers 
(including their employment history and edu-
cation or skills) who more readily move into 
these jobs? Do workers have the skills needed for 
greener employment?
•• How do environmental policies affect the reallo-
cation of workers into greener jobs? Can policies 
help make the labor market greener? Is the effective-
ness of such policies affected by an economy’s labor 
market policies and structural features? What are the 
consequences for overall employment and income 
distribution?
Importantly, the empirical analysis in this chap-
ter takes the prevailing state of technology as given, 
investigating how labor allocation may respond to 
policy changes. As suggested by Figure 3.1, technology 
adoption and innovation—a focus of Chapter 3 of the 
October 2020 WEO—also has a critical role to play in 
the green economic transformation. The model-based 
analysis incorporates technological change (potentially 
Average total change
Sectoral efﬁciency
Sectoral labor reallocation
Average emissions per worker decreased between 2005 and 2015 for the 
countries in the sample, with labor reallocation playing a role.
Sources: IMF, Climate Change Indicators Dashboard; International Labour 
Organization; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the percentage point change in the cross-country average 
carbon emissions intensity relative to 2005. See Online Annex 3.1 for details on 
the underlying country sample and data sources.
2005
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
Figure 3.1.  Evolution of Average Carbon Emissions Intensity
(Percentage point change in CO2 emissions per worker relative to 2005)
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
69
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
spurred by policy), allowing its contribution to the 
green transition in the labor market to be gauged. 
Data constraints mean that the empirical analysis uses 
a limited sample of 34 countries (mainly the United 
States and advanced economies in Europe) covering 
2005–19. To assess how an economy’s development 
level may affect employment in the green transition, 
illustrative scenarios in the model-based analysis are 
calibrated to reflect initial conditions for representative 
advanced and emerging market economies. These are 
the chapter’s main findings:
•• More green- and pollution-intensive jobs appear 
concentrated among a subset of the workforce, leading 
to low average green and pollution intensities of jobs. 
Green and pollution intensities quantify the share 
of activities in a given occupation that improve or 
degrade environmental sustainability, respectively. 
The lion’s share of jobs is neutral in respect to 
these two properties, with zero green and pollu-
tion intensity scores. There is a wide dispersion of 
environmental properties of jobs across and within 
sectors, suggesting that scope exists for reallocation 
both across and within sectors to help green the 
labor market. Higher-skilled and urban workers 
tend to have more green-intensive occupations than 
lower-skilled and rural workers. Moreover, even 
with skills and other individual-level characteristics 
controlled for, green-intensive occupations exhibit 
an average earnings premium of almost 7 percent 
compared with pollution-intensive occupations.
•• Environmental properties of jobs tend to be sticky in 
transitions, pointing to difficulties for workers in more 
pollution-intensive or neutral jobs in moving up the 
green ladder. The probability that a worker will tran-
sition into greener work from pollution-intensive 
work when changing jobs is comparatively low, 
though not statistically significantly different than 
the probability of making that transition from a 
neutral job, which reflects how tough it is to change 
occupations. Higher skills make it easier to tran-
sition into more green-intensive work, suggesting 
that further human capital accumulation could help 
boost workers’ prospects for greener employment.
•• Environmental policies tend to be more effective 
when labor market policies and structural features 
do not inhibit incentives for reallocation. More 
stringent environmental policies are associated 
with employment that is more green- and less 
pollution-intensive, making for a greener labor 
market. Labor market policies and structural features 
may need realignment to avoid diminishing the 
impetus for labor reallocation from greener poli-
cies. In particular, with a strong recovery from the 
COVID-19 pandemic recession underway, it will be 
important to reduce job retention support measures 
to help provide incentives for reallocation (in line 
with country-specific circumstances).
•• With the appropriate policy package, an economy 
can get on the path to net zero emissions by 2050, 
while improving the average economic conditions of 
lower-skilled workers. Similar to earlier IMF advice, 
the package should include a green infrastructure 
push and a gradual phase-in of carbon taxes. It 
should also include a training program—targeted 
toward lower-skilled workers to boost their pro-
ductivity in lower-emissions-intensive work—and 
an earned income tax credit, providing income 
support and incentivizing labor supply. Both would 
help encourage labor reallocation while ameliorat-
ing inequality.
•• In an illustration with a representative advanced 
(emerging market) economy, about 1 (2.5) per-
cent of employment will shift from higher- to 
lower-emissions-intensive work over the next 10 years to 
get on the net zero emissions path. The shift is larger 
for emerging markets, reflecting their larger initial 
employment shares in higher-emissions-intensive 
sectors. For the group of advanced economies, 
the size of these labor shifts is smaller than the 
almost 4 percent of employment per decade shift 
from industry to services sector work since the 
mid-1980s. Finally, while the overall long-term 
employment effects are small, they can be slightly 
positive or negative depending on the magnitude of 
adjustment needed and the policy package used.
Taken together, the results indicate that the employ-
ment changes required by the green transformation 
are moderate in a historical, macroeconomic con-
text. This reflects in part the small initial shares of 
employment that are more pollution-intensive and in 
higher-emissions-intensive sectors.5 Modest techno-
logical and productivity improvements—spurred by 
policies in the model scenarios—are essential to main-
tain or grow employment while lowering emissions. 
5For example, only about 1 percent of employment is in the 
utilities sector (energy and water/sewage; the sector with the highest 
average emission intensity) on average for a sample of advanced 
economies (Online Annex Figure 3.2.1 sample). See the next section 
for further discussion.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
70
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
However, the transition may entail considerable 
challenges for individuals. Although more green- and 
pollution-intensive jobs are on average concentrated 
among a smaller subset of workers, the extent of labor 
reallocation required will vary according to country and 
within-country regional characteristics (see Box 3.1 for 
evidence on the geographic distribution of the environ-
mental properties of jobs in the United States). Areas 
that rely more heavily on higher-emissions-intensive 
production will have a larger reallocation need and a 
potentially tougher transition.6
The analysis demonstrates that it is difficult for any 
given individual to switch to a greener occupation, 
which should temper any inference that the transition 
will be easy. This is especially the case for lower-skilled 
workers, which highlights the importance of including 
well-designed training programs in the policy package.7 
More broadly, occupational switches are not easy.
Some important caveats to these analyses need 
stating. First, because of data limitations, the green 
and pollution intensities assigned to occupations in the 
empirical analysis are invariant over time. However, 
employment could become greener without reallo-
cation across occupations if technological changes 
increased green intensities and decreased pollution 
intensities by occupation. Second, the empirical 
results are derived using a sample composed largely 
of advanced economies, which makes the results less 
applicable to the typical emerging market or develop-
ing economy, in particular, one with a large share of 
informal employment. Third, even when the analysis 
of the empirical effects of policies takes place at the 
individual level, omitted variables may still be a con-
cern, which suggests that the empirical policy-related 
results should be interpreted as associational rather 
than causal. More generally, the empirical analysis 
relies upon historical patterns in the data to assess 
policy effects, which may not be representative of the 
size and mix of policy changes needed to achieve net 
zero emissions.
6For example, see Online Annex 1.6 to the October 2019 Fiscal 
Monitor for a study of regions that are heavily dependent on coal.
7In a meta-analysis, Card, Kluve, and Weber (2018) find that 
training programs have typically positive medium-term impacts on 
participants’ prospects. Specific program design elements, which 
must be calibrated to the country and regional context, also affect 
cost and success. See Levy Yeyati, Montané, and Sartorio (2019) 
for recent findings. Although there has been particular interest in 
developing skills for a greener economy (OECD and Cedefop 2014), 
there are no comprehensive evaluation studies on such specific 
training aspects.
With the flexibility of its calibration and incorpora-
tion of technological change, the model-based analysis 
attempts to address these shortcomings of the empiri-
cal analysis. However, it too comes with limitations. If 
there were a mismatch in the timing of the destruction 
of more pollution- and emissions-intensive jobs and 
the creation of greener jobs, then there could be a 
rise in unemployment over the near term. The model 
used here is one of structural transition with a labor 
supply decision and does not incorporate involuntary 
unemployment. That said, the model does account 
for structural changes in the skills of the workforce 
(improved by training), which may well help ease the 
adjustment over a longer period. Finally, the analysis 
uses a closed economy framework for simplicity and 
does not consider possible international spillovers from 
policy changes.8
Important factors outside the chapter’s scope 
could complicate the transition to a greener econ-
omy. The scenario-based analysis assumes that 
policies are fully credible, transparently announced, 
and implemented in a timely manner. However, 
the risk is large that policy uncertainties and delays 
will continue—for example, as a result of political 
economy constraints.9 With these uncertainties and 
delays, the transition will be more challenging and 
potentially require even sharper adjustment. More-
over, if the policy package is only partly imple-
mented or its implementation is poorly sequenced, 
the transition could exacerbate income inequality 
and net employment losses.
The chapter begins by defining the environmental 
properties of jobs and documenting their incidence 
and distribution. It also explores how these properties 
vary with worker characteristics. The chapter then 
turns to individual-level job transitions and how they 
change with the environmental properties of jobs 
(source or destination). In the penultimate section, the 
chapter analyzes how environmental policies can help 
green the employment landscape, how policy effective-
ness may vary with labor market policies and structural 
features, and the content and shape of a policy package 
to make the green transition.
8See Chapter 3 of the October 2020 WEO, which takes 
a global perspective in its examination of activity and does 
incorporate the possible international spillovers from climate 
mitigation policies.
9See the October 2019 Fiscal Monitor for a discussion about polit-
ical economy concerns related to the green economic transformation.
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
71
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Environmental Properties of Jobs: 
Definitions and Stylized Facts
This chapter takes the perspective that the envi-
ronmental properties of jobs are multidimensional, 
examining them through two lenses: what workers 
do (their occupations) and where they work (their 
sectors). For the first lens, the chapter constructs an 
occupation-level measure of the green intensity of a 
job, based on the taxonomy of tasks and occupa-
tions from Dierdorff and others (2009) and O*NET 
Center (2021) and similar to that in Vona and others 
(2018). This measure is computed by occupation as 
the share of green tasks in total tasks in the work. 
The chapter also constructs an occupation-level 
measure of the pollution intensity of a job, building 
on the classification of Vona and others (2018), 
who identify polluting occupations as those par-
ticularly predominant in high-GHG-emitting and 
high-polluting sectors.10
As defined, the measures of green and pollution 
intensity each range continuously from 0 to 100 
(expressed as a percent), with higher values indicating 
greener or more polluting occupations, respectively. 
It is possible for an occupation to be neither green- 
nor pollution-intensive (both measures are zero). The 
chapter refers to these as neutral occupations, and they 
account for the bulk of jobs.
For the second lens, the chapter matches infor-
mation on the sectors in which people are employed 
with the emissions intensity (in total tons of carbon 
dioxide emitted per worker) by sector and country. 
Higher-emissions-intensive sectors include utilities, 
mining, and manufacturing.11
A natural question is how these environmental 
properties of jobs relate to each other, as they each 
capture a different environmental dimension of a given 
job. The green and pollution intensities of employ-
ment show a negative relationship to each other within 
the sample of employed workers, reflecting a general 
10See Online Annex 3.1 for details on the construction of these 
indices and examples of selected occupations and their associ-
ated scores. Both green and pollution intensities take underlying 
inputs from the US occupational classification system, which are 
cross-walked to the international standard occupational classification 
system with employment weights. Green intensity is the average 
employment-weighted share of green tasks in total tasks in an inter-
national standard occupation. Pollution intensity is interpreted as 
the average employment-weighted share of polluting activities in an 
international standard occupation.
11See Online Annex 3.1 for a description of the calculation of 
sectoral emissions intensity and the underlying emissions data.
property that more green-intensive occupations tend 
to be less polluting. More pollution-intensive jobs are 
positively related to jobs in more emissions-intensive 
sectors.12 Taken together, these findings provide reas-
surance that the three environmental properties of jobs 
are sensibly associated with each other.
Higher Green, Pollution, and Emission Intensities Are 
Concentrated among a Small Subset of Workers
For the sample of economies analyzed, the average 
employment-weighted green intensity of occupations 
ranges from about 2 to 3 percent for most economies 
in the sample, while the average employment-weighted 
pollution intensity is between about 2 and 6 percent 
(Figure 3.2, panels 1 and 3). Many jobs have very 
low green and pollution intensities: most are neutral 
(Figure 3.2, panels 2 and 4). Despite the urgency of 
the climate change threat, the rise in average green 
intensity and fall in average pollution intensity over the 
past decade have been incremental.
On the other hand, the emissions intensity of 
employment has fallen noticeably over the same period 
for the economies in the sample (Figure 3.2, panel 
5). As noted, this partly reflects labor reallocation 
from higher- to lower-emissions-intensive sectors. 
In fact, the average share of employment in the 
higher-emissions-intensive sectors of mining, man-
ufacturing, and utilities fell from about 18 percent 
in 2005 to 15 percent in 2015. While the median 
individual-level emissions intensity for the average 
country within the sample stood at about eight tons of 
carbon dioxide per worker in 2015, there is a substan-
tial right skew in the average employment distribution, 
indicating that there is only a small share of workers 
involved in activities generating high carbon emissions 
(Figure 3.2, panel 6).13
12See Online Annex 3.1 for the underlying analysis of these rela-
tionships across measures.
13Other measures or definitions could generate different conclu-
sions. For example, a broader definition that includes jobs that could 
see increased demand during a green transition while not actually 
involving green tasks themselves and that does not distinguish 
between jobs that are more versus less heavily affected (a simple 
binary classification) could generate a larger share of employment. 
For example, Bowen, Kuralbayeva, and Tipoe (2018) apply such a 
broader definition and calculate that almost 20 percent of employ-
ment in the United States is green. See also ONEMEV (2021) for 
its classification of the green economy in France. It finds that about 
0.5 percent of employment is green, while another 14 percent is 
“greening” in some way. See also IMF (2022).
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
72
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Labor Reallocation Can Strengthen the Green Transition
The green intensity of occupations varies across sec-
tors, with that in industrial sectors higher on average, 
but sectoral averages are generally low (Figure 3.3, 
panel 1). Industrial sectors are also typically more 
pollution-intensive, but with averages notably higher 
in a few sectors, such as mining, manufacturing, and 
energy production (Figure 3.3, panel 2).
There is also wide dispersion in green and pollution 
intensities within sectors, as shown by the whiskers 
in the panel. This illustrates that there can be sub-
stantial within-sector differences in how green- or 
pollution-intensive workers’ jobs are.
For a given sector, large differences in emissions 
intensity can be seen across countries, reflecting wide 
variation in technology and efficiency across countries 
(Figure 3.3, panel 3). Overall, these results high-
light the substantial potential to “move up the green 
ladder” or “down the pollution ladder” within and 
across sectors.
Higher-Skilled and Urban Workers Tend 
to Have More Green-Intensive and Less 
Pollution-Intensive Occupations
Further greening of the labor market is easier 
if workers already have the skills needed in more 
green-intensive jobs. Higher-skilled workers tend to be 
in occupations with higher green and lower pollution 
intensities than lower-skilled workers (Figure 3.4).14 
Among other demographic characteristics, urbanicity 
stands out: urban workers tend to have occupations 
with higher green and lower pollution intensities than 
rural workers. At the same time, there is no statistically 
significant difference between the average emissions 
intensities of urban and rural workers.
Average Green-Intensive Job Earns More Than the 
Average Pollution-Intensive Job
Even after an individual’s skill level and other 
demographic characteristics are controlled for, 
the average green-intensive job commands earn-
ings almost 7 percent higher than the average 
14Online Annex 3.2 presents evidence that general green skills 
(skill categories most highly associated with green-intensive employ-
ment) are relatively evenly distributed across sectors. The wide 
dispersion within sectors and the similar levels across sectors suggest 
that further greening of the economy without massive skill changes 
at the macroeconomic level may be possible.
Median
10th–90th percentile
25th–75th percentile
90th percentile
Median
10th–90th percentile
25th–75th percentile
90th percentile
Median
10th–90th percentile
25th–75th percentile
90th percentile
Median
Figure 3.2.  Cross-Country Distribution and Evolution of 
Green- and Pollution-Intensive Occupations and Carbon 
Emissions per Worker
Although it has risen slowly over recent years, green intensity remains low on 
average, indicating further scope for greening. Pollution intensity has declined 
marginally, while emissions intensity has fallen about one-third, on average.
Environmental Properties of
Jobs
Average Employment Distribution
by Environmental Property
(Density)
1. Green Intensity
(Average employment-
weighted index, percent)
2011
13
15
17
19
0
1
2
3
4
0
10
20
30
40
0
50
100
150
2. Green Intensity, 2019
Green intensity
3. Pollution Intensity
(Average employment-
weighted index, percent)
2011
13
15
17
19
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
20
40
60
80
100
Pollution intensity
0
5
10
15
20
25
4. Pollution Intensity, 2019
5. Emissions Intensity
(Annual tons of CO2 per
worker)
2005 07
09
11
13
15
0
20
40
60
80
100
6. Emissions Intensity, 2015
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Total carbon emissions
(tons of CO2) per worker (log)
Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; IMF, Climate Change Indicators Dashboard; 
International Labour Organization; National Institute of Statistics and Geography 
(INEGI) (Mexico), National Survey of Occupation and Employment; Occupational 
Information Network; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; 
Statistics South Africa, Quarterly Labour Force Survey; US Census, Current 
Population Survey; Vona and others (2018); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 1 and 3 are computed as the share (percent) of occupational tasks in 
the total economy that are green-intensive and the share (percent) of occupations 
that are pollution-intensive, respectively, weighted by employment for each 
country. Panel 5 exhibits carbon emissions intensity for the average worker by 
country. Data are shown over the time periods for which they are available. 
Panels 2, 4, and 6 show the average kernel density for employment (see Silverman 
1986). See Online Annex 3.1 for details on country samples.
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
73
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
pollution-intensive job (Figure 3.5).15 This premium 
has trended slightly upward in recent years, poten-
tially helping to provide incentives for the transition 
toward a greener economy.
Environmental Properties of Job Transitions
This section investigates how easily workers move 
into greener jobs, examining individual-level job transi-
tions. These transitions include such changes as an 
unemployed person’s finding a job, an employed per-
son’s separating from a job, and changes in occupation 
or the sector in which a person works. As benchmarks, 
an average of about 8 percent of workers a year switch 
to a new job while employed or “on-the-job” for the 
countries in the sample used in this chapter, while 
about 52 percent of those who were out of work the 
previous year (either unemployed or not participating) 
15See Online Annex 3.3 for details on the earnings premium. The 
findings are similar to those of Vona, Marin, and Consoli (2019) for 
the United States.
 
1. Green Intensity, 2019
(Individual index scores)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Agri.
Mining
Manuf.
Elec./Gas
Water
Constr.
Trade
Transport
Acc./Food
Info./Com.
Fin./Ins.
Real Est.
Prof.
Adm./Serv.
Public Adm.
Educ.
Health
Arts
Oth. Serv.
2. Pollution Intensity, 2019
(Individual index scores)  
0
20
40
60
80
100
3. Emissions Intensity, 2015
(Average tons of CO2 per worker, log)
Elec./Gas
Water
Constr.
Trade
Transport
Acc./Food
Info./Com.
Fin./Ins.
Real Est.
Prof.
Adm./Serv.
Public Adm.
Educ.
Health
Arts
Oth. Serv.
Agri.
Mining
Manuf.
Educ.
Health
Agri.
Mining
Manuf.
Utilities
Constr.
Trade
Transport
Acc./Food
Info./Com.
Fin./Ins.
Real Est.
Prof. Serv
Public Adm.
Arts/Oth. Serv.
0
2
4
6
8
Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; International Labour Organization, ILOSTAT 
database; IMF, Climate Change Indicators Dashboard; National Institute of 
Statistics and Geography (INEGI) (Mexico), National Survey of Occupation and 
Employment; Occupational Information Network; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; Statistics South Africa, Quarterly Labour Force 
Survey; US Census, Current Population Survey; Vona and others (2018); and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Squares represent the mean for the sector across individuals in the sample, 
while whiskers represent the 10th–90th percentile range. Sectors are classiﬁed 
according to International Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation Revision 4. See Online 
Annex 3.1 for details on the country sample for the charts and deﬁnitions of the 
abbreviations used.
Figure 3.3.  Sectoral Differences in the Distribution of Green, 
Pollution, and Emissions Intensities in Employment
There is substantial room to boost green intensity in economies by reallocating 
workers away from highly polluting occupations both within and across sectors.
Higher-skilled
Lower-skilled
Rural 
Urban
Skills
Geography
Figure 3.4.  Environmental Properties of Jobs by Worker 
Characteristics
Higher-skilled workers’ jobs are more green- and less pollution-intensive; 
pollution-intensive jobs are more concentrated in rural areas.
0
2
4
6
8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Green
intensity
Pollution
intensity
Emissions
intensity
(right scale)
Green
intensity
Pollution
intensity
Emissions
intensity
(right scale)
Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; IMF, Climate Change Indicators Dashboard; 
National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI) (Mexico), National Survey of 
Occupation and Employment; Occupational Information Network; Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development; Statistics South Africa, Quarterly Labour 
Force Survey; US Census, Current Population Survey; Vona and others (2018); and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars show the averages for the property over the employment-weighted 
sample of individuals with the characteristic indicated. Lower-skilled workers have 
at most secondary and nontertiary education or below, while higher-skilled 
workers have postsecondary or tertiary education. Whiskers depict the 90 percent 
conﬁdence band around the estimates.
Average individual index, percent
Average tons of CO2 per worker
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
74
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
find new jobs in the current year (Figure 3.6, panel 1). 
About 6 percent of workers separate from (leave) their 
job each year.16
Green-Intensive Jobs Exhibit Less Churn Than 
Pollution-Intensive Jobs
Both green- and pollution-intensive jobs see less 
churning—fewer transitions—than neutral jobs. Work-
ers with either more green- or more pollution-intensive 
jobs have lower on-the-job transition rates than 
those with neutral jobs (Figure 3.6, panels 2 and 3). 
Out-of-work individuals with a history of more green- 
or pollution-intensive employment also appear to find 
jobs more easily than those previously employed in 
neutral jobs, although this difference is not statistically 
significant. Finally, workers who previously held more 
green-intensive or more pollution-intensive jobs are 
also less likely to separate from their jobs than those 
who previously held neutral jobs. Taken together, these 
results suggest that workers in nonneutral jobs have 
greater job stability on average, with those with more 
green-intensive jobs the most stable.
16These rates are similar to those found in the literature. See 
Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin (2013) and Hobijn and Şahin (2009), 
among others.
Environmental Properties of Jobs Are Sticky, and 
Transitions Can Be Tough
Zooming in on transitions into more green-intensive 
jobs, workers already employed in such jobs are highly 
likely to find work of a similar nature in a transition, 
with finding rates from unemployment or on-the-job of 
41 and 54 percent, respectively (Figure 3.7). By contrast, 
Earnings premium
90 percent conﬁdence interval
The average green-intensive job commands a small earnings premium relative to 
the average pollution-intensive job, even when skill levels are controlled for.
0
5
10
15
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
18
Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; Occupational Information Network; Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development; US Census, Current Population 
Survey; Vona and others (2018); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annexes 3.1 and 3.3 for details on the country sample and the 
estimation of the earnings premium.
Figure 3.5.  Earnings and the Environmental Properties of Jobs
(Percent)
Figure 3.6.  Job Transition Rates and the Environmental 
Properties of Past Jobs
Workers in more green- and pollution-intensive jobs enjoy greater job security on 
average, with more green-intensive jobs having the greatest stability.
1. Benchmark Transition Rates
(Annual probability, percent)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
On-the-job job
ﬁnding rate
Out-of-work job
ﬁnding rate
Job separation
rate
2. Impact of Past Green Intensity
(Percent change)
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
On-the-job job
ﬁnding rate
Out-of-work job
ﬁnding rate
Job separation
rate
3. Impact of Past Pollution Intensity
(Percent change)
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
On-the-job job
ﬁnding rate
Out-of-work job
ﬁnding rate
Job separation
rate
Sources: EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions; US Census, Current 
Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, each bar shows the estimated average transition rates in our 
sample. In panels 2 and 3, each bar shows the indicated average transition rate 
in the sample. The whiskers depict the 90 percent conﬁdence intervals around 
the estimated coefﬁcients. The differences between more green- and pollution- 
intensive jobs are statistically signiﬁcant for job-to-job ﬁnding and job separation 
rates. See Online Annexes 3.1 and 3.4 for details on the country sample and 
estimation.
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
75
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
it is not as easy for workers in pollution-intensive 
and neutral jobs to move to more green-intensive 
jobs. The probability of moving from a pollution- to 
a green-intensive job when transitioning is between 
4 and 7 percent. For workers coming from neutral 
jobs, the rates are slightly higher, ranging from 9 
to 11 percent. Although it is somewhat easier than 
moving into green-intensive jobs, workers with more 
pollution-intensive job histories also find it difficult to 
move into neutral jobs, with rates around 11 percent. 
These results in part reflect how tough it is in general to 
change occupations.17
17The simple probabilities calculated here do not control for other 
worker characteristics. See Online Annex 3.2 for further analysis 
comparing job transitions across workers with differing employment 
histories after accounting for worker demographic characteristics, 
including skills. These findings show that the stickiness of the 
environmental properties of jobs and difficulties with job transi-
tions are robust.
Labor Markets and Environmental Policies: 
Empirical and Model-Based Analyses
As discussed, the green economic transformation 
necessary to respond to climate change will likely mean 
that employment must become more green-intensive 
and decrease its pollution and emissions intensities. 
However, and as just demonstrated, the environmen-
tal properties of jobs tend to be sticky, with workers 
finding it easier to move into occupations with prop-
erties similar to their previous occupations.18 As it is 
tougher for workers with pollution-intensive or neutral 
job histories to move into more green-intensive work, 
an important question is whether policies can help 
increase (reduce) the share of green-(pollution-)inten-
sive jobs in the economy and make worker reallocation 
easier to facilitate the green economic transformation.
To make progress in answering this question, this 
section first provides an empirical assessment of the 
relationships between a country’s environmental 
policy stringency and the environmental properties of 
workers’ employment. It then examines how a coun-
try’s labor market policies and structural features may 
affect these relationships. However, recognizing that 
these empirical estimates rely on a composite index of 
the environmental policy stance and are associational 
rather than causal, this section then uses a newly devel-
oped task-based model of the labor market to study 
the content and shape of a policy package that can 
guide the economy through the green transition. By 
varying the calibration, the model allows the influence 
of country characteristics on policy effectiveness and 
the transition path to be evaluated.
Empirical Estimates of the Labor Market Effects of 
Environmental Policies
Expanding on the linear regression models of the 
environmental properties of jobs and job transitions, 
a variable capturing the stringency of environmental 
policies at the country level is introduced.19 Although 
the estimation of the effects with individual-level 
18This is consistent with more general findings regarding job tran-
sitions. Switching occupations is typically less likely than staying in 
the same occupational category when changing jobs (see Chapter 3 
of the April 2021 WEO for further details and selected references).
19The policy variable of interest is the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development’s composite index of the stringency 
of environmental policies, which combines a country’s measures of 
carbon pricing and taxation, the extent of research and development 
spending on green technologies, and the stringency of environmental 
regulation, among other environmental policy instruments.
On-the-job
From unemployment
Moving from a more pollution-intensive or a neutral job to a more green-intensive 
job is more difﬁcult than moving from one green-intensive job to another.
Sources: EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions; National Institute of 
Statistics and Geography (INEGI) (Mexico), National Survey of Occupation and 
Employment; Occupational Information Network; US Census, Current Population 
Survey; Vona and others (2018); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Probabilities are calculated based on transitions across three job types 
among individuals switching jobs. For the discrete state transition probabilities 
exhibited in this ﬁgure, a job is deﬁned to be green-intensive if its green intensity 
is positive and its pollution intensity is zero; likewise, a job is deﬁned to be 
pollution-intensive if its pollution intensity is positive and its green intensity is zero. 
A job is deﬁned to be neutral if its green and pollution intensities are both zero. 
Whiskers depict the 90 percent conﬁdence band around the estimates. See Online 
Annexes 3.1 and 3.4 for details on the sample and estimation.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
From pollution-
intensive
From green-
intensive
From neutral
From pollution-
intensive
To green-intensive job
To neutral job
Figure 3.7.  Annual Probability among Job Switchers of 
Transitioning into a Green-Intensive or Neutral Job
(Percent)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
76
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
observations—which likely do not affect country-level 
policy settings—and the inclusion of various fixed 
effects provide some robustness, the findings should 
be interpreted as associational rather than causal. 
Moreover, only the statistically significant results are 
shown here.20
Policies Encouraging Greater Environmental 
Sustainability Help Green the Labor Market
The analysis suggests that more stringent envi-
ronmental policies are associated with employment 
with higher green intensity and lower pollution and 
emissions intensities. Specifically, the findings suggest 
that a country that moves from the 25th to the 75th 
percentile in environmental policy stringency would 
see a 2 percent increase in its average green intensity of 
employment; its average pollution and emissions inten-
sities would decline by about 4 and 6 percent, respec-
tively (Figure 3.8, panel 1). In other words, policies 
that encourage greater environmental sustainability are 
statistically significantly related to greener employment.
This is in part a reflection of the impact of policies 
on job transitions. When environmental policies are 
more stringent, the average green intensity of new-
found jobs among workers who switch while employed 
tends to be higher, and the average emissions intensity 
of these jobs tends to be lower. For a country shifting 
from the 25th to the 75th percentile in environmental 
policy stringency, among those who switch jobs while 
on the job, their destination jobs have about 4 per-
cent higher average green intensity, while those jobs’ 
average emissions intensity is about 2 percent lower 
(Figure 3.8, panel 2).
Economy-Specific Labor Market Policies and 
Structural Features Can Have an Impact on the 
Effects of Environmental Policies on Employment
These findings on the labor market greening effects 
of environmental policies point to their role in helping 
further the green transition. However, these average 
effects may mask the impacts of differences in coun-
tries’ labor market policies and structural features on 
the effectiveness of environmental policies. This sub-
section attempts to unpack these effects by considering 
how they may be mediated by such country-specific 
characteristics. This is accomplished by adding interac-
tions of environmental policy stringency with selected 
20See Online Annex 3.5 for further details on the regression speci-
fications and set of outcome variables considered.
labor market policy and structural feature indicators to 
the linear regression analysis.21
The results suggest that labor market policies and 
features associated with reduced incentives for worker 
reallocation tend to dampen the effectiveness of 
environmental policies in greening the labor market 
(Figure 3.9).22 In particular, higher spending on job 
21As mentioned earlier, only statistically significant results are shown 
here. Other country-specific labor market policies and structural 
features were investigated but were not found to have statistically 
significant impacts on the effects of environmental policy stringency 
on the environmental properties of jobs or related job transitions. 
These included worker reallocation support measures, the stringency 
of employment protection regulation, and the stringency of product 
market regulation. See Online Annex 3.5 for further details.
22Other structural policies may also influence labor market 
greening through their effects on geographic allocation within 
countries. For example, eliminating nontariff internal trade barriers 
(through activities such as harmonizing occupational licensing within 
a country) could improve labor reallocation by easing regional labor 
movements (Alvarez, Krznar, and Tombe 2019; Hermansen 2020).
Figure 3.8.  Estimated Effects of Environmental Policy 
Stringency
(Percent change)
More stringent environmental policies help green the labor market.
1. On Environmental Properties of Jobs
Green intensity
Pollution intensity
Emissions intensity
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
2. On Environmental Properties of Destination Jobs after On-the-Job
Job Switches
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Green intensity
Emissions intensity
Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions; 
US Census, Current Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The panels show the average marginal effects of a country’s moving from 
the 25th to the 75th percentile in environmental policy stringency on the indicated 
environmental properties, either among all employed workers (panel 1) or among 
destination jobs after on-the-job job switches (panel 2). The whiskers depict the 
90 percent conﬁdence intervals around the estimated effects. See Online Annexes 
3.1 and 3.5 for details on the country sample and underlying regression 
speciﬁcations, respectively.
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
77
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
retention support and more generous unemployment 
insurance are associated with declining effectiveness 
of environmental policies in spurring, respectively, 
greater green intensity and lower pollution intensity of 
jobs. Worker reallocation support (including spend-
ing on training programs) is not found to statistically 
significantly alter the effectiveness of environmental 
policies, which suggests that it has historically not been 
designed to support labor market greening. By con-
trast, the evidence suggests that environmental policies 
are more effective in reducing the pollution intensity 
of employment in countries with more coordinated 
labor market and collective bargaining arrangements. 
Why might this be the case? Such arrangements could 
help social partners—businesses, workers, and the 
government—coordinate on shared actions to support 
a green transformation as a common objective and ease 
any associated labor market adjustment.23
In summary, the empirical analysis suggests that 
more stringent environmental policies help promote a 
greener labor market. Moreover, they tend to be more 
effective when other labor market policies and features 
do not inhibit incentives for workers to reallocate 
and match to new jobs. However, endogeneity, the 
lack of granularity on alternative policy instruments, 
and the unprecedented nature of the climate change 
mitigation challenge argue for caution in extrapolating 
these empirical findings too broadly. The next sub-
section attempts to address such concerns through a 
model-based analysis of policies and their impacts on 
employment and worker welfare in the green economic 
transformation.
A Package of Policies for a Greener Labor Market: 
A Model-Based Analysis
This chapter uses a newly developed task-based, 
closed economy model to analyze the impact of 
granular policies on the green economic transforma-
tion. As in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) and Drozd, 
Taschereau-Dumouchel, and Tavares (forthcoming), 
production of goods takes place through the execution 
of fixed sets of tasks, which vary according to what is 
produced. Tasks are completed by labor (lower-skilled 
or higher-skilled) or capital, with varying degrees of 
cost and productivity. A producing sector’s greenness 
depends on the kind and intensity of inputs used in 
production, with inputs and tasks varying in their 
green and pollution intensities (for example, a greener 
sector produces output with less polluting tasks). For 
simplicity, the model considers the production of two 
goods in two sectors that differ in their ultimate emis-
sions intensity (higher/lower), as a function of their 
production technology and inputs employed.
Capital is used in the production of final goods by 
both sectors and can substitute for lower-skilled or 
higher-skilled labor in the execution of tasks, depend-
ing on how the relative productivity of capital evolves. 
However, capital investment requires output from the 
higher-emissions-intensive sector, similarly to what 
23See Addison (2016) and Blanchard, Jaumotte, and Loungani 
(2014), among others, which describe how more coordinated and 
collective labor market arrangements may enhance an economy’s 
ability to adjust to common shocks, particularly when there is trust 
among social partners.
Figure 3.9.  Estimated Effects of Environmental Policy 
Stringency Conditional on Labor Market Features
(Percent change)
The labor market effects of environmental policy stringency depend on labor 
market policies and features, particularly those that can inhibit or facilitate worker 
reallocation.
1. On Green Intensity of Employment
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Zero retention
support
Mean retention
support
2. On Pollution Intensity of Employment
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
No labor market
arrangements
Mean coverage of
coordinated labor market
arrangements
Mean generosity
of unemployment
insurance
Sources: EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions; US Census, Current 
Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The marginal effect of environmental policy stringency (EPS index) on the 
environmental properties of jobs is expressed as a percentage of the mean 
intensity for changes in the EPS index from the 25th to 75th percentiles of the 
cross-country distribution. The whiskers depict the 90 percent conﬁdence interval 
around the estimated effects. See Online Annexes 3.1 and 3.4 for details on the 
country sample and the estimation.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
78
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
might be expected for machinery and equipment invest-
ment. Hence, to grow the lower-emissions-intensive sec-
tor or support greater automation through investment, 
production in the higher-emissions-intensive sector may 
rise, at least temporarily.24
Importantly, the model allows for the effects of 
country-specific characteristics—such as a country’s 
development level—to be assessed through scenar-
ios. The model is calibrated first to a representative 
advanced economy and then to a representative 
emerging market economy, drawing on the literature 
and the empirical findings shown earlier for parameter 
values.25 There are two main differences between these 
two economies: (1) the share of overall output coming 
from the higher-emissions-intensive sector is larger in 
the emerging market economy, and (2) the difference 
in the use of labor across the two sectors is larger in 
the emerging market economy, where production in 
the higher-emissions-intensive sector is even more 
reliant on labor. Across both economies, the share of 
lower-skilled workers in sectoral employment is greater 
in the higher-emissions-intensive sector.
Rises in the relative price of the higher-emissions-­
intensive good can shift demand and supply toward 
the lower-emissions-intensive good, leading to realloca-
tion. This section considers a policy package designed 
to enable an economy to achieve net zero emissions 
by 2050 through a mix of productivity improvements 
and reallocation while smoothing the employment 
adjustment. Policymakers are able to credibly commit 
to the policy, enabling investors and workers to plan 
accordingly. Two elements of the package share simi-
larities with the policies examined in Chapter 3 of the 
October 2020 WEO:
•• An initial green infrastructure and research and 
development investment push is deployed in 
2023 to support a modest productivity increase in 
the lower-emissions-intensive sector, reducing its 
production costs per unit of output.26 Spending is 
slowly reduced after 2028.
•• An ad valorem tax on carbon emissions is gradually 
phased in, starting at about 0.1 percentage point 
24Online Annex 3.2 shows that the gap in pollution intensity 
between routinizable and nonroutinizable jobs is about six times 
larger than that in green intensity, suggesting that greater automation 
could be associated with a greener labor market.
25See Online Annex 3.6 for further details, including selected 
structural and policy parameter calibrations.
26See the Online Annex 3.5 of the October 2020 WEO for dis-
cussion and more in-depth analysis of how research and development 
subsidies targeted to green innovation can facilitate the transition.
per year in 2023 and then rising by 1 percentage 
point per year from 2029 onward. This raises the 
relative price of the higher-emissions-intensive 
good, spurring reallocation and growth in the 
lower-emissions-intensive sector.
Compared with the earlier study, two new policy 
instruments are added to the package:
•• A training program to facilitate the transition of 
lower-skilled workers to the lower-emissions-intensive 
sector is implemented from 2023. This raises 
the productivity of lower-skilled workers in 
lower-emissions-intensive work.27
•• An earned income tax credit (EITC) program is set up 
to boost lower-skilled workers’ incomes and stimulate 
their labor supply at the same time. This program 
starts in 2029, coincident with the carbon tax phase-in.
With this package of policies appropriately timed 
and tuned, the economy can be put on a green transi-
tion path and labor shifts smoothed out.
Advanced Economy Case
In the case of a representative advanced economy, the 
policy package generates a labor reallocation of about 
1 percent of employment over the next 10 years, shrink-
ing the higher-emissions-intensive sector and growing 
the lower-emissions-intensive sector (Figure 3.10, 
panel 1). For the group of advanced economies, the 
pace of the labor shift is smaller than the average shift 
of almost 4 percent per decade from industry to services 
sector employment since the mid-1980s. The package 
also promotes an increase in capital investment in the 
lower-emissions-intensive sector, while leading to a sharp 
fall in investment in the higher-emissions-intensive 
sector (Figure 3.10, panel 2).
When employment in each sector compared with 
its baseline is examined, the relative importance of 
the various policies becomes clear. The green invest-
ment push postpones the reallocation of workers 
initially (Figure 3.10, panels 3 and 4, blue bars), 
because the push requires capital goods produced by 
the higher-emissions-intensive sector. By contrast, the 
carbon tax acts as a price signal, promoting labor reallo-
cation from the higher- to the lower-emissions-intensive 
27See Online Annex 3.6 for details on the magnitude of the 
productivity boost from training. Empirical evidence on the positive 
effects of training programs supports the argument that training can 
improve employment prospects for (and reallocation of) targeted 
worker groups (Card, Kluve, and Weber 2018).
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
79
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
sector (Figure 3.10, panels 3 and 4, yellow bars). 
Moreover, despite the clearly communicated very 
gradual step-up of the carbon tax over time, businesses 
and workers anticipate its ultimate impact, starting 
some reallocation immediately. The training program 
also helps to promote labor reallocation but does so 
by making lower-skilled workers more productive in 
lower-emissions-intensive work (Figure 3.10, panels 3 
and 4, red bars). This encourages their hiring by busi-
nesses in the lower-emissions-intensive sector and boosts 
the earnings of those who switch. Finally, the earned 
income tax credit expansion is not targeted to sectors 
but instead provides greater incentives for lower-skilled 
workers to boost their labor supply economy-wide 
(Figure 3.10, panels 3 and 4, green bars).
Overall, the package generates an increase in total 
employment of about 0.5 percent.28 Both lower- and 
higher-skilled workers see higher employment in the 
lower-emissions-intensive sector, but lower-skilled 
workers see the largest boost (Figure 3.10, panel 5).29 
Moreover, the training and earned income tax credit 
programs result in an increase in after-tax income for 
lower-skilled workers, reducing inequality (Figure 3.10, 
panel 6, red and green bars).
Emerging Market Economy Case
As already mentioned, the emerging market 
economy case differs from the advanced economy 
case, given emerging market economies’ typically 
larger shares of output and employment in 
higher-emissions-intensive production. An emerging 
market economy is also more likely to have a large 
share of its labor force in informal employment, which 
would not benefit from an earned income tax credit. 
The policy package is thus modified to include a cash 
transfer to lower-skilled workers. The cash transfer 
program is not targeted to workers in any specific 
sector but is available to all low-income (on average, 
lower-skilled) workers. It is implemented from 2029, 
alongside the carbon tax and earned income tax credit. 
Although the cash transfer program could lower 
income inequality, it could also reduce the incentive to 
28This magnitude of the net employment change is closely related 
to the labor supply elasticity assumed (see Online Annex 3.6).
29The model findings imply that labor reallocation contributes 
about one-seventh of the emissions decline in the policy scenario, 
with the rest related to efficiency gains. This is a similar order of 
magnitude to the one-fourth share related to sectoral labor reallo-
cation observed historically in Figure 3.1 for the average sample 
country over the 2005–15 period.
2027
2032
Package
Infrastructure
Training
Carbon taxes
EITC
Package
Infrastructure
Training
Carbon taxes
EITC
Package
Infrastructure
Training
Carbon taxes
EITC
Total
Lower-emissions
Higher-emissions
Total
Lower-emissions
Higher-emissions
Figure 3.10.  Model Simulations of the Green Economic 
Transformation with a Comprehensive Policy Package in an 
Advanced Economy
(Percent deviation from baseline, unless noted otherwise) 
A comprehensive package with appropriate policy sequencing can bolster the 
economic and labor market transformations of the economy and labor market 
needed to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. Training programs and support for 
low-income workers are key elements for ensuring an inclusive green transition.
1. Employment
2. Investment
–4
–2
0
2
4
–12
–4
0
4
8
–8
–12
–8
–4
0
4
8
12
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
2022
24
26
28
30
32
2022 24
26
28
30
32
3. Employment Change
Composition: Higher-
Emissions-Intensive
Sector
4. Employment Change
Composition: Lower-
Emissions-Intensive
Sector
2023
25
27
29
32
2023
25
27
29
32
–4
0
4
8
12
16
Lower-skilled
Higher-skilled
2027
2032
0
1
2
3
5. Employment in Lower-
Emissions-Intensive Sector
(Percentage point
difference)
6. After-Tax Income of
Lower-Skilled Workers
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Results shown here are from a model calibrated to a representative 
advanced economy. The panels show the behavior of the indicated variable in 
response to a comprehensive policy package, relative to a baseline in which the 
package is absent. For panels 3 and 4, the effects of the package elements taken 
individually do not sum to the overall package effect because of interactions in 
general equilibrium. See Online Annex 3.6 for further details on the model, 
calibration, and simulations. EITC = earned income tax credit.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
80
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
work, lowering the labor supply. This is an important 
difference compared with the earned income tax credit.
The policy package in the emerging market econ-
omy case generates a larger reallocation from higher- 
to lower-emissions-intensive sectors compared with 
the advanced economy case, with about 2.5 percent 
of employment shifting over 10 years (Figure 3.11, 
panel 1). The package affects employment through the 
same channels as earlier, but the initially larger share of 
employment in the higher-emissions-intensive sector 
means that a larger part of the economy is affected. 
There is an overall positive net employment effect in the 
near term from the investment push, but this changes to 
a 0.5 percent decline in employment by 2032. Similar 
to the effect in the advanced economy, the package 
boosts the income of lower-skilled workers. This comes 
from the package’s mix of earned income tax credit, 
training, and cash transfers (Figure 3.11, panel 2).
Conclusions
Reducing the profound downside risks from climate 
change calls for a green transformation of the econ-
omy: production structures must change to lower 
global GHG emissions. The externalities inherent in 
the production of emissions mean that policy actions 
are essential to provide incentives for the needed 
changes. This chapter investigated the labor market 
implications of such a green economic transformation, 
using a mix of empirical and model-based analyses.
The chapter began by quantifying the environmental 
properties of individual workers’ jobs through three 
different metrics, reflecting how green, polluting, 
and carbon-emitting each job is. More green- and 
pollution-intensive jobs both appear to be concentrated 
among subsets of workers: economy-wide average 
green and pollution intensities are relatively low. Still, 
there is a wide dispersion of these environmental prop-
erties across and within sectors, suggesting the capacity 
exists for labor reallocation along both dimensions. Of 
particular note, industrial sectors tend to be simultane-
ously more green-, pollution-, and emissions-intensive 
than services.
Second, the chapter looked at the relationship 
between workers’ demographic characteristics and 
the environmental properties of their jobs. It found 
that more green-intensive occupations tend to have 
higher-skilled and more urban workers, while the 
opposite is true for more pollution-intensive jobs. 
Importantly, even after skills are controlled for, 
green-intensive jobs exhibit an earnings premium—
almost 7 percent—compared with pollution-intensive 
jobs on average.
Third, reallocation could be challenging for indi-
vidual workers. The chapter found that a worker with 
a history of more pollution-intensive or neutral jobs 
is less likely to move into a more green-intensive job 
than to stay in pollution-intensive or neutral work. 
Higher skills do make for an easier match to a more 
green-intensive job, pointing to the importance of a 
worker’s human capital in easing transitions.30 Targeted 
and effective training programs to boost the human 
capital of lower-skilled workers in pollution-intensive 
or neutral occupations could help, by improving these 
workers’ ability to move into more green-intensive 
occupations.
30See Online Annex 3.4 for discussion of how a worker’s demo-
graphic characteristics are related to the environmental properties of 
jobs after transitions.
Total
Lower-emissions
Higher-emissions
Infrastructure
EITC
Training
Transfers
Carbon taxes
Package
Figure 3.11.  Model Simulations of the Green Economic 
Transformation with a Comprehensive Policy Package in an 
Emerging Market Economy
(Percent deviation from baseline)
A similar package in an emerging market economy produces a larger labor 
reallocation. Lower-skilled workers in the emerging market economy beneﬁt from 
the greener transition with the policy package.
1. Employment
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
2022
24
26
28
30
32
2. After-Tax Income of Lower-Skilled Workers
–5
0
5
10
15
20
2027
2032
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Results shown here are from a model calibrated to a representative 
emerging market economy. The panels show the behavior of the indicated variable 
in response to a comprehensive policy package, relative to a baseline in which the 
package is absent. See Online Annex 3.6 for further details on the model, 
calibration, and simulations. EITC = earned income tax credit.
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
81
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Fourth, environmental policies are effective in shift-
ing employment toward greener jobs, but such policies 
work best in economies in which incentives for real-
location are not inhibited. This points to the impor-
tance of moving from job retention to measures that 
support worker reallocation as COVID-19 shifts from 
pandemic to endemic. Recent labor market dynamics 
indicate that greener employment was relatively more 
resilient during the COVID-19 recession (Box 3.2).
Critically, the model-based analysis suggests that the 
right policy package can put an economy on the path 
to net zero emissions by 2050 with moderate shifts 
in employment. Similar to that presented in earlier 
work, the package involves a green infrastructure push 
and carbon tax, but paired with two new elements 
to improve labor market functioning and address 
distributional concerns: a targeted training program 
to boost the productivity of lower-skilled workers in 
lower-emissions-intensive work and an earned income 
tax credit—which helps offset any consumption 
shock from carbon taxes for lower-income workers 
and incentivizes labor supply. Where informality in 
employment is high, the earned income tax credit 
should be supplemented with cash transfers for income 
support, targeted toward those most likely to be work-
ing informally.
For a representative advanced economy, the package 
entails technological and productivity improvements 
and a shift of about 1 percent of employment into the 
lower-emissions-intensive sector over 10 years. This 
package also buffers the unequal impacts of the carbon 
tax on low-skilled workers, reducing income inequal-
ity. To provide some sense of the magnitude of this 
shift, it involves a smaller labor reallocation than the 
average shift of almost 4 percent of employment per 
decade from work in industrial to services sectors that 
has been observed in advanced economies since the 
mid-1980s.31 With the earned income tax credit, the 
package actually helps boost total employment over the 
long term by about 0.5 percent.
For a representative emerging market economy, 
the employment shifts from the policy package are 
larger—about 2.5 percent—reflecting emerging 
market economies’ initially greater shares of more 
emissions-intensive production and higher shares of 
lower-skilled workers. Employment increases over the 
31This employment shift may in part reflect reallocation as a result 
of automation, although measuring its exact contribution is difficult, 
and it likely varies by country (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2020; Dauth 
and others 2021).
near term, as the infrastructure boost draws workers 
in, but then declines, ending up about 0.5 percent 
lower after 10 years. This reflects the need to rely more 
on cash transfers than the earned income tax credit to 
provide income support to the informally employed, 
translating into a smaller boost to labor supply. How-
ever, the package still improves income inequality.
Climate change mitigation actions will touch all 
aspects of the economy, many of which lie outside 
this chapter’s focus on the labor market. Mod-
est policy-induced technological and productivity 
improvements are critical for achieving net zero 
emissions without large output drops and large-scale 
labor shifts.32 The green energy transition will also 
likely require extensive new capital investments, which 
could prove costly in the near term.33 Within-country 
regional concentrations of more pollution-intensive 
occupations and higher-emissions-intensive produc-
tion could mean that the burden of adjustment is 
shared unevenly geographically, particularly if policy 
measures to ease the transition (such as training pro-
grams and other reallocation support) are ineffectively 
implemented. Because of lack of data, the chapter 
was unable to delve into issues facing the agricultural 
sector, which are particularly important for many 
low-income developing countries. Finally, the chapter 
abstracted away from the international dimensions of 
climate change policies, in which potential leakages 
and cross-country spillovers argue for a global, coordi-
nated approach.34
An overall picture emerges that the size of labor 
shifts required for the green transition is not unprec-
edented. That said, the exact size and speed of the 
needed reallocation will vary by country (and within 
country, by region), depending on the importance 
of higher-emissions-intensive production in the 
32See Online Annex 3.6 for further discussion of the model’s 
incorporation of technology and productivity improvements and 
their relative importance.
33Among others, see IEA (2021) for a recent discussion of the 
energy transition and capital costs. Capital investment increases 
are also needed to address climate change adaptation (Chapter 2 of 
the October 2020 Fiscal Monitor). For discussion of the magnitude 
of financing shifts required and how financial market regulation 
(including climate-related data standards and disclosures) can sup-
port the green transition and adaptation, see Chapter 5 of the April 
and October 2020 Global Financial Stability Report (GFSR) and 
Chapter 3 of the October 2021 GFSR.
34See Chapter 3 of the October 2020 WEO for an example of 
such a globally coordinated policy package and Chateau, Jaumotte, 
and Schwerhoff (2022) for mechanisms to facilitate international 
coordination.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
82
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
local economy and whether policy actions to get 
on the net zero emissions path are delayed. From 
an individual-level perspective, the road appears 
rougher, as workers with pollution-intensive or neutral 
job backgrounds find it harder to move into more 
green-intensive jobs. Any policy package should thus 
include elements that aim to ease the transition for 
these workers—policies that enhance their employabil-
ity, like well-designed training programs, and boost 
their ability to find new job matches—and ensure that 
the path to a greener labor market is a smooth and 
inclusive one.
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
83
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
The within-country distribution of green- and 
pollution-intensive jobs offers insights into the chal-
lenges of transitioning to a greener economy by region. 
If green-intensive jobs are also present in regions 
currently more reliant on more pollution-intensive 
employment, the green transition may require less 
geographic reallocation of workers. Depending on the 
country, the geographical distribution could also have 
political economy implications.
There are signs of geographic concentration of higher 
green and pollution intensities.1 On average, jobs are 
more green-intensive in the US West and South-
west, with pockets of intensity in the Midwest 
(Figure 3.1.1, panel 1). Notable subsectors in regions 
with green-intensive jobs include research and devel-
opment, engineering services, and aerospace manu-
facturing. Jobs have higher pollution-intensity in the 
Southeast and Southwest and are found especially 
in extractive industries, electric power (generation, 
transmission, and distribution), and wood and textile 
industries (Figure 3.1.1, panel 2).
Areas with more green- and pollution-intensive jobs 
tend to overlap. Geographic frictions can impede the 
green transition, especially if labor mobility is declin-
ing (Chapter 2 of the October 2019 World Economic 
Outlook; Dao, Furceri, and Loungani 2017). However, 
areas rich in green-intensive jobs tend to border on or 
overlap with pollution-intensive-job-rich areas. Of 173 
US commuting zones rich in pollution-intensive jobs 
(above the 75th percentile), 125 either are also rich 
in green-intensive jobs (above the 75th percentile) or 
border a commuting zone rich in such jobs. This prox-
imity does not guarantee the transition will be easy: 
policy measures such as effective training programs 
remain important. There are differences between areas 
with either more green- or more pollution-intensive 
jobs. More green-intensive jobs tend to be more urban, 
while more pollution-intensive jobs tend to be rural. 
Counties with a higher share of more green-intensive 
jobs also tend to have higher incomes, younger 
The authors of this box are Katharina Bergant and Rui Mano.
1Online Annex 3.7 provides further details on the data and 
analysis exhibited.
populations, a greater proportion of people with a 
college degree or more education, and lower unemploy-
ment. Unionization is negatively related to the share of 
pollution-intensive jobs but shows no relationship to 
green intensity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1.1.  Geographic Distribution of 
Green and Pollution Intensities across US 
Counties
Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational 
Employment and Wage Statistics; US Census, County 
Business Patterns; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: These maps use a relative coloring scheme, such that 
greener (grayer) coloring means that employment is more 
green-(pollution)-intensive in a relative rather than an 
absolute sense. Estimates of green-(pollution)-intensive jobs 
combine three data sets: (1) deﬁnitions of green/polluting 
occupations (see Vona and others 2018), (2) industry-state 
occupational breakdowns from the Occupational 
Employment and Wage Statistics data set, and (3) county- 
industry employment (from County Business Patterns, as 
harmonized by Eckert and others 2021).
1. Green-Intensive Jobs
2. Pollution-Intensive Jobs
Maximum
Maximum
Minimum
Minimum
Box 3.1. The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
84
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Official labor force surveys can provide an in-depth 
picture of the evolution of greener employment. 
However, these surveys are usually published with lags, 
making it challenging to track whether the ongoing 
COVID-19 recovery has accelerated or decelerated 
labor market greening. High-frequency data from 
online job networking and search platforms can help 
provide timelier insights.
Recent patterns in hiring rates suggest greener jobs 
were relatively more resilient throughout 2020. Using 
self-reported worker profiles and expert judgments, 
LinkedIn identified green skills and categorized workers 
according to their “green talents.”1 Similarly to the 
motivation for the green intensity definition with 
respect to tasks used in this chapter, the classification 
reflects whether workers report skills that improve the 
environmental sustainability of economic activities 
(for example, pollution mitigation, waste prevention, 
and green energy generation and management). By 
using information on workers’ employment changes, 
gross hiring rate indices can be computed to follow 
short-term hiring fluctuations. Hiring rates for green 
talent workers were better than that for all jobs in the 
early months of the pandemic and ticked up over 2021 
as the recovery strengthened (Figure 3.2.1, panel 1).
Developments in job postings also suggest more resilient 
demand for greener workers. Although not linked to 
the green skills classification presented in the previous 
paragraph, job postings data from the online platform 
Indeed can be matched to sectors, which can in turn 
be categorized as having above- or below-average green 
intensities. Based on this split, world average green job 
postings declined less than nongreen postings during 
the pandemic (Figure 3.2.1, panel 2). This resilience 
was broad-based, as green sector postings experienced 
smaller declines in 28 of the 34 countries in the sample. 
Moreover, paralleling the pattern seen in hiring rates, 
bounce-backs in job postings have been similar in both 
green and nongreen sectors during the recovery. Overall, 
a picture emerges of some labor market greening early 
in the post-COVID recovery, which has now stalled.
The author of this box is Jorge A. Alvarez.
1See Online Annex 3.7 for further details on the LinkedIn and 
Indeed data sets.
Nongreen postings
Green postings
Median, green to overall (right scale)
Median
10th–90th percentile range
25th–75th percentile range
1. LinkedIn Green Hiring Rates
(Index)
2. Indeed Job Postings
(Index, world average)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Oct.
21
Figure 3.2.1.  Cross-Country Evolution of 
Green Hiring Rates and Job Postings
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Nov.
21
Sources: Indeed; LinkedIn; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows cross-country percentiles standardized 
to the median observed in January 2019. The hiring rate is a 
measure of hires normalized by LinkedIn membership. It is 
computed as the percentage of LinkedIn members who 
added a new employer in the same period the job began, 
divided by the total number of LinkedIn members in the 
corresponding location. The green hiring rate is computed 
considering only members classiﬁed as green talent. Workers 
are considered green talent if they have explicitly added at 
least one green skill to their proﬁle, are occupied in a green 
occupation, or both. Panel 2 shows a cross-country 
12-month average job postings index, standardized to 
January 2019. Green postings refer to postings on the 
Indeed platform associated with sectors that have 
above-average green skill intensity. See Online Annex 3.7 
for further details.
Box 3.2. A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?
CHAPTER 3 
A GREENER LABOR MARKET: EMPLOYMENT, POLICIES, AND ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION
85
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and 
Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.” In 
Handbook of Labor Economics vol. 4, edited by O. Ashenfelter, 
R. Layard, and D. Card, 1043–171.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018. “The Race 
between Man and Machine: Implications of Technology for 
Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment.” American Eco-
nomic Review 108 (6): 1488–542.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2020. “Robots and 
Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets.” Journal of Political 
Economy 128 (6): 2188–244.
Addison, John T. 2016. “Collective Bargaining Systems and 
Macroeconomic and Microeconomic Flexibility: The Quest 
for Appropriate Institutional Forms in Advanced Economies.” 
IZA Journal of Labor Policy 5 (19): 1–53.
Ahn, JaeBin, Zidong An, John Bluedorn, Gabriele Ciminelli, 
Zsoka Koczan, Davide Malacrino, Daniela Muhaj, and 
Patricia Neidlinger. 2019. “Work in Progress: Improving 
Youth Labor Market Outcomes in Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 19/02, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aldieri, Luigi, Cristian Barra, Nazzareno Ruggiero, and Con-
cetto Paolo Vinci. 2021. “Green Energies, Employment, 
and Institutional Quality: Some Evidence for the OECD.” 
Sustainability 13 (3252).
Allard, Gayle. 2005. “Measuring Job Security over Time: In 
Search of a Historical Indicator for EPL (Employment Pro-
tection Legislation).” Instituto de Empressa Working Paper 
WP05–17, Madrid.
Alvarez, Jorge, Ivo Krznar, and Trevor Tombe. 2019. “Internal 
Trade in Canada: Case for Liberalization.” IMF Working Paper 
19/158, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Autor, David H., and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of 
Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US Labor 
Market.” American Economic Review 103 (5): 1553–597.
Blanchard, Olivier J., Florence Jaumotte, and Prakash Loungani. 
2014. “Labor Market Policies and IMF Advice in Advanced 
Economies during the Great Recession.” IZA Journal of Labor 
Policy 3 (2): 1–23.
Botta, Enrico, and Tomasz Kozluk. 2014. “Measuring Environ-
mental Policy Stringency in OECD Countries: A Composite 
Index Approach.” OECD Economics Department Working 
Papers 1177, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, Paris.
Bowen, Alex, Karlygash Kuralbayeva, and Eileen L. Tipoe. 
2018. “Characterising Green Employment: The Impacts of 
‘Greening’ on Workforce Composition.” Energy Economics 
72 (2018): 263–75.
Card, David, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber. 2018. “What 
Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active Labor Market 
Program Evaluations.” Journal of the European Economic Asso-
ciation 16 (3): 894–931.
Chateau, Jean, Florence Jaumotte, and Gregor Schwerhoff. 2022. 
“Economic and Environmental Benefits from International 
Cooperation on Climate Policies.” IMF Departmental Paper 
2022/007, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014. 
“Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added 
and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” American Economic 
Review 104 (9): 2633–79.
Conference of the Parties (COP). 2015. “Adoption of the Paris 
Agreement.” United Nations Framework Convention on Cli-
mate Change. https://​unfccc​.int/​resource/​docs/​2015/​cop21/​
eng/​l09r01​.pdf.
Dao, Mai, Davide Furceri, and Prakash Loungani. 2017. “Regional 
Labor Market Adjustment in the United States: Trend and 
Cycle.” Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (2): 243–57.
Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, Jens Suedekum, and 
Nicole Woessner. 2021. “The Adjustment of Labor Markets 
to Robots.” Journal of the European Economic Association 
19 (6): 3104–53.
Dierdorff, Erich C., Jennifer J. Norton, Donald W. Drewes, 
Christina M. Kroustalis, David Rivkin, and Phil Lewis. 
2009. “Greening of the World of Work: Implications for 
O*NET-SOC and New and Emerging Occupations.” National 
Center for O*NET Development, Raleigh, North Carolina.
Drozd, Lukasz, Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel, and Marina 
M. Tavares. Forthcoming. “Understanding Growth through 
Automation: The Neoclassical Perspective.” Philadelphia 
Federal Reserve Research Department Working Paper.
Eckert, Fabian, Teresa C. Fort, Peter K. Schott, and Natalie J. 
Yang. 2021. “Imputing Missing Values in the US Cen-
sus Bureau’s County Business Patterns.” NBER Working 
Paper 26632, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2013. 
“Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD.” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 95 (2): 530–48.
Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, 
J. Robert Warren, and Michael Westberry. 2021. Integrated 
Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: 
Version 9.0. https://​doi​.org/​10​.18128/​D030​.V9​.0.
Georgieva, Kristalina, and Rajiv J. Shah. 2020. “How Govern-
ments Can Create a Green, Job-Rich Global Recovery.” IMF 
Blog, International Monetary Fund, December 4. https://​
blogs​.imf​.org/​2020/​12/​04/​how​-governments​-can​-create​-a​
-green​-job​-rich​-global​-recovery/​.
Hermansen, Mikkel. 2020. “Occupational Licensing and Job 
Mobility in the United States.” OECD Economics Depart-
ment Working Paper 1585, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A. Macpherson. 2003. “Union 
Membership and Coverage Database from the Current Pop-
ulation Survey: Note.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 
56(2): 349–54.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
86
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Hobijn, Bart, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2009. “Job-Finding and 
Separation Rates in the OECD.” Economics Letters 104 
(2009): 107–11.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2015. 
Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change; Working 
Group III Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2018. 
Global Warming of 1.5°C: An IPCC Special Report on the 
Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5°C above Pre-industrial Levels 
and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in 
the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat 
of Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Efforts to 
Eradicate Poverty, edited by V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, 
H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, 
and others. Geneva.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2021. “The Cost of Capital 
in Clean Energy Transitions.” https://​www​.iea​.org/​articles/​the​
-cost​-of​-capital​-in​-clean​-energy​-transitions. Paris.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022. France: Selected 
Issues. IMF Staff Country Report 22/19. Washington, DC.
Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. “The Global 
Decline of the Labor Share.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
129 (1): 61–103.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, Martín Montané, and Luca Sartorio. 
2019. “What Works for Active Labor Market Policies?” 
Center for International Development at Harvard Faculty 
Working Paper 358, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Martin, John P. 1996. “Measures of Replacement Rates for the 
Purpose of International Comparisons: A Note.” OECD 
Economic Studies 26: 99–115.
Observatoire National des Emplois et Métiers de l’Economie 
Verte (ONEMEV). 2021. “Métiers Verts et Verdissants: Près 
de 4 Millions de Professionnels en 2018” [Green and Greening 
Professions: Nearly 4 Million Professionals in 2018]. https://​
www​.statistiques​.developpement​-durable​.gouv​.fr/​metiers​-verts​
-et​-verdissants​-pres​-de​-4​-millions​-de​-professionnels​-en​-2018.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 1994. The OECD Jobs Study: Facts, Analysis, 
Strategy. Paris.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) and European Centre for the Development of Voca-
tional Training (Cedefop). 2014. Greener Skills and Jobs. Paris.
O*NET Center. 2010. “Green Task Development Project.” 
https://​www​.onetcenter​.org/​reports/​GreenTask​.html. Accessed 
May 17, 2021.
O*NET Center. 2021. “Green Occupations.” Version 22.0. 
https://​www​.onetcenter​.org/​dictionary/​22​.0/​excel/​green​
_occupations​.html.
Silverman, Bernard W. 1986. Density Estimation for Statistics and 
Data Analysis. London: Chapman and Hall.
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 
2022. “Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions Data.” https://​www​
.epa​.gov/​ghgemissions/​global​-greenhouse​-gas​-emissions​-data. 
Washington, DC.
van der Velden, Rolf, and Ineke Bijlsma. 2016. “College Wage 
Premiums and Skills: A Cross-Country Analysis.” Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy 32 (4): 497–513.
Vona, Francesco, Giovanni Marin, and Davide Consoli. 2019. 
“Measures, Drivers, and Effects of Green Employment: Evi-
dence from US Local Labor Markets, 2006–2014.” Journal of 
Economic Geography 19 (5): 1021–48.
Vona, Francesco, Giovanni Marin, Davide Consoli, and David 
Popp. 2018. “Environmental Regulation and Green Skills: An 
Empirical Exploration.” Journal of the Association of Environ-
mental and Resource Economists 5 (4): 713–53.
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
87
When COVID-19 hit, the combined supply and demand 
shock was expected to lead to a dramatic collapse in 
trade. However, although trade in services remains slug-
gish, trade in goods bounced back surprisingly quickly. 
This chapter finds that factors specific to the pandemic 
played a key role in the rotation of trade from services to 
goods, above and beyond the impact on demand. Imports 
of goods fell by less and imports of services by more 
than can be explained by demand and relative prices. 
The pattern was more pronounced in countries where 
the pandemic—and associated containment policies—
were more severe. Further, an examination of granular 
bilateral trade data reveals that international spillovers 
from lockdown-induced supply disruptions were a key 
driver of the decline in trade early in the pandemic. 
These negative spillover effects tended to be short-lived 
and were mitigated to the extent that telework was 
possible. Moreover, the spillover effects diminished over 
subsequent waves of the pandemic, suggesting adapt-
ability and resilience in global value chains (GVCs). 
Indeed, with differences in the timing of pandemic 
outbreaks and containment policies across different 
regions, some regions with significant participation in 
GVCs were able to increase their share in the imports 
of other regions, but these changes also appear to be 
unwinding over time. In view of the overall resilience of 
global trade and value chains during the pandemic, this 
chapter argues that policies such as reshoring are likely 
misguided. Instead, supply chain resilience to shocks 
is better built by increasing diversification away from 
domestic sourcing of inputs and greater substitutability 
in input sourcing (easier switching of input supplies 
between countries). Increasing supply chain resilience is 
important for dealing with not only health emergencies 
like the pandemic, but also other types of shocks such as 
the war in Ukraine, cyberattacks, and extreme weather 
This chapter was prepared by Ting Lan, Davide Malacrino, Adil 
Mohommad (lead), Andrea Presbitero, and Galen Sher, under the 
guidance of Shekhar Aiyar, and with support from Shan Chen, 
Bryan Zou, Youyou Huang, and Ilse Peirtsegaele. It includes 
contributions from Mariya Brussevich, Diego Cerdeiro, Andras 
Komaromi, Yang Liu, Chris Papageorgiou, and Pauline Wibaux. 
Andrei Levchenko was a consultant for the project.
events related to climate change. While much of the 
work of building resilience must be undertaken by firms 
(as private sector actors), governments can still play a 
useful role by filling information gaps in supply chains, 
investing in trade and digital infrastructure, reducing 
trade costs, and minimizing policy uncertainty. Wide-
spread vaccination will be crucial to mitigating spillovers 
from future shocks related to the spread of COVID-19.
Introduction
With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, trade 
collapsed in a dramatic fashion. At its trough in the 
second quarter of 2020, the volume of global trade in 
goods fell 12.2 percent, and trade in services fell even 
more sharply, by 21.4 percent, compared with the last 
quarter of 2019 (Figure 4.1). However, the recovery 
in trade was also surprisingly quick, compared with 
the much more protracted recoveries after other global 
recessions (Figure 4.2) (Baldwin 2020). Trade in goods 
had recovered to pre-pandemic levels by October 
2021—a very rapid rebound compared, for example, 
with that from the global financial crisis. However, 
the aggregate trends mask considerable heterogeneity, 
and further disruptions are likely, owing to the war in 
Ukraine.1
•• Trade in services remains sluggish, driven mainly by 
the collapse of travel. Transport services appear to be 
recovering, although disruptions in seaborne trade 
remain elevated (see Komaromi, Cerdeiro, and Liu, 
2022, on the evolution of delays in shipping). Trade 
in other services has been more robust (Figure 4.3), 
notably telecommunication services.
•• Trade in goods that rely heavily on global value 
chains (GVC-intensive goods) was more volatile than 
that in other goods (Figure 4.4). Between January 
and April 2020, exports of GVC-intensive goods 
fell 30 percent, while exports of other goods fell by 
1The analysis presented in this chapter was concluded in early 
2022, prior to the outbreak of the war in Ukraine, and does not 
focus on it’s implications for global trade and value chains.
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
4
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
88
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Goods (2018:Q1 = 100)
Services (2018:Q1 = 100)
Lockdown stringency
(right scale, inverted)
Figure 4.1.  Global Import Volume and Lockdown Stringency
(Index)
Goods trade recovered rapidly, although services trade remains sluggish.
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
90
75
60
45
30
15
0
2018:
Q1
18:
Q3
19:
Q1
19:
Q3
20:
Q1
20:
Q3
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
Sources: CPB World Trade Monitor; Hale and others (2021); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The lockdown stringency index is the world import-weighted average of the 
Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Stringency Index.
1982
1991
2008
2020
Figure 4.2.  Trade Patterns around Global Recessions: Goods 
and Services Import Volume
(Index)
The recovery in goods trade was more rapid than in previous recessions.
80
90
100
85
95
105
110
–6
–3
0
3
6
Quarters around the onset of the recession (t = 0)
Sources: Kose, Sugawara, and Terrones (2020); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The goods and services import volume index is normalized to 100 at the 
onset of the recession (t = 0).
Transport
Travel
Telecommunications
Other
Figure 4.3.  Imports of Commercial Services by Main Sectors
(Index, 2018:Q1 = 100)
The decline in services trade has mainly been due to that in travel services.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
2018:
Q1
18:
Q3
19:
Q1
19:
Q3
20:
Q1
20:
Q3
21:
Q2
Sources: World Trade Organization; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Telecommunications” comprises telecommunications, computer, and 
information services. “Other” comprises commercial, goods-related, construction, 
ﬁnancial, insurance and pension, intellectual property, other business, personal, 
cultural, and recreational services.
GVC-intensive industries
Non-GVC-intensive industries
Oxford COVID-19 Government Response
Stringency Index (right scale, inverted)
Figure 4.4.  Volatility of Trade in GVC-Intensive Industries 
versus Non-GVC-Intensive Industries Early in the Pandemic
(Index)
Trade in GVC-intensive industries was relatively more volatile than trade in 
non-GVC intensive industries.
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
90
75
60
45
30
15
0
Jan.
2020
Apr.
20
Jul.
20
Oct.
20
Dec.
20
Sources: Hale and others (2021); Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: GVC = global value chain.
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
89
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
about 18 percent.2 The recovery in GVC-intensive 
goods was also more rapid. The initial drop, how-
ever, was relatively more severe in some industries 
like automobiles, amid disruptions to key inputs 
such as semiconductors (see Box 4.1 for further 
details on the evolution of supply disruptions, 
including in automobile and semiconductor trade). 
Amid the volatility in trade among GVC-intensive 
goods, calls to explore policy options to increase 
GVC resilience to shocks have gained prominence.
Against this backdrop, this chapter first formally 
examines potential explanations for observed patterns 
in trade during the pandemic. In particular it asks 
three questions: (1) How well can trade patterns be 
accounted for by a standard model of demand and 
prices, compared with previous large recessions?; 
(2) What factors specific to the pandemic were 
important in determining the trade patterns?; and 
(3) What international spillover effects were gener-
ated by the mobility restrictions in response to the 
pandemic? These questions are investigated using an 
empirical framework based on standard models from 
the trade literature and relying on granular bilateral 
trade data at monthly frequency to examine spillovers.
The second set of questions in this chapter probes 
developments in GVCs and examines how to build up 
GVCs’ resilience. It is difficult to paint a precise pic-
ture of changes in the structure of GVCs through the 
pandemic, given lags in high-frequency input–output 
data. Hence, the chapter tracks GVC developments as 
inferred from trade data. And in response to concerns 
about how well GVCs can weather global shocks, it 
examines options for increasing the resilience of the 
world economy in a modeling framework. Using a 
model that spans multiple sectors and countries, it 
examines the gains in resilience from (1) increasing 
the geographic diversification of input sourcing across 
countries and (2) increasing the substitutability of 
inputs across sources in different countries.
2GVCs are internationally distributed activities, such as design, 
production, and distribution, involved in bringing a product or 
service from conception to end use (Ponte, Gereffi, and Raj-Reichert 
2019). Operationally, GVC trade has been defined to include trade 
in goods that cross at least two international borders (Hummels, 
Ishii, and Yi 2001). In this chapter, GVC-intensive goods are defined 
to include inputs and finished goods in the following industries: 
automobiles, electronics, textiles and garments, and medical goods. 
Together these goods account for about a quarter of global goods 
trade (in 2019), and are typically considered to be at the forefront of 
GVCs (Sturgeon and Memedovic 2010).
The main conclusions of the chapter are as follows:
•• Factors specific to the pandemic had an important 
role in determining trade patterns. Goods imports 
were larger, and services imports were smaller, in 
2020 than would be predicted by a model of import 
demand. Moreover, the deviations in actual trade from 
model predictions were much larger than in previous 
recessions. The “excess” goods imports were larger in 
countries with more severe pandemic outbreaks, more 
stringent containment policies, and larger declines in 
mobility. On the other hand, “deficit” services imports 
were larger where the pandemic was more severe.
•• Lockdown policies to contain the pandemic had 
substantial—if unintended—international spillovers. 
Lockdowns in a country’s trade partners on average 
accounted for up to 60 percent of the observed decline 
in imports in the first half of 2020. International 
spillovers were larger in GVC-intensive industries than 
in non-GVC-intensive industries, and they were larger 
in downstream (close to final user) industries than in 
upstream (input) industries. However, the ability to 
work from home (teleworkability) in partner coun-
tries mitigated the spillovers from lockdowns, and the 
effects also diminished over time. These findings on 
spillovers suggest two things. First, containing the pan-
demic domestically is important not just for domestic 
activity, but also because future outbreaks leading to 
lockdowns could have negative spillovers onto trade 
partners. Second, the reduction of spillovers over time, 
including for GVC-intensive goods, suggests that 
global supply chains were able to adjust. This should 
sound a cautionary note regarding policies seeking to 
effect permanent changes in the structure of global 
production and trade.
•• GVCs were able to adjust to the asynchronous 
development of the pandemic, as reflected in changes 
in market shares among GVC regions during the 
pandemic. To further build resilience in GVCs, there 
is potentially substantial room to diversify away from 
domestic inputs. The chapter shows that resilience 
to shocks may be gained by further diversification of 
inputs across countries and by making inputs from 
different countries more substitutable. Diversification 
substantially reduces global GDP losses in response to 
shocks in key upstream suppliers. It also reduces GDP 
volatility following productivity shocks to multiple 
countries that are correlated, in line with what is 
observed in historical productivity data over the past 
25 years. Reducing diversification, on the other hand, 
increases volatility. Greater input substitutability across 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
90
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
source countries reduces GDP losses from shocks in 
individual countries. Thus, it is important to find 
avenues to expand trade opportunities, which can 
boost resilience in the world economy in the face of a 
variety of shocks.
Drivers of Trade during the Pandemic
Demand and Relative Prices Alone Do Not Explain 
Pandemic Trade Patterns
Unlike previous global recessions such as that during 
the global financial crisis, changes in services and 
goods trade growth early in the pandemic are poorly 
explained by a model including conventional factors 
(domestic demand and relative prices) alone. Such 
a model performs well in explaining total trade but 
produces large forecast errors for goods and services 
import growth in 2020 when goods and services are 
considered separately. Moreover, these forecast errors 
are significantly correlated with pandemic-specific fac-
tors, pointing to the unique nature of this trade shock.
Here, a standard import demand model is used to 
estimate the historical relationship between demand 
and import growth. The model links real import 
growth of goods and services to growth in demand 
and the relative price of imports for a sample of 
127 countries over 1985–2019.3 Consistent with eco-
nomic intuition and previous studies (see, for exam-
ple, Chapter 2 of the October 2016 World Economic 
Outlook), the estimated coefficients on the measure of 
import-adjusted demand (a combination of demand 
components weighted by their import content, as in 
Bussière and others 2013) are positive for most coun-
tries and greater than 1. The coefficients on relative 
price are mostly negative and average between –0.2 
and –0.3 (Online Annex 4.1).
Combining the estimates from the regressions—
using world import shares as weights—yields good 
predictions of import growth up to 2019. Yet for 
2020, the model underpredicts the large observed 
decline in services trade (the model predicts a 
3As explained in Bussière and others (2013), an import demand 
equation, which relates growth in real imports to changes in absorption 
and relative price levels, can be derived from virtually any international 
real business cycle model. In this chapter, the following empirical spec-
ification, ​Δ​ln Mi,t = ​π​i + ​β​D,i ​Δ​ln Di,t + ​β​P,i ​Δ​ln Pi,t + ​ε​i,t, in which Mi,t, 
Di,t, and Pi,t refer to imports, demand, and relative prices, respectively, 
in country ​i​ and time ​t​, is estimated, together with other more parsi-
monious versions, as described in Online Annex 4.1.
growth rate of about –8 percent, while trade in 
2020 actually fell by 25 percent). It overpredicts the 
fall in goods trade (predicting a 10 percent decline, 
against the 6 percent observed fall) (Figure 4.5).4 
The forecast errors are unprecedented in size; by 
contrast, the global financial crisis and the global 
recession of the early 1990s are much better 
explained by standard factors.
Pandemic Intensity and Containment Policies Were Key 
Drivers of Trade Patterns in This Crisis
Several features of—and policy responses to—the 
pandemic are key to explaining the discrepancies 
between predicted and actual import growth. Relating 
the forecast errors to country-specific factors suggests 
that countries whose experience of the pandemic was 
more severe (more COVID-19 cases, more stringent 
containment measures, or less mobility) showed 
“excess import demand” for goods—that is, the fall 
in goods imports was smaller than predicted by the 
model (Figure 4.6). The forecast error for goods 
4The performance of the model in 2020 is the worst since the 
beginning of the sample (1985) when metrics other than the average 
forecast error, such as the mean squared forecast error, are examined. 
Online Annex 4.1 discusses the distribution of errors in 2020, com-
paring it with that of previous years.
Goods
Services
Total
Figure 4.5.  Average Forecast Errors of the Growth in Imports 
from the Import Demand Model
(Log points)
The large errors for 2020 show that conventional factors alone cannot explain the 
changes in goods and services imports.
–0.20
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
1985
90
95
2000
05
10
15
20
Sources: Eora Global Supply Chain Database; IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics; 
and IMF staff estimates.
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
91
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
imports was 3 percentage points more positive for 
countries in the third quartile of the distribution of 
the number of COVID-19 cases than for those in the 
first quartile.5
For imports of services, the most important factor 
accounting for the model’s overprediction is the 
extent to which a country imported travel services. 
That is, the unexplained portion of the fall in service 
imports was most pronounced in countries where 
travel services accounted for a large share of total 
service imports.
These findings are consistent with various conjec-
tures regarding the impact of pandemic-specific factors 
on trade. First, the rapid recovery in goods trade may 
reflect a general switching in consumer spending 
away from services to goods—such as remote-working 
5If such disruptions are not fully incorporated by changes in the 
relative prices, in countries hit hardest by the pandemic, the model 
will predict a larger decline in the imports of goods than actu-
ally occurred.
equipment and medical goods—created by 
pandemic-specific conditions.6 Second, part of the shift 
could be driven by a simple reallocation of income 
toward goods because some services were unavailable. 
Third, it is possible that as countries with more severe 
lockdowns experienced a sharp contraction in the pro-
duction of some goods domestically, they were pushed 
to import them instead (for the impact of lockdowns 
on domestic production, see Chapter 1 of the October 
2020 World Economic Outlook).
Interestingly, the better the health-preparedness 
of an importing country’s trade partners, the less its 
imports of goods fell relative to predictions. Trade part-
ners’ preparedness for the pandemic is measured here 
by the Global Health Security Index and is associated 
with more positive forecast errors for goods imports.7 
This suggests some degree of international spillovers; 
specifically, countries whose trade partners experienced 
smaller disruptions in domestic supply were less nega-
tively affected by shock transmission in trade networks. 
Accordingly, the next section focuses on spillovers from 
lockdown policies in trade partners, which constitute 
supply shocks from a domestic perspective.
International Spillovers from Pandemic 
Containment Policies
Supply Shock Spillovers from Lockdowns Accounted for a 
Large Part of the Decline in Trade
The decline in imports at its trough in mid-2020 
appears to be correlated with the stringency of 
lockdowns in exporting trade partners (Figure 4.7). 
Intuitively, tighter lockdowns in exporters would 
constitute a supply shock from the point of view of 
the importing country. Indeed, with demand factors 
controlled for, more stringent lockdowns in trade 
partners had a large and statistically significant neg-
ative impact on goods imports. A comparison of the 
actual evolution of imports between January and May 
2020 against a counterfactual without any contain-
ment policies in place in trade partners indicates that 
containment policies accounted for up to 60 percent 
6Among many studies confirming this trend, see Bounie and 
others (2020) for France; Andersen and others (2020) for Denmark; 
Baker and others (2020) for the United States; and Chronopoulos, 
Lukas, and Wilson (2020) for the United Kingdom.
7For details on the index, see Cameron, Nuzzo, and Bell (2019), 
as well as other material that can be found on the Global Health and 
Security Index website at https://​www​.ghsindex​.org/​about/​.
Goods
Services
Figure 4.6.  Factors Associated with the Demand Model’s 
Forecast Errors for 2020
(Standard deviation, unless noted otherwise)
Domestic factors speciﬁc to the pandemic played an important role in determining 
trade patterns in 2020.
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Share of travel service imports
Partners’ health preparedness
Less mobility
Oxford COVID-19 Government
Response Stringency Index
COVID-19 cases (log)
Sources: Global Health Security Index; Google, Community Mobility Reports; Hale 
and others (2021); Our World in Data; World Trade Organization; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure reports standardized coefﬁcients for a regression of residuals 
from the demand model on the listed variables. Solid bars show coefﬁcients that 
are statistically signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level; hollow bars show those that are 
not. Trade partners’ health preparedness for the pandemic is measured by the 
Global Health Security Index. “Share of travel service imports” captures the share 
of travel services in a country’s total service imports.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
92
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
of the observed decline in imports. That said, the 
spillover effect from lockdown stringency appears to 
have been short-lived. The impact first materialized 
in February 2020, with the first round of restrictions 
in Asia; grew in strength in March and April, when 
lockdowns became more geographically widespread, 
including in Europe; and started declining in May. In 
June, when goods imports rebounded strongly, even 
as the stringency of lockdowns eased only moderately, 
the spillover effects became indistinguishable from 
zero (see Box 4.2 for further evidence on the declin-
ing rate of spillovers, using data at daily frequency for 
seaborne trade).8
8Similar results are obtained by Berthou and Stumpner (2022). 
Heise (2020) also documents the close to 50 percent decline in US 
imports from China in March 2020 relative to January 2020, when 
factories were temporarily closed, before those imports bounced 
back in April 2020. Lafrogne-Joussier, Martin, and Mejean (2021) 
show that French firms sourcing inputs from China just before the 
lockdown experienced a drop in imports between February and 
April 2020 that was 7 percent larger than that of firms sourcing their 
inputs from elsewhere.
These findings are based on estimates of a gravity 
model employed widely in the trade literature (San-
tos Silva and Tenreyro 2006), using bilateral data on 
monthly imports at the six-digit product level from 
Trade Data Monitor.9 The model includes a set of 
time-varying fixed effects that absorb the effects of all 
observed and unobserved factors specific to import-
ing countries and industries, including demand shifts, 
and of factors such as trade agreements that could 
affect (product-specific) trade flows across each pair of 
importer and exporter countries. The methodology and 
results are described in more detail in Online Annex 4.2.
The spillover effect of lockdown stringency is also 
robust to controlling for the extent of the health crisis 
in the exporter country, measured by the number of 
new COVID-19 cases and deaths per capita (both 
contemporaneous and lagged), changes in export 
restrictions put in place by trade partners, and the 
fiscal policy response in trade partners.
Spillovers Were More Pronounced within GVCs and Were 
Mitigated by the Extent of Teleworking
The average spillover effects mask several sources of 
heterogeneity.
•• First, the spillover effect of lockdowns is more than 
twice as strong for countries whose exporting partners 
are less able to rely on remote working (Figure 4.8, 
panel 1). The finding is consistent with existing 
9The chapter estimates the following specification:  
Mm,e,i,t = g(βStringency Indexe,t + δ Controlsm,e,t + αm,e,i + γm,i,t + εm,e,s,t). 
Bilateral imports of products in industry i (​M​ m,e,i,t​) by importer 
country m from exporter country e in month t are regressed on 
(1) the time-varying index of lockdown intensity in the exporter 
country e (​Stringency Index​ e,t​), measured using the monthly average 
values of the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Stringency 
Index; (2) a set of variables that vary across country pairs and time 
(​Controls​); and (3) a set of fixed effects (​α​ m,e,i​, ​γ​ m,i,t​). The Oxford 
Stringency Index records the strictness of “lockdown style” policies 
that restrict people’s behavior. It ranges from 0 to 100 and is calcu-
lated using eight ordinal containment and closure policy indicators 
(such as school and workplace closures) and restrictions on move-
ment, plus an indicator recording public information campaigns. 
The stringency index used in this chapter is highly correlated with 
the component related to workplace closings, which has less variabil-
ity, being a categorical variable (assuming four values). The model 
employed in the chapter considers an importing country (such as 
the United States) and compares its imports of a product (such as 
vehicles) in each month from trade partners with different contain-
ment policies. Under the plausible assumption that US demand for 
vehicles is the same across partner countries, the analysis controls for 
demand factors, including the role of domestic containment policies, 
and exploits only the variation in the intensity of lockdowns across 
trade partners.
Linear ﬁt
Figure 4.7.  Change in Imports and Partner Countries’ 
Lockdown Stringency
Spillovers from the lockdown policies of trade partners are associated with lower 
imports.
–1.0
–0.6
–0.2
0.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
0.6
Percent change in imports,
2020:Q2 versus 2019:Q4
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Stringency Index in
partner countries, 2020:Q2
Sources: Hale and others (2021); IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The Oxford Stringency Index in partner countries is constructed taking 
2018:Q3–2019:Q4 import ﬂows as weights. The size of each country’s bubble is 
proportional to the value of its imports (in US dollars) in 2019:Q4. The solid line is 
a linear ﬁt of a weighted regression of the change in imports between 2020:Q2 
and 2019:Q4 against the Oxford Stringency Index in partner countries, in which 
the weights are the values of imports (in US dollars) in 2019:Q4. The estimated 
coefﬁcient is equal to –0.015 (t-stat = –2.44).
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
93
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
evidence showing that the feasibility of remote work 
mitigated the negative effects of reduced worker 
mobility (Pei, de Vries, and Zhang 2021).10
•• Second, spillover effects are stronger in 
GVC-intensive industries (yellow bars, Figure 4.8, 
panel 2), and especially in electronics, than in 
non-GVC-intensive ones (red bar). Intuitively, 
imports in GVC-intensive industries would be 
relatively more exposed to disruptions in the supply 
chain (in this case resulting from lockdowns).11
•• Third, the negative effect of stringency measures is 
dampened in industries that are more upstream in 
10Teleworkability is measured using the cross-country data com-
puted by Dingel and Neiman (2020). The sample of trade partners 
is split between those with a low share of jobs that can be performed 
remotely (the bottom quartile of the distribution) and those with a 
high share of teleworking.
11The six-digit product codes for goods in GVC-intensive 
industries are compiled from Frederick and Lee (2017) (electronics), 
Sturgeon and others (2016) (automobiles), and Frederick (2019) 
(textiles, medical devices).
the production process (such as metals and miner-
als products), while it is stronger for those down-
stream (such as transportation and textiles).12 A 
one-standard-deviation increase in the upstreamness 
index reduces the spillover supply effect of the lock-
down by almost one-third. This is consistent with 
the intuition that downstream industries are more 
likely to be affected by disruptions to the supply 
chain, such as lockdowns in countries supplying 
intermediate goods used as inputs (see Box 4.3 for a 
detailed analysis using customs data from France).
To summarize, evidence from granular bilateral trade 
data shows that after demand in importing countries 
is controlled for, there were statistically significant 
negative spillovers from lockdowns in partner coun-
tries, consistent with findings in the literature (Espitia 
and others 2021; Berthou and Stumpner 2022). These 
spillovers were larger in GVC-intensive industries and 
in downstream industries. However, the spillovers 
tended to be short-lived and were mitigated to the 
extent that partner countries were able to use telework. 
Moreover, the spillover effects waned in magnitude 
over time, as countries gained experience with func-
tioning under mobility restrictions; thus imports fell 
by much less in response to lockdowns in partner 
countries in 2021 than in 2020 (Box 4.2).
Resilience in GVCs
Trade Data Suggest That GVCs Adapted to Pandemic 
Conditions during the Crisis
The preceding analysis suggests that with the 
rotation in demand toward goods and the short-lived 
negative impact of spillovers from lockdowns, goods 
trade was resilient overall, including in GVC-intensive 
goods. The resilience of trade in goods can also be 
traced to the adaptability of GVC networks. Trade data 
show that there were sizable changes in trade market 
shares between regions with significant participation 
12To test the upstreamness hypothesis, the model includes the 
interaction between the lockdown stringency index and a measure 
of industry “upstreamness” (the average distance from final use) 
computed by Antràs and others (2012) from a US input–output 
table. The (time-invariant) upstreamness of the industry is a measure 
of its exposure to the (time-varying) lockdown supply shock. This 
specification makes it possible to control for exporter-time effects, 
making the model fully consistent with gravity models that control 
for time-varying “multilateral resistance” factors.
Figure 4.8.  Semielasticity of the Oxford COVID-19 
Government Response Stringency Index
Spillovers were larger in GVC-intensive industries and among partner countries 
less able to rely on teleworking.
1. Teleworkability
Low teleworkability
High teleworkability
Average, all countries
–0.15
–0.05
–0.10
0.00
2. Type of Industry
Automotive
Electronics
Medical
Textiles
Non-GVC-intensive industries
Average, all industries
–0.30
–0.10
–0.40
–0.20
0.00
Sources: Dingel and Neiman (2020); Hale and others (2021); Trade Data Monitor; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: GVC = global value chain.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
94
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
in GVCs early in the pandemic.13 With the asyn-
chronous development of the pandemic, regions that 
exited lockdowns earlier experienced sizable increases 
in market share vis-à-vis other regions, especially in 
GVC-intensive industries. However, these changes in 
market shares appear to be reversing course over time, 
suggesting that they are unlikely to persist as countries 
learn to adjust to pandemic-related restrictions.
Asian countries, which were hit early by the 
COVID-19 shock but then managed to contain the 
virus—while other regions were experiencing surges in 
COVID-19 infections and lockdowns—gained market 
share compared with 2019; European and North 
American countries lost market share. By June 2020, 
“Factory Asia” countries increased their market share 
in GVC-intensive industries by 4.6 percentage points 
in “Factory Europe” and by 2.3 percentage points in 
“Factory North America.”14 Factory Europe is the 
regional bloc that lost the most during the first phase 
of the crisis (Figure 4.9, panel 1).
However, the most recent data, up to June 2021, 
show that the initial gains in market share for Factory 
Asia and the initial losses in market share for Factory 
Europe were both pared back during the recovery 
phase, suggesting that the change in market shares 
may be temporary. Factory North America continued 
to lose market share, predominantly within its own 
domestic markets (Figure 4.9, panel 2). To put these 
changes in a longer historical context, panel 3 of 
Figure 4.9 shows the evolution of Asia’s market share 
in Europe since 2000, before China’s accession to the 
World Trade Organization.15 The gains in Asia’s market 
by mid-2020 were large and quick relative to historical 
changes but also appear to be reversing rapidly.
13Because of lags in input–output data availability, granular 
analysis of changes in GVC participation is difficult. Bilateral trade 
data can thus shed some light on recent trends. For 2020, GVC 
participation metrics show that at the macroeconomic level, disrup-
tions in supply chains led to a sharp reduction in GVC participation 
compared with 2019 (WTO 2021), especially in some sectors (such 
as transportation and electrical equipment).
14The classification of countries included in each of the three 
regional blocs follows Baldwin and Freeman (2020). Factory Asia 
comprises Australia, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Republic 
of Korea, and Taiwan Province of China. Factory Europe com-
prises France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, 
Turkey, and the United Kingdom. Factory North America comprises 
Canada, Mexico, and the United States.
15While China predominated in the increase in Asia’s market share 
in Europe, changes in global market shares have seen winners and 
losers. Online Annex 4.3 shows that across countries, the increase in 
market share was positively correlated with an increase in mobility 
during the pandemic period.
Factory Asia
Of which: China
Figure 4.9.  Changes in Regions’ Market Shares of 
GVC-Intensive Products
(Percentage points, unless noted otherwise)
Changes in trade market shares during the pandemic indicate that GVCs adjusted 
to asynchronous lockdowns in different countries and regions.
1. 2020:H2 versus 2019
–1.0
–0.8
1.8
0.0
–0.8
–0.8
1.3
0.3
–0.9
–1.9
4.6
–1.9
Rest of
the world
Asia
Europe
North
America
–2.4
–1.4
2.3
1.5
Importer regions
North America
Europe
Asia
Rest of
the world
Exporter regions
2. 2021:H1 versus 2019
Rest of
the world
Asia
Europe
North
America
Importer regions
–0.6
–1.7
2.1
0.2
–0.6
–0.6
1.1
0.1
–0.5
–2.3
3.1
–0.4
–3.2
–0.8
0.6
3.4
North America
Europe
Asia
Rest of
the world
Exporter regions
3. Market Share with Respect to Europe
(Percent)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2000
05
10
15
20:
H1
20:
H2
21:
H1
Sources: Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Market shares are computed using only GVC-intensive products, as deﬁned 
in the chapter. Panel 3 plots only the market shares of Factory Asia and China in 
GVC-intensive products with respect to Factory Europe, as deﬁned in the chapter. 
GVC = global value chain.
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
95
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Notwithstanding the overall resilience of GVCs, 
some industries such as automobiles have faced large 
supply disruptions. Moreover, shipping costs remain 
elevated along some routes despite having come down 
from their peaks, and some ports remain congested, 
contributing to continuing supply chain disruptions 
(Box 4.1; Komaromi, Cerdeiro, and Liu 2022). 
Other types of shocks—not just health emergencies, 
but also international or civil conflicts, cyberattacks, 
or extreme weather events associated with climate 
change—could also pose challenges (Baumgartner, 
Malik, and Padhi 2020; McKinsey Global Institute 
2020). In this light, assessing options to strengthen 
resilience in GVCs is important, especially in view of 
growing calls to reshore production. The next section 
uses a model-based framework to analyze two options 
for building supply chain resilience that have been 
proposed in the literature: greater geographical diver-
sification of input sources and greater substitutability 
of inputs from one source with inputs from another 
source (OECD 2021).
Policies to Boost Resilience: Insights from a 
Model-Based Approach
To analyze these options, this chapter extends 
the general equilibrium model of global production 
networks and trade proposed by Bonadio and others 
(2021). The model includes trade in intermediate 
goods (such as raw materials, parts, and energy that 
are produced by one firm and used in production by 
another firm) and services and thus captures global 
value chains.16 Each sector in each country has a 
representative firm that produces using a technology 
characterized by constant return to scale. The model is 
calibrated to 64 countries and 33 sectors, as described 
in Online Annex 4.4. Note that the model does not 
feature endogenous input–output linkages and cannot 
speak to possible trade-offs between diversification 
and efficiency.
In the model, supply disruptions in source countries 
spill over to other countries through trade in inter-
mediates. The analysis considers two scenarios: supply 
16In the model intermediate goods and services from one country 
are used as inputs into production in a second country, and then the 
resulting intermediate or final goods are exported to a third country. 
The model does not include inventory management and therefore 
cannot address risk mitigation options such as inventory manage-
ment practices and their impact on trade (Alessandria, Kaboski, and 
Midrigian 2011).
disruption in a single large input supplier country 
and supply shocks to multiple countries. It compares 
outcomes under high levels of diversification or substi-
tutability with those under the levels actually observed. 
The precise sense in which these options are considered 
is as follows:
•• Diversification: Countries could diversify their sup-
pliers of intermediate inputs internationally, sourc-
ing them in more equal amounts across countries. 
Diversification is a widely used term in economics 
(see, for example, Cadot, Carrère, and Strauss-Kahn 
2013), but the meaning here is very specific. This 
chapter refers to diversification (1) across countries, 
not across products; (2) of intermediate goods and 
services, not final goods and services; and (3) of the 
use of intermediate inputs, not the production or 
export thereof. Diversification might enhance resil-
ience by reducing reliance on a single country or by 
establishing relationships in good times that can be 
tapped during a crisis. In principle there could also 
be downsides to diversification. For example, diver-
sification could expose a country to more volatile 
supplier countries. Empirical evidence to date on the 
benefits of diversification is mixed.17
•• Substitutability: This refers to how easy it is in the 
production process for a producer to switch inputs 
from a supplier in one country with those from 
another country. While geographic diversification is 
about establishing relationships with suppliers in dif-
ferent countries, substitutability can be interpreted 
either as making firms’ production technologies 
more flexible, in the sense that they can accommo-
date slightly different inputs of the same type from 
different suppliers, or as standardizing intermediate 
inputs internationally. An example of greater flexibil-
ity in production is Tesla’s response to the semi-
conductor shortage. The company rewrote software 
to enable it to use alternative semiconductors that 
were more available at the time. As an example of 
standardization, General Motors recently announced 
that it is working with chipmakers to reduce the 
number of unique semiconductor chips that it uses 
17An emerging body of literature shows mixed benefits of diversi-
fication. Caselli and others (2020) find benefits at the national level 
of greater openness to overall trade (that is, exports and imports) and 
to trade in intermediate and final goods and services. At the firm 
level, Jain, Girotra, and Netessine (2015) find that diversification 
exposes firms to smaller suppliers that take longer to recover from a 
disruption, and Lafrogne-Joussier, Martin, and Mejean (2021) find 
negligible gains from diversification.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
96
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
by 95 percent, down to just three families of micro-
controllers. In principle, each family of microcon-
trollers would replace a host of chips, eliminating 
any costs of substituting among them.18
The evidence suggests that countries and sectors 
have substantial room to diversify away from domes-
tic sourcing of intermediate inputs internationally. 
For example, the blue bars in Figure 4.10 show 
that on average, firms in the Western Hemisphere 
source 82 percent of their intermediates domesti-
cally, which is far above a benchmark of 31 percent 
that reflects the concentration of world production 
18See, for example, “Ford Moves to Ensure Supply of Chips and 
Guide Their Design,” New York Times, November 18, 2021  
(https://​www​.nytimes​.com/​2021/​11/​18/​business/​ford​-global 
foundries​-chip​-shortage​.html). Note that if substitutability is 
achieved by standardization, then it might also carry the cost to 
producers that suppliers are less “locked in” and could more easily 
switch between producers.
of these intermediates.19 This points to a sizeable 
“home bias” in the sourcing of intermediates.20 One 
important implication of this home bias is that any 
reshoring of production would lower diversifica-
tion even further, thereby increasing concentration 
risk. This is a simple argument against reshoring. 
Fuller analyses of reshoring find that this increased 
concentration would indeed result in more volatile 
economic activity, even after the economy adjusts 
structurally by expanding some sectors and shrink-
ing others (OECD 2021; Bonadio and others 2021).
In contrast, there is not much room to diversify 
further among inputs sourced from abroad, except 
in the Western Hemisphere (Figure 4.10). Therefore, 
the main scope for diversification is in diversify-
ing away from domestic sources, by sourcing more 
intermediates from abroad. Online Annex 4.4 shows 
that the sectors with the greatest room to diversify 
are services industries such as hospitality, finance, 
and health care.
Greater diversification is modeled by constructing a 
simple average of (1) a distribution that sources from 
each country with equal weight and (2) the actual 
data. Effectively, the domestically sourced share is set 
to roughly half of what it is in the observed data.
To increase substitutability across suppliers in 
different countries, an increase in the elasticity of 
substitution between intermediate inputs from 
different countries from 0.5 to 2.0 is modeled, 
similar to the range found in Feenstra and oth-
ers (2018).21 The increase is equivalent to going 
from the short-term elasticity used by Bonadio and 
19This benchmark illustrates the limits on how much a firm can 
diversify its sourcing of intermediates in the short term. For each 
country-sector pair, the share of domestically sourced intermediates 
is compared with a benchmark for the concentration of world 
production of those intermediates. The concentration of imported 
intermediates is compared with a benchmark for the concentration 
of exports of those intermediates. For example, suppose the US 
motor vehicles industry uses two inputs, A and B, in equal parts. 
Suppose that the country producing the largest share of input 
A has a 20 percent share in world production and the country 
producing the largest share of input B has a 40 percent share. 
Then the benchmark concentration for domestic sourcing of these 
inputs, A and B, for the US motor vehicles industry is 30 percent ​
(​=  ​(​20 + 40​)​ / 2​)​. The benchmark of 31 percent in the text then 
averages across all country-sector pairs in the Western Hemisphere. 
The room for diversification shown here may look different within 
more narrowly defined product categories.
20This is similar to the home bias identified in overall trade by 
McCallum (1995).
21This is an extension of the baseline model of Bonadio and others 
(2021), as explained in Online Annex 4.4.
Domestic share
Import concentration (right scale)
Benchmark for the domestic share
Benchmark for import concentration
(right scale) 
Figure 4.10.  Room to Diversify the Sourcing of Intermediates
(Percent)
Substantial home bias in sourcing inputs suggests room for international
diversiﬁcation. 
0
25
50
75
100
0
5
10
15
20
Western
Hemisphere
Europe
Asia
Rest of
the world
Western
Hemisphere
Europe
Asia
Rest of
the world
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Inter-country 
Input-Output Tables; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Blue bars show the share of intermediates sourced domestically. Yellow 
squares show the benchmark concentration in world production. Red bars show 
the extent of import concentration (Herﬁndahl concentration index) across foreign 
countries within the share of intermediates that is imported. Green squares show 
the world exports concentration benchmark. See Online Annex 4.2 for details.
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
97
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
others (2021) to an estimate closer to the long-term 
substitutability implied by Boehm, Levchenko, and 
Pandalai-Nayar (2020).22
Diversification and Substitutability Can Boost Resilience 
to Cross-Border Supply Shocks
Diversification substantially reduces the GDP losses 
in all regions of the world following a sizable (25 per-
cent) labor supply contraction in a single large global 
supplier of intermediate inputs.23 In this scenario, the 
average economy’s GDP falls by 0.8 percent under the 
22The elasticity of tariff-exclusive trade flows to tariff changes 
estimated by Boehm, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2020) equals 
the elasticity of substitution in the Armington (1969)/Krugman 
(1980) setting. Boehm, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2020) 
estimate that the long-term elasticity ranges from 1.75 to 2.25. The 
counterfactual analysis chooses a parameter value of 2.0 to discipline 
the upper bound of short-term elasticity. Online Annex 4.4 discusses 
the selection of the parameter value in detail.
23The global supplier is calibrated to closely match China. The 
scenario assumes a drop of two standard deviations in China’s total 
factor productivity, using Penn World Table data, which is equivalent 
to a labor supply contraction of about 22 percent (rounded up to 
25 percent in the scenario), assuming Cobb-Douglas production 
with Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
averages of labor supply elasticity and labor share of income (as 
explained in Online Annex 4.4).
baseline level of diversification. In the high-diversification 
scenario, Figure 4.11 shows that the decline in GDP is 
reduced by almost half.24 Most of this benefit accrues 
to countries other than the source country, as higher 
diversification makes them less dependent on intermedi-
ates produced by the source country. The source country 
also benefits, as diversification makes it less dependent on 
domestic sources.
Higher diversification also reduces the volatility of 
GDP growth when a series of shocks affect more than 
one country, with some correlation across countries. 
Figure 4.12 shows the results from simulations that draw 
multicountry shock scenarios from historical productiv-
ity data.25 Diversification offers some protection against 
24These are simple averages across countries. The GDP-weighted 
average across countries is a loss of 3.2 percent under baseline levels 
of diversification (with China contributing 2.7 percentage points 
of that loss) and 2.6 percent in the high-diversification world (with 
China contributing 2.4 percentage points).
25Specifically, 100 years of multicountry total factor productivity 
changes are sampled with replacement (bootstrapped) from yearly Penn 
World Table data between 1995 and 2019. These shocks should be 
seen as having a medium to high correlation with one another, because 
member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development make up a large portion of the sample. The average 
pairwise correlation between the shocks is 25 percent.
Current world
More diversiﬁed world
Figure 4.11.  Gains from Diversiﬁcation Following a Supply 
Disruption in a Large Supplier Country
(Percent)
Greater diversiﬁcation reduces GDP losses by almost half, on average, following a 
shock to a large input supplier.
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
Western
Hemisphere
Europe
Asia excluding
China
Rest of
the world
Source country
(right scale)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows GDP declines in response to a 25 percent labor supply 
contraction in a country that is a large global supplier of intermediates. The bars 
and squares show simple averages of GDP declines across countries within each 
region. Elasticity of substitution = 0.5.
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
Western
Hemisphere
Asia
Europe
World
Rest of
the world
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars show simple averages within each region of the percentage 
reduction in volatility. The shock is calibrated by drawing 100 years of changes in 
total factor productivity across multiple countries with replacement from yearly 
Penn World Table data between 1995 and 2019. The average pairwise correlation 
between the shocks is 25 percent.
Figure 4.12.  Gains from Diversiﬁcation under Shocks to Total 
Factor Productivity
(Percent)
Greater diversiﬁcation reduces the volatility of GDP by 5 percent under correlated 
total factor productivity shocks.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
98
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
shocks with this level of correlation, reducing the volatility 
of GDP growth in the average country by 5 percent.26
By contrast, diversification offers little protection 
against exceptionally highly correlated shocks. For 
example, under the scenario calibrated to the first four 
months of the COVID-19 pandemic that Bonadio and 
others (2021) analyze, world GDP falls by the same 
amount under high diversification as it does under 
levels of diversification observed in the data.
Turning to substitutability, countries benefit from 
being able to more easily substitute away from one 
country’s inputs to those produced in another coun-
try. Considering again the scenario of the 25 percent 
labor supply contraction in a large global supplier of 
intermediate inputs, the results show that with greater 
substitutability—even though it amplifies the shock in 
the source country—all countries other than the source 
country benefit, as their GDP losses are reduced by 
about four-fifths (Figure 4.13).27
26Online Annex 4.4 shows that the results on diversification 
and volatility are symmetric, in that lower diversification would 
increase volatility.
27For modeling purposes, the characteristics of the large global 
supplier are calibrated to those of China. However, the conclusions 
are robust to using other countries for calibration.
In terms of achieving greater diversification, the 
model also shows that reducing trade costs can help. 
A one-quarter reduction in the costs of trading in 
intermediates lowers the Herfindahl index of geo-
graphic concentration in the sourcing of intermediates 
by 4 percentage points from 60 percent as observed in 
actual data.28
Conventional policy tools for reducing trade costs 
include tariff and nontariff barriers. With tariff barriers 
having declined globally to low levels, there is still 
ample scope to reduce nontariff barriers, particularly 
in emerging markets and low-income developing 
countries (Figure 4.14). Consistent with the model, 
other evidence from the literature suggests that such 
trade cost reductions could lead to sizable GDP gains 
(October 2021 Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and 
Pacific; Estefania-Flores and others 2022).
The model’s results on the benefits of diversification 
and substitutability naturally raise the question of why 
profit-maximizing firms do not already take advan-
tage of these opportunities. To some extent this could 
reflect government policies that favor domestic sourc-
ing and thus tilt the scales against greater diversifica-
tion (for example, Made in China 2025, the Make in 
India initiative, and the United States Innovation and 
Competition Act of 2021).29 But it is also important 
28The increase in diversification is similar across regions.
29See McBride and Chatzky (2019) for China, Press Information 
Bureau (2017) for India, and Hufbauer and Jung (2021) for the 
United States.
Baseline substitutability
Higher substitutability
Figure 4.13.  Gains from Substitutability Following a Supply 
Disruption in a Large Supplier Country
(Percent)
Greater substitutability reduces GDP losses by about four-ﬁfths relative to the 
baseline in non–source countries.
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
Western
Hemisphere
Europe
Asia excluding
China
Rest of
the world
Source country
(right scale)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows GDP declines in response to a 25 percent labor supply 
contraction in a country that is a large global supplier of intermediates. The bars 
and squares show simple averages of GDP declines across countries within each 
region. Baseline elasticity of substitution = 0.5. Higher elasticity of 
substitution = 2.0.
Advanced economies
Emerging markets
Low-income developing countries
Figure 4.14.  Nontariff Barriers Index
(Simple average)
There is room to lower nontariff barriers among emerging markets and 
low-income developing countries.
0
4
8
12
16
1960
70
80
90
2000
10
19
Source: Estefania-Flores and others (2022).
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
99
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
to emphasize that the model does not capture all the 
factors feeding into firm-level decisions. There are 
likely to be costly trade-offs for firms in building resil-
ience, including the costs of holding larger inventories, 
fixed costs of establishing new supply relationships, 
and efficiency gains from dealing with a smaller num-
ber of suppliers—which, if large, could reduce gains 
from diversification. That said, the trade-off between 
efficiency and lower risk may not be acute, given that 
firms that are best at mitigating risks also tend to be 
the most efficient.30
To summarize, the evidence from a modeling 
approach suggests that resilience to cross-border supply 
shocks can be increased with greater input source 
diversification (using more foreign inputs) and greater 
input substitutability (across suppliers), although the 
benefits are smaller if shocks are more widespread and 
correlated across countries. From a policy perspec-
tive, these findings on gains from diversification and 
substitutability suggest the need to provide a support-
ive environment for firm-level measures to enhance 
GVC resilience.
Policy Implications
The role of factors specific to the pandemic in shap-
ing trade patterns suggests that the pandemic-induced 
rotation in demand from services to goods may 
not be lasting. In particular, services trade should 
recover as travel restrictions are lifted. The pace of 
the recovery is therefore likely to be closely related 
to the success of global public health efforts, and a 
quicker-than-expected easing of mobility restrictions 
could pose an upside risk to global trade projections.31 
Facilitating the full return of mobility should therefore 
be an important element in boosting services demand 
back to pre-pandemic trends. That said, it is possible 
that some changes in services trade may be more per-
sistent. For instance, increasing familiarity with virtual 
interactions may reduce certain kinds of travel more 
permanently (Antràs 2021).
The evidence on international spillovers presented 
in this chapter further underscores the urgency of 
30For example, firms with just-in-time inventory management also 
enjoy lower inventory costs and would be best placed to increase 
inventories if needed, while remaining competitive (Miroudot 2020; 
van Stekelenborg 2020).
31Separately, advances in digital technology could provide a 
further boost to trade in services, for example, in areas such as health 
and education (Baldwin and Freeman 2021).
dealing with the pandemic everywhere. Vaccinating 
widely across countries is important not just from the 
perspective of domestic economic activity, but also to 
minimize supply disruption spillovers onto partner 
countries. Moreover, strengthening health systems and 
investing in digital infrastructure would help mitigate 
the transmission of shocks in future shock scenarios, 
including further COVID-19 variants or other possi-
ble pandemics.
The chapter emphasizes that overall, trade was fairly 
resilient in the pandemic—falling sharply initially, but 
then recovering rapidly in line with economic activity 
and demand, despite significant bottlenecks in trade 
logistics. Trade was also resilient in key GVC-intensive 
industries—with the notable exception of the auto-
motive sector. Policy proposals to reduce dependence 
on foreign suppliers, especially in strategic sectors, 
have gained prominence (Javorcik 2020), including in 
major markets such as Europe and the United States 
(Le Maire 2020; White House 2021). The resilience of 
trade through the pandemic suggests that such propos-
als may be premature, if not misguided (Baldwin and 
Freeman 2021; Antràs 2021; OECD 2021; Miroudot 
2020; Eppinger and others 2021).
This chapter argues instead that greater diversifica-
tion in international sourcing of inputs and greater 
substitutability in input sourcing could enhance 
GVC resilience. The lessons from Toyota’s adapta-
tions following the Tohoku earthquake are instruc-
tive (APEC 2021). Toyota took measures to increase 
diversification and substitutability, much in line with 
the model-based evidence presented by this chapter. In 
particular the company (1) standardized some compo-
nents across vehicle models to enable global sharing of 
inventory and flexibility in production across various 
sites, (2) built a comprehensive database of its sup-
pliers and parts held in inventory, (3) regionalized its 
supply chains to avoid depending on a single location, 
and (4) asked its single-source suppliers to disperse 
production of parts to multiple locations or hold extra 
inventory. Firms may also choose to adopt greater 
mechanization as a way to gain resilience against 
shocks to labor supply (Box 4.3).
The lessons from this chapter suggest the following 
policy recommendations.
•• Enhancing Infrastructure. While firm-level deci-
sions will predominantly shape the future resilience 
of GVCs, government policies can help by pro-
viding a supportive environment and lowering the 
costs of greater diversification and substitutability. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
100
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
One obvious area is infrastructure. The pan-
demic has shown that infrastructure investments 
in certain areas are critical for mitigating supply 
disruptions related to trade logistics. For example, 
upgrading and modernizing port infrastructure 
on key global shipping routes would help reduce 
global choke points.
•• Closing Information Gaps. Governments could 
also step in to resolve informational externalities, 
which could help firms to make more strategic deci-
sions. For example, evidence suggests that automo-
bile manufacturers on average have about 250 Tier 
1 suppliers (with which the manufacturers conduct 
business directly), but this number rises to 18,000 
suppliers in the full value chain (Baumgartner, 
Malik, and Padhi 2020).32 It is easy to see how visi-
bility over the supply chain would be challenging for 
firms that lack the resources of large corporate enti-
ties. Filling informational gaps could thus be a key 
role that governments can play. Advancing digitaliza-
32Tier 1 suppliers provide parts or systems directly to an “original 
equipment manufacturer” or enterprise (such as Chevrolet). Tier 2 
suppliers in turn supply inputs to Tier 1 suppliers.
tion of firms’ document filings, such as tax returns, 
can help generate more information on interfirm 
transactions and supply chain networks.33 This 
information could be useful in stress-testing exercises 
to identify supply chain weaknesses and risks.
•• Reducing Trade Costs. Finally, reducing trade costs 
can help boost diversification in inputs. Consider-
able scope exists to reduce nontariff barriers in par-
ticular, which would carry substantial medium-term 
growth benefits, especially in emerging markets 
and low-income developing countries (October 
2021 Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific). 
In addition, reducing trade policy uncertainty and 
providing an open and stable, rules-based trade 
policy regime can also support greater diversification 
(Handley and others 2020; OECD 2021).
33For example, Gadenne, Nandi, and Rathelot (2019) use 
value-added tax (VAT) data from the state of West Bengal (India) to 
map supply chains. VAT-paying firms are required to report trans-
actions with other tax-registered firms, providing matches between 
client and supplier tax identifiers. Similarly, Alfaro-Ureña, Manelici, 
and Vasquez (2020) use tax identification data in firms’ tax declara-
tions in Costa Rica to match buyer firms with supplier firms.
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
101
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Supply chain pressures increased to unprecedented 
levels at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
and after a significant easing in the second half of 
2020, accelerated again to reach a new peak by the 
end of 2021. Shipping costs steadily increased until 
September 2021, when they started a moderate 
decline. Delivery times lengthened in 2021, and indi-
ces of future delivery times indicate that supply chain 
disruptions persist. Trade flows closely mimicked the 
evolution of supply chain disruptions in the first phase 
of the crisis. Although the recovery in trade continued 
even when supply chain pressures resumed in late 
2020 (Figure 4.1.1), flat import volumes and rising 
unit values in 2021 suggest that supply disruptions 
have contributed to inflationary pressures (Helper and 
Soltas 2021; Leibovici and Dunn 2021).
Supply chain disruptions have large real effects 
on firm inventories, production, and sales (Bonadio 
and others 2021; Carvalho and others 2021). These 
effects were still in evidence in the first weeks of 2022. 
High-frequency data from the United States show that 
the share of firms that reported foreign supplier delays 
increased from 9 percent in October 2020 to 20 per-
cent in December 2021. A growing share of small 
businesses have also reported difficulties in locating 
alternative foreign suppliers. These developments are 
particularly severe in the manufacturing, construction, 
and trade sectors and have translated into an increase 
in the share of firms reporting delays in produc-
tion and delivery to their customers, which reached 
14 percent and 26 percent, respectively, in December 
2021 (Figure 4.1.2). These persistent pressures, which 
increased in January 2022 as the Omicron wave spread 
in the United States, indicate a need to discuss policy 
options to improve global value chains’ risk manage-
ment through more flexibility, better knowledge and 
information, and better adaptability to shocks.
Disruptions in some industries have been particu-
larly conspicuous. The automotive industry is a case 
in point. Trade in (and sales of) automobiles collapsed 
during spring 2020 and then started rebounding in 
the second half of the year, although without reaching 
pre-pandemic levels. The shortage of automotive chips 
was a key factor behind this drop. At the beginning 
of the pandemic, the shift to remote working led to 
a sharp increase in demand for semiconductors. By 
contrast, the demand for cars fell, and pessimism 
This box was prepared by the Chapter 4 authoring team.
Import unit values (Jan. 2018 = 100)
Import volumes (Jan. 2018 = 100)
Global supply chain pressures
(right scale, inverted)
Figure 4.1.1.  Global Goods Trade and Supply 
Chain Pressures
(Index)
80
90
100
110
120
–6
–3
0
3
6
Jan.
2018
Jan.
19
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Jan.
22
Sources: Benigno and others (2022); CPB World Trade 
Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The index of global supply chain pressures is a 
composite measure of several variables combining 
cross-border transportation costs with country-level supply 
chain measures of delays, backlogs, and inventories from 
manufacturing surveys.
Production delays at this business
Delays in delivery/shipping to customers
Difﬁculty locating alternate foreign suppliers
Foreign supplier delays
Figure 4.1.2.  Foreign Suppliers, Production, 
and Delivery Delays in the United States
(Percent)
0
10
20
30
40
Aug.
2020
Nov.
20
Feb.
21
May
21
Aug.
21
Nov.
21
Jan.
22
Sources: US Census Bureau, Small Business Pulse Survey; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data are as of January 20, 2022.
Box 4.1. Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
102
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
about the economy led car producers to limit their 
orders for semiconductors. When pent-up demand 
for cars accelerated more than expected in the second 
half of 2020, the semiconductor industry had limited 
production capacity to meet the demand for automo-
tive chips because it had already shifted production 
to meet demand from other sectors (such as con-
sumer electronics) (Deloitte 2021). Trade tensions 
and domestic shocks (such as a drought in Taiwan 
Province of China) aggravated this shortage, which has 
constrained recovery in the automotive sector, despite 
strong demand (Figure 4.1.3), and has resulted in 
higher prices. More generally, the shortage of semi-
conductors, a key component for many products, has 
highlighted the vulnerabilities of global value chains 
and driven calls for reshoring and for increasing supply 
chain resilience.
Automobiles
Semiconductors
Jan.
2018
Jan.
19
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Jun.
21
40
60
80
100
120
Figure 4.1.3.  Trade in Automobiles and  
Semiconductors
(Index, January 2018 = 100)
Sources: Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Automobiles” comprises Harmonized System six-digit 
codes for manufactured intermediate inputs and ﬁnal goods 
(vehicles). “Semiconductors” comprises Harmonized System 
six-digit codes 854150 and 854190.
Box 4.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
103
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
This box examines the effect on trade of pandemic 
containment measures, using a unique data set of daily 
bilateral seaborne trade volumes (see Cerdeiro and 
others 2020). A country’s imports during a pandemic 
are affected by lockdowns imposed by trade part-
ners (suppliers). Domestic factors (health situation, 
macroeconomic policies, consumer sentiment) are also 
likely to influence bilateral trade. The following import 
equation is estimated at a daily frequency to measure 
the effect of a lockdown imposed by country ​j​ on the 
growth of country i’s imports from country j (bilateral 
import growth) at horizon ​h​, ​ ˆ 
M ​ ij,t+h​:
​ ˆ 
M ​ ij,t+h​  =  ​γ​ it​ + ​α​ ij​ + β ​LS​ jt​ + ​
X​ jt​ 
´ ​ δ + ​∑ k=1​ 
7  ​ ​ˆ 
M​ ij,t−k​ + ε​ ij,t+h​,
in which bilateral import growth from ​j​ to ​i​ (​ ˆ 
M ​ ijt​)  
is the seven-day moving average of year-over-year 
growth rates with respect to pre-pandemic (2017–19) 
averages and ​LS​ jt​ denotes the lockdown stringency 
(0–100) of the exporter country (Hale and others 
2020).1 The specification includes importer-time fixed 
effects,​ ​γ​ it​, to control for any unobserved time-varying 
factors affecting country ​i​’s imports; a bilateral pair 
fixed effect ​α​ ij​; and a vector of control variables ​X​ jt​ 
´ ​ 
(the ratio of new COVID-19 cases to the population 
and an aggregate measure of exporters’ exposure to 
foreign lockdowns).2
Over the full 2020–21 sample, exporter lockdowns 
have a large and statistically significant impact on 
The authors of this box are Andras Komaromi, Diego Cerdeiro, 
and Yang Liu.
1Lockdown measures are lagged to account for delivery lags in 
shipping. For example, if all voyages from country ​j​ to country ​
i​ take three days, then lockdown stringency measures in ​j​ are 
lagged by three days in the equation for imports into ​i​.
2This empirical specification captures lockdown-induced trade 
disruptions at the bilateral level, but it does not rule out cases 
in which a drop in bilateral imports is made up for by sourcing 
goods from a different country. For an alternative approach that 
takes into account potential substitution effects and measures 
lockdown disruptions in terms of aggregate imports, see Cerdeiro 
and Komaromi (2020). The bilateral specification presented 
here has the important advantage that one can control for any 
time-varying confounding factors specific to the importer.
bilateral trade volumes (Figure 4.2.1, panel 1). As 
the stringency variable has a range of 0–100, the 
point estimates of around 5 imply that less than a full 
lockdown (a change in stringency of just 20 points) 
can temporarily halt bilateral trade. Notably, lock-
downs have no statistically significant effect on trade 
volumes in 2021 (Figure 4.2.1, panel 2). This finding 
is consistent with activity becoming less susceptible to 
lockdowns as economies adapt to the pandemic and 
underscores the resilience of global value chains.
Figure 4.2.1.  Response of Bilateral Import 
Growth to Exporter Lockdowns
(Percent)
1. Full Sample
–16
–12
–8
–4
0
4
0
3
6
9
12
15
Days
2. 2021 Sample
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
0
3
6
9
12
15
Days
Source: IMF staff estimates based on Cerdeiro and others 
(2020). Automatic Identiﬁcation System data were collected 
by Marine Trafﬁc.
Note: The shaded areas indicate 95 percent conﬁdence 
bands; robust standard errors.
Box 4.2. The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
104
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
This box uses monthly French Customs data on 
firms’ imports and exports for 2019 and 2020 to 
examine the duration of, and margins of adjustment 
to, the shock induced by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Adjustment occurred mainly along the intensive 
margin (volumes). The extensive margin, with varieties 
dropping out of France’s trade basket, contributed 
marginally to the total trade adjustment, indicating 
the temporary nature of the shock (Antràs 2021).1 The 
trade recovery was supported by the rebound in con-
sumer demand and extensive economic relief policies 
implemented by the French government.
•• The trade of downstream firms was more affected. The 
average impact of importing-country lockdowns 
on exports of firms selling final consumer goods 
(downstream firms) was nearly nine times larger 
than that for firms selling intermediate inputs 
(upstream firms).2
•• Greater automation was associated with more resil-
ience. The impact of lockdowns and the spread 
of the virus (measured by COVID-19 deaths) on 
exports was almost 67 percent larger for firms that 
are less automated (Figure 4.3.1, panel 1).
•• Firms in low-inventory industries experienced larger 
contractions in trade. Imports of firms in industries 
holding the lowest stocks of inventories fell more 
than twice as much as those among firms in indus-
tries with average inventory intensity (Figure 4.3.1, 
panel 2).3 Firms in industries with the highest 
inventory intensity increased imports. Exporters in 
more inventory-intensive industries also experienced 
a smaller drop in sales (Figure 4.3.1, panel 1), sug-
gesting that inventories play a shock-absorbing role.
The authors of this box are Mariya Brussevich, Chris 
Papageorgiou, and Pauline Wibaux. For details on data and esti-
mation methodology, see Brussevich, Papageorgiou, and Wibaux 
(forthcoming).
1A variety is defined as a trade-partner-specific product, fol-
lowing the eight-digit Combined Nomenclature classification.
2To evaluate the heterogeneous effects of lockdown stringency 
and deaths by industry or firm characteristics, stringency and 
deaths variables are interacted with one of the variables of inter-
est: an industry-level measure of upstreamness (Antràs and others 
2012), firm-level imports of industrial robots as a proxy for 
automation, and an industry-level measure of inventory intensity 
(ratio of inventory to sales).
3The results on inventory intensity are sensitive to the measure 
of industry-average inventory-to-sales ratios.
Industry upstreamness
Industrial robots use
Inventory intensity
Figure 4.3.1.  Impact of Supply Chain 
Upstreamness, Automation, and Inventories 
on Trade Adjustment
(Percent)
1. Effect on Export Growth
–30
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
Downstream
Midstream
Upstream
No
Yes
Low
Medium
High
2. Effect on Import Growth
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
Downstream
Midstream
Upstream
Yes
Low
Medium
High
No
Sources: Antràs and others (2012); French Customs data; 
Hale and others (2021); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each bar corresponds to the average effect for a given 
group of ﬁrms derived from the regression of ﬁrms’ exports 
and imports on COVID-19 lockdown intensity and COVID-19 
deaths in trade partner countries interacted with the 
industry’s upstreamness index, its median ratio of 
inventories to sales, and ﬁrms’ use of industrial robots. 
Downstream industries are closest to the ﬁnal consumer, 
whereas upstream and midstream industries specialize 
predominantly in production of intermediate inputs.
Box 4.3. Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
105
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
References
Alessandria, George, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigian. 
2011. “US Trade and Inventory Dynamics.” American 
Economic Review 101 (3): 303–7.
Alfaro-Ureña, Alonso, Isabela Manelici, and Jose P. Vasquez. 
2020. “The Effects of Joining Multinational Supply 
Chains: New Evidence from Firm-to-Firm Linkages.” 
PEDL Research Papers, Centre for Economic Policy 
Research, London. https://​pedl​.cepr​.org/​sites/​default/​
files/​WP​%204744​%20Alfaro​-UrenaManeliciVasquez​
%20TheEffectsOfJoiningMultinationalSupply​.pdf.
Andersen, Asger L., Emil T. Hansen, Niels Johannesen, 
and Adam Sheridan. 2020. “Consumer Responses to the 
COVID-19 Crisis: Evidence from Bank Account Transaction 
Data.” CEBI Working Paper 18/20, Center for Economic 
Behavior & Inequality, Department of Economics, Univer-
sity of Copenhagen, Denmark. https://​ssrn​.com/​abstract​=​
3609814 or http://​dx​.doi​.org/​10​.2139/​ssrn​.3609814.
Antràs, Pol. 2021. “De-globalisation? Global Value Chains in 
the Post-COVID-19 Age.” Conference Proceedings, 2021 
ECB Forum: “Central Banks in a Shifting World.” European 
Central Bank, Frankfurt.
Antràs, Pol, Davin Chor, Thibault Fally, and Russell Hillberry. 
2012. “A Measure of Upstreamness of Production and Trade 
Flows.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 
102 (3): 412–16.
Armington, Paul. 1969. “A Theory of Demand for Products 
Distinguished by Place of Production.” IMF Staff Papers 
16 (1): 159–78.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). 2021. “APEC 
Regional Trends Analysis.” APEC Policy Support Unit, APEC 
Secretariat, Singapore.
Baker, Scott R., Robert A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela 
Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis. 2020. “How Does House-
hold Spending Respond to an Epidemic? Consumption 
during the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic.” Review of Asset 
Pricing Studies 10 (July): 834–62.
Baldwin, Richard. 2020. “The Greater Trade Collapse of 2020: 
Learnings from the 2008–09 Great Trade Collapse.” VoxEU, 
April 7. https://​voxeu​.org/​article/​greater​-trade​-collapse​-2020.
Baldwin, Richard, and Rebecca Freeman. 2020. “Supply Chain 
Contagion Waves: Thinking Ahead on Manufacturing 
‘Contagion and Reinfection’ from the COVID Concussion.” 
VoxEU, April 1. https://​voxeu​.org/​article/​covid​-concussion​
-and​-supply​-chain​-contagion​-waves.
Baldwin, Richard, and Rebecca Freeman. 2021. “Risks and 
Global Supply Chains: What We Know and What We Need 
to Know.” NBER Working Paper 29444, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baumgartner, Thomas, Yogesh Malik, and Asutosh Padhi. 
2020. “Reimagining Industrial Supply Chains.” McKinsey & 
Company. https://​www​.mckinsey​.com/​industries/​advanced​
-electronics/​our​-insights/​reimagining​-industrial​-supply​-chains.
Benigno, Gianluca, Julian di Giovanni, Jan J. J. Groen, and 
Adam I. Noble. 2022. “A New Barometer of Global Supply 
Chain Pressures.” Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, January 4. https://​libertystreeteconomics​
.newyorkfed​.org/​2022/​01/​a​-new​-barometer​-of​-global​-supply​
-chain​-pressures/​.
Berthou, Antoine, and Sebastian Stumpner. 2022. “Trade under 
Lockdown.” Banque de France Working Paper 867, Banque 
de France, Paris. https://​www​.banque​-france​.fr/​sites/​default/​
files/​medias/​documents/​wp867​.pdf.
Boehm, Christoph E., Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya 
Pandalai-Nayar. 2020. “The Long and Short (Run) of Trade 
Elasticities.” NBER Working Paper 27064, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bonadio, Barthélémy, Zhen Huo, Andrei A. Levchenko, and 
Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2021. “Global Supply Chains in the 
Pandemic.” Journal of International Economics 133: 103534.
Bounie, David, Youssouf Camara, Etienne Fize, John Galbraith, 
Camille Landais, Chloe Lavest, Tatiana Pazem, and Baptiste 
Savatier. 2020. “Consumption Dynamics in the COVID 
Crisis: Real-Time Insights from French Transaction and 
Bank Data.” CEPR Discussion Paper DP15474, Centre for 
Economic Policy Research, London. https://​cepr​.org/​active/​
publications/​discussion​_papers/​dp​.php​?dpno​=​15474.
Brussevich, Mariya, Chris Papageorgiou, and Pauline Wibaux. 
Forthcoming. “Trade and the COVID-19 Pandemic: 
Lessons from French Firms.” International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Bussière, Matthieu, Giovanni Callegari, Fabio Ghironi, Giulia 
Sestieri, and Norihiko Yamano. 2013. “Estimating Trade 
Elasticities: Demand Composition and the Trade Collapse 
of 2008–2009.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 
5 (3): 118–51.
Cadot, Olivier, Céline Carrère, and Vanessa Strauss-Kahn. 2013. 
“Trade Diversification, Income, and Growth: What Do We 
Know?” Journal of Economic Surveys 27 (4): 790–812.
Cameron, Elizabeth, Jennifer B. Nuzzo, and Jessica A. Bell. 
2019. Global Health Security Index: Building Collective Action 
and Accountability. Baltimore, MD: Center for Health 
Security, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. 
https://​www​.ghsindex​.org/​wp​-content/​uploads/​2020/​04/​2019​
-Global​-Health​-Security​-Index​.pdf.
Carvalho, Vasco M., Makoto Nirei, Yukiko Saito, and Alireza 
Tahbaz-Salehi. 2021. “Supply Chain Disruptions: Evidence 
from the Great East Japan Earthquake.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 136 (2): 1255–1321.
Caselli, Francesco, Miklós Koren, Milan Lisicky, and Silvana 
Tenreyro. 2020. “Diversification through Trade.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 135 (1): 449–502.
Cerdeiro, Diego A., and Andras Komaromi. 2020. “Supply Spill-
overs during the Pandemic: Evidence from High-Frequency 
Shipping Data.” IMF Working Paper 20/284, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington DC.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
106
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Cerdeiro, Diego A., Andras Komaromi, Yang Liu, and Mamoon 
Saeed. 2020. “World Seaborne Trade in Real Time: A Proof 
of Concept for Building AIS-Based Nowcasts from Scratch.” 
IMF Working Paper 20/57, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Chronopoulos, Dimitri K., Marcel Lukas, and John O. S. 
Wilson. 2020. “Consumer Spending Responses to the 
COVID-19 Pandemic: An Assessment of Great Britain.” 
Unpublished. https://​ssrn​.com/​abstract​=​3586723.
Deloitte. 2021. “Reimagining the Auto Manufacturing 
Supply Network.” New York. https://​www2​.deloitte​.com/​
content/​dam/​Deloitte/​us/​Documents/​manufacturing/​us​
-semiconductor​-updated​-final​.pdf.
Dingel, Jonathan L., and Brent Neiman. 2020. “How Many 
Jobs Can Be Done at Home?” Journal of Public Economics 
189: 104235.
Eppinger, Peter, Gabriel J. Falbermayr, Oliver Krebs, and Bohdan 
Kukharskyy. 2021. “Decoupling Global Value Chains.” CESifo 
Working Paper 9079, CESifo Network, Munich.
Espitia, Alvaro, Aaditya Mattoo, Nadia Rocha, Michele Ruta, 
and Deborah Winkler. 2021. “Pandemic Trade: COVID-19, 
Remote Work, and Global Value Chains.” Policy Research 
Working Paper WPS 9508, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Estefania-Flores, Julia, Davide Furceri, Swarnali A. Hannan, 
Jonathan D. Ostry, and Andrew K. Rose. 2022. “A Measure-
ment of Aggregate Trade Restrictions and Their Economic 
Effects.” IMF Working Paper 22/1, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington DC.
Feenstra, Robert C., Philip Luck, Maurice Obstfeld, and 
Katheryn N. Russ. 2018. “In Search of the Armington Elas-
ticity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (1): 135–50.
Frederick, Stacey. 2019. “Global Value Chain Mapping.” Chapter 1 
in Handbook of Global Value Chains, edited by Stefano Ponte, 
Gary Gereffi, and Gale Raj-Reichert. Northampton, MA: Elgar.
Frederick, Stacey, and Jonkoo Lee. 2017. “Korea and the 
Electronics Global Value Chain.” Global Value Chains 
Center, Duke University, Durham, NC. https://​gvcc​.duke​
.edu/​cggclisting/​chapter​-3​-korea​-and​-the​-electronics​-global​
-value​-chain/​.
Gadenne, Lucie, Tushar Nandi, and Roland Rathelot. 2019. 
“Taxation and Supplier Networks: Evidence from India.” 
Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper 19/21, Institute for 
Fiscal Studies, London. https://​ifs​.org​.uk/​publications/​14324.
Hale, Thomas, Noam Angrist, Rafael Goldszmidt, Beatriz 
Kira, Anna Petherick, Toby Phillips, Samuel Webster, Emily 
Cameron-Blake, Laura Hallas, Saptarshi Majumdar, and 
Helen Tatlow. 2021. “A Global Panel Database of Pan-
demic Policies (Oxford COVID-19 Government Response 
Tracker).” Nature Human Behaviour 5: 529–38. https://​doi​
.org/​10​.1038/​s41562​-021​-01079​-8.
Hale, Thomas, Noam Angrist, Beatriz Kira, Anna Petherik, 
Toby Phillips, and Samuel Webster. 2020. “Variation in 
Government Responses to COVID-19.” Blavatnik School 
of Government Working Paper 2020/032, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Handley, Kyle, Nuno Limao, Rodney D. Ludema, and Zhi Yu. 
2020. “Firm Input Choice under Trade Policy Uncertainty.” 
NBER Working Paper 27910, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Heise, Sebastian. 2020. “How Did China’s COVID-19 Shut-
down Affect U.S. Supply Chains?” Liberty Street Economics, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May 12. https://​
libertystreeteconomics​.newyorkfed​.org/​2020/​05/​how​-did​
-chinas​-covid​-19​-shutdown​-affect​-us​-supply​-chains/​.
Helper, Susana, and Evan Soltas. 2021. “Why the Pandemic Has 
Disrupted Supply Chains.” Council of Economic Advisors, 
June 17. https://​www​.whitehouse​.gov/​cea/​written​-materials/​
2021/​06/​17/​why​-the​-pandemic​-has​-disrupted​-supply​-chains/​.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, and Euijin Jung. 2021. “Lessons Learnt 
from Half a Century of US Industrial Policy.” Realtime 
Economics Issues Watch, Peterson Institute of International 
Economics, November 29. https://​www​.piie​.com/​blogs/​
realtime​-economic​-issues​-watch/​lessons​-learned​-half​-century​
-us​-industrial​-policy​#_ftn1.
Hummels, David L., Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “The 
Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World 
Trade.” Journal of International Economics 54: 75–96.
Jain, Nitish, Karan Girotra, and Serguei Netessine. 2015. 
“Recovering from Disruptions: The Role of Sourcing Strat-
egy.” INSEAD Working Paper 2015/85, Institut Européen 
d’Administration des Affaires, Paris.
Javorcik, Beata. 2020. “Reshaping of Global Supply Chains Will 
Take Place, but It Will Not Happen Fast.” Journal of Chinese 
Economic and Business Studies 18(4): 321–25.
Komaromi, Andras, Diego A. Cerdeiro, and Yang Liu. 2022. 
“Supply Chains and Port Congestion around the World.” 
Unpublished, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Kose, Ayhan M., Naotaka Sugawara, and Marco E. Terrones. 
2020. “Global Recessions.” World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper 9172, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Krugman, Paul. 1980. “Scale Economies, Product Differentia-
tion, and the Pattern of Trade.” American Economic Review 
70(5): 950–59.
Lafrogne-Joussier, Raphael, Julien Martin, and Isabelle Mejean. 
2021. “Supply Shocks in Supply Chains: Evidence from the 
Early Lockdown in China.” CEPR Discussion Paper 16813, 
Center for Economic and Policy Research, Washington, DC.
Le Maire, Bruno. 2020. “Strengthening the EU’s Resilience and 
Strategic Autonomy.” European Files, October. https://​www​
.europeanfiles​.eu/​industry/​strengthening​-the​-eus​-resilience​
-and​-strategic​-autonomy.
Leibovici, Fernando, and Jason Dunn. 2021. “Supply Chain 
Bottlenecks and Inflation: The Role of Semiconductors.” Eco-
nomic Synopses 28, Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis.
McBride, James, and Andrew Chatzky. 2019. “Is Made in China 
2025 a Threat to Global Trade?” Backgrounder, Council on 
Foreign Relations, New York.
McCallum, John. 1995. “National Borders Matter: Canada-US 
Regional Trade Patterns.” American Economic Review 
85 (3): 615–23.
CHAPTER 4 
GLOBAL TRADE AND VALUE CHAINS DURING THE PANDEMIC
107
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
McKinsey Global Institute. 2020. “Could Climate Become the 
Weak Link in Your Supply Chain?” https://​www​.mckinsey​
.com/​business​-functions/​sustainability/​our​-insights/​could​
-climate​-become​-the​-weak​-link​-in​-your​-supply​-chain​#:​~:​text​
=​As​%20climate​%20change​%20makes​%20extreme​,likelihood​
%20of​%20supply​-chain​%20disruptions.
Miroudot, Sebastien. 2020. “Reshaping the Policy Debate on 
the Implications of COVID-19 for Global Supply Chains.” 
Journal of International Business Policy 3: 430–42.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2021. “Global Value Chains: Efficiency and Risks in 
the Context of COVID-19.” Tackling Coronavirus (COVID-19): 
Contributing to a Global Effort, Paris, February 11.
Pei, Jiansuo, Gaaitzen de Vries, and Meng Zhang, 2021. “Inter-
national Trade and Covid-19: City-Level Evidence from Chi-
na’s Lockdown Policy.” Journal of Regional Science. Published 
ahead of print, August 22, 2021. doi:​10​.1111/​jors​.12559.
Ponte, Stefano, Gary Gereffi, and Gale Raj-Reichert. 2019. 
“Introduction to the Handbook on Global Value Chains.” In 
Handbook on Global Value Chains, edited by Stefano Ponte, 
Gary Gereffi, and Gale Raj-Reichert. Northampton, MA: Elgar.
Press Information Bureau. 2017. Government of India Public 
Procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order 2017, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry. https://​pib​.gov​.in/​
newsite/​PrintRelease​.aspx​?relid​=​165658.
Santos Silva, J. M. C., and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of 
Gravity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 641–58.
Sturgeon, Timothy, Jack Daly, Stacey Frederick, Penny Bamber, 
and Gary Gereffi. 2016. The Philippines in the Automotive 
Global Value Chain. Durham, NC: Center on Globalization, 
Governance and Competitiveness, Duke University. https://​
hdl​.handle​.net/​10161/​12484.
Sturgeon, Timothy, and Olga Memedovic. 2010. “Mapping 
Global Value Chains: Intermediate Goods Trade and 
Structural Change in the World Economy.” Working Paper 
05/2010, United Nations Industrial Development Organiza-
tion, Vienna.
van Stekelenborg, Rob. 2020. “Resilient Just-in-Time: An Oxy-
moron?” Just-in-Time News, February 10. https://​dumontis​
.com/​2020/​02/​resilient​-just​-in​-time/​.
White House. 2021. “Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revi-
talizing American Manufacturing, and Fostering Broad-Based 
Growth.” 100-Day Review under Executive Order 14017, 
Washington, DC.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2021. World Trade Report 
2021: Economic Resilience and Trade. Geneva.
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
109
T
he Statistical Appendix presents historical 
data as well as projections. It comprises 
seven sections: Assumptions, What’s 
New, Data and Conventions, Country 
Notes, General Features and Composition of Groups 
in the World Economic Outlook (WEO), Key Data 
Documentation, and Statistical Tables.
The first section summarizes the assumptions 
underlying the estimates and projections for 
2022–23. The second section briefly describes the 
changes to the database and statistical tables since 
the October 2021 World Economic Outlook. The 
third section offers a general description of the data 
and the conventions used for calculating coun-
try group composites. The fourth section presents 
selected key information for each country. The fifth 
section summarizes the classification of countries 
in the various groups presented in the WEO. The 
sixth section provides information on methods 
and reporting standards for the member countries’ 
national account and government finance indicators 
included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statisti-
cal tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included with the 
main WEO report; Statistical Appendix B is available 
in a separate online document at www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO.) 
Data in these tables have been compiled on the basis 
of information available through April 8, 2022. The 
figures for 2022–23 are shown with the same degree 
of precision as the historical figures solely for conve-
nience; because they are projections, the same degree 
of accuracy is not to be inferred.
Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econo-
mies are assumed to remain constant at their average 
levels measured during February 22, 2022–March 
22, 2022. For 2022 and 2023 these assumptions 
imply average US dollar–special drawing right (SDR) 
conversion rates of 1.394 and 1.409, US dollar–euro 
conversion rates1 of 1.114 and 1.130, and yen–US dol-
lar conversion rates of 114.7 and 109.5, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average 
$106.83 a barrel in 2022 and $92.63 a barrel in 2023.
National authorities’ established policies are assumed 
to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific 
policy assumptions underlying the projections for 
selected economies.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the 
three-month government bond yield for the United States 
will average 0.9 percent in 2022 and 2.4 percent in 
2023, for the euro area will average –0.7 percent in 
2022 and 0.0 percent in 2023, and for Japan will 
average 0.0 percent in 2022 and 0.1 percent in 2023. 
Further, it is assumed that the 10-year government bond 
yield for the United States will average 2.6 percent in 
2022 and 3.4 percent in 2023, for the euro area will 
average 0.4 percent in 2022 and 0.6 percent in 2023, 
and for Japan will average 0.3 percent in 2022 and 
0.4 percent in 2023.
What’s New
•	 For Ecuador, fiscal sector projections are excluded 
from publication for 2022–27 because of ongoing 
program review discussions.
•	 Ethiopia’s forecast data, which were previously omit-
ted due to an unusually high degree of uncertainty, 
are now included.
•	 Fiji’s fiscal data and forecasts are now presented on a 
fiscal year basis.
•	 For Tunisia, projections are excluded from publi-
cation for 2023–27 because of ongoing technical 
discussions pending potential program negotiations.
1 In regard to the introduction of the euro, on December 31, 
1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective 
January 1, 1999, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the 
euro and currencies of the member countries adopting the euro are 
as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO. See Box 5.4 of 
the October 1998 WEO as well for details on how the conversion 
rates were established. For the most recent table of fixed conversion 
rates, see the Statistical Appendix of the October 2020 WEO.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
110	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
•	 For Ukraine, all projections for 2022–27 except 
Real GDP are omitted due to an unusually high 
degree of uncertainty. Real GDP is projected 
through 2022.
•	 Venezuela redenominated its currency on October 1, 
2021, by replacing 1,000,000 bolívares soberanos 
(VES) with 1 bolívar digital (VED). 
•	 Beginning with the April 2022 WEO, the interest 
rate assumptions are based on the three-month and 
10-year government bond yields, which replace the 
London interbank offered rates. See the Assump-
tions section for more details. 
Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 196 economies form the 
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are 
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department 
and regional departments, with the latter regularly 
updating country projections based on consistent 
global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the 
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions, 
international organizations are also involved in statisti-
cal issues, with the objective of harmonizing meth-
odologies for the compilation of national statistics, 
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, 
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the 
production of economic statistics. The WEO database 
reflects information from both national source agencies 
and international organizations. 
Most countries’ macroeconomic data as presented 
in the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version 
of the System of National Accounts (2008 SNA). The 
IMF’s sector statistical standards—the sixth edition of 
the Balance of Payments and International Investment 
Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Financial 
Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide (MFSMCG), 
and the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 
(GFSM 2014)—have been aligned with the SNA 
2008. These standards reflect the IMF’s special interest 
in countries’ external positions, financial sector stabil-
ity, and public sector fiscal positions. The process of 
adapting country data to the new standards begins in 
earnest when the manuals are released. However, full 
concordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent 
on the provision by national statistical compilers of 
revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are 
only partly adapted to these manuals. Nonetheless, for 
many countries, conversion to the updated standards 
will have only a small impact on major balances and 
aggregates. Many other countries have partly adopted 
the latest standards and will continue implementation 
over a number of years.2 
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the 
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF 
staff estimates. While attempts are made to align 
gross and net debt data with the definitions in the 
GFSM, as a result of data limitations or specific 
country circumstances, these data can sometimes 
deviate from the formal definitions. Although every 
effort is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant 
and internationally comparable, differences in both 
sectoral and instrument coverage mean that the data 
are not universally comparable. As more information 
becomes available, changes in either data sources or 
instrument coverage can give rise to data revisions 
that can sometimes be substantial. For clarification 
on the deviations in sectoral or instrument cover-
age, please refer to the metadata for the online WEO 
database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are 
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual 
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages 
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates 
of change.3 Arithmetically weighted averages are used 
for all data for the emerging market and developing 
economies group—except data on inflation and money 
growth, for which geometric averages are used. The 
following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, inter-
est rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are 
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market 
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three 
years) as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic 
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted 
by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share 
2 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European 
System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few 
countries use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A 
similar adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. 
Please refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards each 
country adheres to.
3 Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and com-
modity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of 
change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based 
on the simple arithmetic average.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
111
of total world or group GDP.4 For the aggregation of 
world and advanced economies (and subgroups) infla-
tion, annual rates are simple percentage changes from 
the previous years; for the aggregation of emerging 
market and developing economies (and subgroups) 
inflation, annual rates are based on logarithmic 
differences. 
Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing-
power-parity terms are sums of individual country data 
after conversion to the international dollar in the years 
indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors 
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepan-
cies in intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual GDP 
data are used for the euro area and for the majority 
of individual countries, except for Cyprus, Ireland, 
Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-adjusted 
data. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 
1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver-
age market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment 
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group 
labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are 
sums of individual country data after conversion to 
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the 
years indicated for balance of payments data and at 
end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denomi-
nated in currencies other than US dollars. 
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes 
and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent 
changes for individual countries weighted by the US 
dollar value of exports or imports as a share of total 
world or group exports or imports (in the preceding 
year). 
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are 
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group 
weights is represented.
4 See Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO for a summary of the 
revised purchasing-power-parity-based weights as well as “Revised 
Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 WEO Update, 
Appendix 1.1 of the April 2008 WEO, Box A2 of the April 2004 
WEO, Box A1 of the May 2000 WEO, and Annex IV of the 
May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne 
Schulze-Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the 
World Economic Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Eco-
nomic Outlook (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 
December 1993), 106–23.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of 
a few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the 
economies with exceptional reporting periods for 
national accounts and government finance data for 
each country. 
For some countries, the figures for 2021 and earlier 
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; Table 
G lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and bal-
ance of payments indicators for each country.
Country Notes
For Afghanistan, data and projections for 2021–27 
are omitted because of an unusually high degree of 
uncertainty given that the IMF has paused its engage-
ment with the country due to a lack of clarity within 
the international community regarding the recognition 
of a government in Afghanistan.
For Argentina, the official national consumer 
price index (CPI) for Argentina starts in December 
2016. For earlier periods, CPI data for Argentina 
reflect the Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (prior 
to December 2013), the national CPI (IPCNu, 
December 2013 to October 2015), the City of 
Buenos Aires CPI (November 2015 to April 2016), 
and the Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (May 2016 
to December 2016). Given limited comparability of 
these series on account of differences in geographi-
cal coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology, 
the average CPI inflation for 2014–16 and end-of-
period inflation for 2015–16 are not reported in the 
WEO. Inflation projections reflect the upper bound 
of the program range given recent world commodity 
price developments. Also, Argentina discontinued 
the publication of labor market data starting in the 
fourth quarter of 2015, and new series became avail-
able starting in the second quarter of 2016. 
Data and forecasts for Bangladesh are presented on 
a fiscal year basis. However, country group aggregates 
that include Bangladesh use calendar year estimates of 
real GDP and purchasing-power-parity GDP.
For Costa Rica, the central government definition 
has been expanded as of January 1, 2021, to include 
51 public entities as per Law 9524. Data are adjusted 
back to 2019 for comparability.
The f﻿iiscal series for the Dominican Republic have 
the following coverage: public debt, debt service, and 
the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
112	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
consolidated public sector (which includes central gov-
ernment, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector, and 
the central bank); the remaining fiscal series are for the 
central government.
For Ecuador, fiscal sector projections are excluded 
from publication for 2022–27 because of ongoing pro-
gram review discussions. The authorities are undertak-
ing revisions of the historical fiscal data with technical 
support from the IMF.
India’s real GDP growth rates are calculated as per 
national accounts: for 1998 to 2011 with base year 
2004/05 and, thereafter, with base year 2011/12.
For Lebanon, data and projections for 2021–27 are 
omitted due to an unusually high degree of uncertainty. 
At the time of preparation of the WEO database, official 
GDP numbers were available only through 2019.
Against the backdrop of a civil war and weak capac-
ity, the reliability of Libya’s data, especially regarding 
national accounts and medium-term projections, is low.
Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward 
because of the uncertain political situation.
For Tunisia, projections are excluded from publica-
tion for 2023–27 because of ongoing technical discus-
sions pending potential program negotiations.
For Turkmenistan, real GDP data are IMF staff 
estimates compiled in line with international meth-
odologies (SNA), using official estimates and sources 
as well as United Nations and World Bank databases. 
Estimates and projections of the fiscal balance exclude 
receipts from domestic bond issuances as well as 
privatization operations, in line with GFSM 2014. The 
authorities’ official estimates on fiscal accounts, which 
are compiled using domestic statistical methodologies, 
include bond issuance and privatization proceeds as 
part of government revenues.
For Ukraine, all projections for 2022–27 except real 
GDP are omitted due to an unusually high degree 
of uncertainty. Real GDP is projected through 2022. 
Revised national accounts data are available beginning 
in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 
2010 onward.
In December 2020 the Uruguay authorities began 
reporting the national accounts data according to SNA 
2008, with the base year 2016. The new series begin 
in 2016. Data prior to 2016 reflect the IMF staff’s best 
effort to preserve previously reported data and avoid 
structural breaks.
Starting in October 2018 Uruguay’s public pen-
sion system has been receiving transfers in the con-
text of a new law that compensates persons affected 
by the creation of the mixed pension system. These 
funds are recorded as revenues, consistent with the 
IMF’s ­methodology. Therefore, data and projections 
for 2018–21 are affected by these transfers, which 
amounted to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2018, 1.1 percent 
of GDP in 2019, and 0.6 percent of GDP in 2020, 
and are projected to be 0.3 percent of GDP in 2021, 
and zero percent thereafter. See IMF Country Report 
19/64 for further details.5 The disclaimer about the 
public pension system applies only to the revenues and 
net lending/borrowing series.
The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was 
changed from consolidated public sector to nonfinan-
cial public sector with the October 2019 WEO. In 
Uruguay, nonfinancial public sector coverage includes 
central government, local government, social security 
funds, nonfinancial public corporations, and Banco de 
Seguros del Estado. Historical data were also revised 
accordingly. Under this narrower fiscal perimeter—
which excludes the central bank—assets and liabilities 
held by the nonfinancial public sector where the coun-
terpart is the central bank are not netted out in debt 
figures. In this context, capitalization bonds issued in 
the past by the government to the central bank are 
now part of the nonfinancial public sector debt. Gross 
and net debt estimates for 2008–11 are preliminary. 
Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, 
including assessing past and current economic devel-
opments as the basis for the projections, is compli-
cated by the lack of discussions with the authorities 
(the last Article IV consultation took place in 2004), 
incomplete understanding of the reported data, and 
difficulties in interpreting certain reported economic 
indicators given economic developments. The fiscal 
accounts include the budgetary central government; 
social security; FOGADE (insurance deposit institu-
tion); and a sample of public enterprises, including 
Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA); and data 
for 2018–21 are IMF staff estimates. The effects of 
hyperinflation and the paucity of reported data mean 
that the IMF staff’s projected macroeconomic indi-
cators need to be interpreted with caution. Public 
external debt in relation to GDP is projected using the 
IMF staff’s estimate of the average exchange rate for 
the year. Wide uncertainty surrounds these projections. 
Venezuela’s consumer prices are excluded from all 
WEO group composites. 
5 Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Country 
Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 
February 2019).
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
113
In 2019 Zimbabwe authorities introduced the Real 
Time Gross Settlement dollar, later renamed the Zim-
babwe dollar, and are in the process of redenominating 
their national accounts statistics. Current data are sub-
ject to revision. The Zimbabwe dollar previously ceased 
circulating in 2009, and during 2009–19, Zimbabwe 
operated under a multicurrency regime with the US 
dollar as the unit of account.
Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the 
world into two major groups: advanced economies 
and emerging market and developing economies.6 This 
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic 
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objec-
tive is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably 
meaningful method of organizing data. Table A pro-
vides an overview of the country classification, showing 
the number of countries in each group by region and 
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size 
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports 
of goods and services, and population). 
Some countries remain outside the country classifica-
tion and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba 
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are 
examples of countries that are not IMF members, and 
the IMF therefore does not monitor their economies.
General Features and Composition of Groups in 
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
Table B lists the 40 advanced economies. The seven 
largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange 
rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, France, 
Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute 
the subgroup of major advanced economies, often 
referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of 
the euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. 
Composite data shown in the tables for the euro area 
cover the current members for all years, even though 
the membership has increased over time.
6 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always 
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by interna-
tional law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are 
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate 
and independent basis.
Table C lists the member countries of the European 
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced 
economies in the WEO.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing 
economies (156) includes all those that are not classi-
fied as advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and 
developing economies are emerging and developing 
Asia; emerging and developing Europe (sometimes 
also referred to as “central and eastern Europe”); Latin 
America and the Caribbean; Middle East and Central 
Asia (which comprises the regional subgroups Caucasus 
and Central Asia; and Middle East, North Africa, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan); and sub-Saharan Africa.
Emerging market and developing economies are also 
classified according to analytical criteria that reflect 
the composition of export earnings and a distinc-
tion between net creditor and net debtor economies. 
Tables D and E show the detailed composition of 
emerging market and developing economies in the 
regional and analytical groups. 
The analytical criterion source of export earnings 
distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard 
International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and 
nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products 
(SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized 
into one of these groups if their main source of export 
earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on aver-
age between 2016 and 2020.
The financial and income criteria focus on net credi-
tor economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted 
poor countries (HIPCs), low-income developing countries 
(LIDCs), and emerging market and middle-income 
economies (EMMIEs). Economies are categorized as net 
debtors when their latest net international investment 
position, where available, was less than zero or their 
current account balance accumulations from 1972 
(or earliest available data) to 2020 were negative. Net 
debtor economies are further differentiated on the basis 
of experience with debt servicing.7 
The HIPC group comprises the countries that 
are or have been considered by the IMF and the 
7 During 2016–20, 35 economies incurred external payments 
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling 
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or 
rescheduling during 2016–20.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
114	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
World Bank for participation in their debt initia-
tive known as the HIPC Initiative, which aims to 
reduce the external debt burdens of all the eligible 
HIPCs to a “sustainable” level in a reasonably short 
period of time.8 Many of these countries have already 
benefited from debt relief and have graduated from 
the initiative.
8 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and 
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The 
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita 
income levels below a certain threshold (set at 
$2,700 in 2016 as measured by the World Bank’s 
Atlas method), structural features consistent with 
limited development and structural transforma-
tion, and external financial linkages insufficiently 
close for them to be widely seen as emerging market 
economies.
The EMMIEs group comprises emerging market 
and developing economies that are not classified as 
LIDCs.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
115
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods  
and Services, and Population, 20211
(Percent of total for group or world)
GDP
Exports of Goods  
and Services
Population
Number of 
Economies
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced Economies
  40
100.0
42.1
100.0
61.4
100.0
14.0
United States
37.4
15.7
14.9
9.1
30.8
4.3
Euro Area
  19
28.5
12.0
42.4
26.0
31.6
4.4
Germany
7.9
3.3
11.8
7.2
7.7
1.1
France
5.5
2.3
5.4
3.3
6.1
0.9
Italy
4.4
1.9
4.0
2.5
5.5
0.8
Spain
3.2
1.4
2.9
1.8
4.4
0.6
Japan
9.1
3.8
5.4
3.3
11.6
1.6
United Kingdom
5.5
2.3
5.1
3.1
6.3
0.9
Canada
3.3
1.4
3.6
2.2
3.5
0.5
Other Advanced Economies
  17
16.2
6.8
28.8
17.7
16.1
2.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
    7
73.2
30.8
50.1
30.8
71.6
10.0
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
156
100.0
57.9
100.0
38.6
100.0
86.0
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
  30
56.0
32.4
52.3
20.2
55.9
48.1
China
32.1
18.6
33.2
12.8
21.4
18.4
India
12.1
7.0
6.3
2.4
21.0
18.1
ASEAN-5
    5
9.5
5.5
11.5
4.4
8.8
7.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
  16
13.4
7.8
16.6
6.4
5.7
4.9
Russia
5.3
3.1
5.1
2.0
2.2
1.9
Latin America and the Caribbean
  33
12.6
7.3
12.8
4.9
9.7
8.3
Brazil
4.1
2.4
3.0
1.1
3.2
2.8
Mexico
3.1
1.8
4.9
1.9
1.9
1.7
Middle East and Central Asia
  32
12.6
7.3
14.2
5.5
12.4
10.7
Saudi Arabia
2.1
1.2
2.7
1.0
0.5
0.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
  45
5.4
3.1
4.1
1.6
16.2
14.0
Nigeria
1.4
0.8
0.5
0.2
3.2
2.7
South Africa
1.0
0.6
1.2
0.5
0.9
0.8
Analytical Groups2
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
  26
10.0
5.8
13.7
5.3
9.6
8.2
Nonfuel
128
89.9
52.1
86.2
33.3
90.3
77.7
Of Which, Primary Products 
  37
5.6
3.3
5.5
2.1
9.4
8.0
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies 
121
49.7
28.8
42.7
16.5
67.9
58.4
Of Which, Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2016–20
  35
4.4
2.6
2.9
1.1
10.5
9.0
Other Groups
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
  96
91.9
53.2
93.1
35.9
76.8
66.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
  59
8.1
4.7
6.9
2.7
23.2
19.9
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
  39
2.8
1.6
2.0
0.8
11.8
10.2
1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those 
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Syria and West Bank and Gaza are omitted from the source of export earnings, and Syria is omitted from the net external position group composites 
because of insufficient data. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
116	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Greece
The Netherlands
Belgium
Ireland
Portugal
Cyprus
Italy
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Finland
Lithuania
Spain 
France
Luxembourg
Germany 
Malta 
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
United States
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Andorra
Israel
San Marino
Australia
Korea
Singapore
Czech Republic
Macao SAR2
Sweden
Denmark
New Zealand
Switzerland
Hong Kong SAR1
Norway
Taiwan Province of China
Iceland
Puerto Rico
1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a 
Special Administrative Region of China.
Table C. European Union
Austria
France
Malta
Belgium
Germany
The Netherlands
Bulgaria
Greece
Poland
Croatia
Hungary
Portugal
Cyprus
Ireland
Romania
Czech Republic
Italy
Slovak Republic
Denmark
Latvia
Slovenia
Estonia
Lithuania
Spain 
Finland
Luxembourg
Sweden
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
117
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings1
Fuel
Nonfuel Primary Products
Emerging and Developing Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Kiribati
Timor-Leste
Marshall Islands
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
Latin America and the Caribbean
Ecuador
Argentina
Trinidad and Tobago
Bolivia
Venezuela
Chile
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Middle East and Central Asia
Algeria
Afghanistan
Azerbaijan
Mauritania
Bahrain
Somalia
Iran
Sudan
Iraq
Tajikistan
Kazakhstan
Uzbekistan
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Chad
Botswana
Republic of Congo
Burkina Faso
Equatorial Guinea
Burundi
Gabon
Central African Republic
Nigeria
Democratic Republic of the Congo
South Sudan
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe
1Emerging and Developing Europe is omitted because no economies in the group have fuel or nonfuel primary products as the main source of export 
earnings.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
118	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
*
Bhutan
*
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
•
Cambodia
*
*
China
•
•
Fiji
*
•
India
*
•
Indonesia
*
•
Kiribati
•
*
Lao P.D.R.
*
*
Malaysia
*
•
Maldives
*
•
Marshall Islands
*
•
Micronesia
•
•
Mongolia
*
•
Myanmar
*
*
Nauru
*
•
Nepal
•
*
Palau
*
•
Papua New Guinea
*
*
Philippines
*
•
Samoa
*
•
Solomon Islands
*
*
Sri Lanka
*
•
Thailand
•
•
Timor-Leste
•
*
Tonga
*
•
Tuvalu
•
•
Vanuatu
•
•
Vietnam
*
*
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
•
Belarus
*
•
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
•
Bulgaria
*
•
Croatia
*
•
Hungary
*
•
Kosovo
*
•
Moldova
*
*
Montenegro
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
North Macedonia
*
•
Poland
*
•
Romania
*
•
Russia
•
•
Serbia
*
•
Turkey
*
•
Ukraine
*
•
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
•
Argentina
•
•
Aruba
*
•
The Bahamas
*
•
Barbados
*
•
Belize
*
•
Bolivia
*
•
•
Brazil
*
•
Chile
*
•
Colombia
*
•
Costa Rica
*
•
Dominica
•
•
Dominican Republic
*
•
Ecuador
*
•
El Salvador
*
•
Grenada
*
•
Guatemala
*
•
Guyana
*
•
•
Haiti
*
•
*
Honduras
*
•
*
Jamaica
*
•
Mexico
*
•
Nicaragua
*
•
*
Panama
*
•
Paraguay
*
•
Peru
*
•
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
•
St. Lucia
*
•
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
*
•
Suriname
*
•
Trinidad and Tobago
•
•
Uruguay
*
•
Venezuela
•
•
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries,  
and Per Capita Income Classification 
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
119
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
•
•
*
Algeria
•
•
Armenia
*
•
Azerbaijan
•
•
Bahrain
•
•
Djibouti
*
*
Egypt
*
•
Georgia
*
•
Iran
•
•
Iraq
•
•
Jordan
*
•
Kazakhstan
*
•
Kuwait
•
•
Kyrgyz Republic
*
*
Lebanon
*
•
Libya
•
•
Mauritania
*
•
*
Morocco
*
•
Oman
*
•
Pakistan
*
•
Qatar
•
•
Saudi Arabia
•
•
Somalia
*
*
*
Sudan
*
*
*
Syria4
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
*
*
Tunisia
*
•
Turkmenistan
•
•
United Arab Emirates
•
•
Uzbekistan
•
*
West Bank and Gaza
*
•
Yemen
*
*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
*
•
Benin
*
•
*
Botswana
•
•
Burkina Faso
*
•
*
Burundi
*
•
*
Cabo Verde
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Cameroon
*
•
*
Central African Republic
*
•
*
Chad
*
•
*
Comoros
*
•
*
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
*
•
*
Republic of Congo
*
•
*
Côte d’Ivoire
*
•
*
Equatorial Guinea
•
•
Eritrea
•
*
*
Eswatini
•
•
Ethiopia
*
•
*
Gabon
•
•
The Gambia
*
•
*
Ghana
*
•
*
Guinea
*
•
*
Guinea-Bissau
*
•
*
Kenya
*
*
Lesotho
*
*
Liberia
*
•
*
Madagascar
*
•
*
Malawi
*
•
*
Mali
*
•
*
Mauritius
•
•
Mozambique
*
•
*
Namibia
*
•
Niger
*
•
*
Nigeria
*
*
Rwanda
*
•
*
São Tomé and Príncipe
*
•
*
Senegal
*
•
*
Seychelles
*
•
Sierra Leone
*
•
*
South Africa
•
•
South Sudan
* 
*
Tanzania
*
•
*
Togo
*
•
*
Uganda
*
•
*
Zambia
*
•
*
Zimbabwe
*
*
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries,  
and Per Capita Income Classification (continued)
1Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3Dot (star) indicates that the country is classified as an Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economy (Low-Income Developing Country).
4Syria is omitted from the net external position group and per capita income classification group composites for lack of a fully developed database.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
120	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
Government Finance
The Bahamas
Jul/Jun
Bangladesh
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Barbados
Apr/Mar
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Apr/Mar
Dominica
Jul/Jun
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Apr/Mar
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Fiji
Aug/Jul
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
Apr/Mar
India
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Apr/Mar
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Jul/Jun
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
St. Lucia
Apr/Mar
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Apr/Mar
Thailand
Oct/Sep
Tonga
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Trinidad and Tobago
Oct/Sep
1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
121
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Albania
Albanian lek
IMF staff
2020
1996
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2020
Algeria
Algerian dinar
NSO
2020
2001
SNA 1993
From 2005
NSO
2020
Andorra
Euro
NSO
2021
2010
. . .
NSO
2021
Angola
Angolan kwanza
NSO and MEP
2020
2002
ESA 1995
NSO
2020
Antigua and 
Barbuda
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
CB
2019
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Argentina
Argentine peso
NSO
2020
2004
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Armenia
Armenian dram
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Aruba
Aruban florin
NSO
2020
2013
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2020
Australia
Australian dollar
NSO 
2021
2020
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Austria
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan manat
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2021
The Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
NSO
2020
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Bahrain
Bahrain dinar
NSO and IMF 
staff
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Bangladesh
Bangladesh taka
NSO
2019/20
2005/06
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Barbados
Barbados dollar
NSO and CB
2019
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
NSO
2020
2018
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2021
Belgium
Euro
CB
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
CB
2021
Belize
Belize dollar
NSO
2020
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Benin
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Bhutan
Bhutanese 
ngultrum
NSO
2020/21
1999/20006
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
NSO
2020
1990
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bosnian convertible 
marka
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2020
Botswana
Botswana pula
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Brazil
Brazilian real
NSO
2020
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Brunei Darussalam
Brunei dollar
MoF
2020
2010
SNA 2008
MoF
2020
Bulgaria
Bulgarian lev
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2021
Burkina Faso
CFA franc
NSO and MEP
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Burundi
Burundi franc
NSO and IMF staff
2019
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verdean 
escudo
NSO
2020
2007
SNA 2008
From 2011
NSO
2020
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
NSO
2020
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Cameroon
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
From 2016
NSO
2020
Canada
Canadian dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
MoF and NSO
2021
Central African 
Republic
CFA franc
NSO
2017
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Chad
CFA franc
CB
2017
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Chile
Chilean peso
CB
2021
20186
SNA 2008
From 2003
NSO
2021
China
Chinese yuan
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Colombia
Colombian peso
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2021
Comoros
Comorian franc
MoF
2019
2007
SNA 1993
From 2007
NSO
2021
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
Congolese franc
NSO
2020
2005
SNA 1993
CB
2020
Republic of Congo
CFA franc
NSO
2019
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colón
CB
2021
2017
SNA 2008
CB
2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
122	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Afghanistan
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
NSO, MoF, and CB
2020
BPM 6
Albania
IMF staff
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
. . .
CB
2020
BPM 6
Algeria
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Andorra
NSO and MoF
2020
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Angola
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
. . .
CB
2020
BPM 6
Antigua and 
Barbuda
MoF
2020
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Argentina
MEP
2021
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Armenia
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Aruba
MoF
2020
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Australia
MoF
2020
2014
CG,SG,LG,TG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Austria
NSO
2020
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Azerbaijan
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
The Bahamas
MoF
2020/21
2014
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Bahrain
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bangladesh
MoF
2018/19
. . .
CG
C
CB
2019/20
BPM 6
Barbados
MoF
2019/20
1986
BCG
C
CB
2019
BPM 6
Belarus
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Belgium
CB
2020
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Belize
MoF
2020
1986
CG,MPC
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Benin
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Bhutan
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
Bolivia
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS,NMPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
MoF
2020
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Botswana
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Brazil
MoF
2020
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Brunei Darussalam
MoF
2020
1986
CG,BCG
C
NSO and MEP
2020
BPM 6
Bulgaria
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Burkina Faso
MoF
2020
2001
CG
CB
CB
2020
BPM 6
Burundi
MoF
2020
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Cabo Verde
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Cambodia
MoF
2019
2001
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 5
Cameroon
MoF
2020
2001
CG,NFPC,NMPC
Mixed
MoF
2020
BPM 5
Canada
MoF and NSO
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Central African 
Republic
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Chad
MoF
2020
1986
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2013
BPM 5
Chile
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
China
MoF
2020
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
GAD
2021
BPM 6
Colombia
MoF
2020
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
. . .
CB and NSO
2021
BPM 6
Comoros
MoF
2020
1986
CG
Mixed
CB and IMF staff
2019
BPM 5
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Republic of Congo
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
CB
2018
BPM 6
Costa Rica
MoF and CB
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
123
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Côte d'Ivoire
CFA franc
NSO
2019
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Croatia
Croatian kuna
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
NSO
2020
Cyprus
Euro
NSO
2021
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Denmark
Danish krone
NSO
2021
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Djibouti
Djibouti franc
NSO
2018
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Dominica
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2018
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
From 2007
CB
2020
Ecuador
US dollar
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
NSO and CB
2021
Egypt
Egyptian pound
MEP
2020/21
2016/17
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
El Salvador
US dollar
CB
2020
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Equatorial Guinea
CFA franc
MEP and CB
2020
2006
SNA 1993
MEP
2021
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
IMF staff
2018
2011
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Estonia
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2021
Eswatini
Swazi lilangeni
NSO
2020
2011
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
NSO
2020/21
2020/21
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Fiji
Fijian dollar
NSO
2020
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Finland
Euro
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2020
France
Euro
NSO
2021
2014
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Gabon
CFA franc
MoF
2020
2001
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
The Gambia
Gambian dalasi
NSO
2020
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Georgia
Georgian lari
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1996
NSO
2021
Germany
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1991
NSO
2021
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
NSO
2019
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2019
Greece
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Grenada
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Guatemala
Guatemalan 
quetzal
CB
2021
2013
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2021
Guinea
Guinean franc
NSO
2019
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Guinea-Bissau
CFA franc
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
NSO
2021
20126
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Haiti
Haitian gourde
NSO
2020/21
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Honduras
Honduran lempira
CB
2021
2000
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong dollar
NSO
2021
2019
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Hungary
Hungarian forint
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
IEO
2021
Iceland
Icelandic króna
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1990
NSO
2020
India
Indian rupee
NSO
2020/21
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2019/20
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Iran
Iranian rial
CB
2020/21
2016/17
SNA 2008
NSO and CB
2021/22
Iraq
Iraqi dinar 
NSO
2020
2007
. . .
NSO
2021
Ireland
Euro
NSO
2021
2017
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Israel
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2021
Italy
Euro
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2020
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
NSO
2020
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
124	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Côte d'Ivoire
MoF
2020
1986
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Croatia
MoF
2020
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Cyprus
NSO
2020
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Czech Republic
MoF
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Denmark
NSO
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Djibouti
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 5
Dominica
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Dominican Republic
MoF
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Ecuador
CB and MoF
2020
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Egypt
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
El Salvador
MoF and CB
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Equatorial Guinea
MoF and MEP
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Eritrea
MoF
2018
2001
CG
C
CB
2018
BPM 5
Estonia
MoF
2021
1986/2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Eswatini
MoF
2019/20
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Ethiopia
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
Fiji
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Finland
MoF
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
France
NSO
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Gabon
IMF staff
2020
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 5
The Gambia
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2019
BPM 6
Georgia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Germany
NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ghana
MoF
2018
2001
CG
C
CB
2019
BPM 5
Greece
NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Grenada
MoF
2020
2014
CG
CB
CB
2020
BPM 6
Guatemala
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Guinea
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB and MEP
2020
BPM 6
Guinea-Bissau
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Guyana
MoF
2021
1986
CG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Haiti
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
Honduras
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS,other
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Hong Kong SAR
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Hungary
MEP and NSO
2020
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Iceland
NSO
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
India
MoF and IMF staff
2019/20
1986
CG,SG
C
CB
2019/20
BPM 6
Indonesia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Iran
MoF
2018/19
2001
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
Iraq
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Ireland
MoF and NSO
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Israel
MoF and NSO
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
. . .
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Italy
NSO
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Jamaica
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
125
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Japan
Japanese yen
GAD
2020
2015
SNA 2008
From 1980
GAD
2020
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
NSO
2020
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
CB
2021
Kenya
Kenyan shilling
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Kiribati
Australian dollar
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 2008
IMF Staff
2020
Korea
South Korean won
CB
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Kosovo
Euro
NSO
2020
2016
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
MEP and NSO
2020
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2021
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz som
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 2010
NSO
2021
Lao P.D.R.
Lao kip
NSO
2020
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Latvia
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Lebanon
Lebanese pound
NSO
2019
2010
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2021
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
NSO
2019/20
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Liberia
US dollar
IMF staff
2016
2018
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Libya
Libyan dinar
CB
2020
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Lithuania
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2005
NSO
2021
Luxembourg
Euro
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2020
Macao SAR
Macanese pataca
NSO
2021
2019
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2021
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
NSO
2018
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
NSO
2020
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MoF and NSO
2020
2014
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Mali
CFA franc
NSO
2019
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Malta
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2021
Marshall Islands
US dollar
NSO
2019/20
2003/04
SNA 2008
NSO
2019/20
Mauritania
New Mauritanian 
ouguiya
NSO
2020
2014
SNA 2008
From 2014
NSO
2020
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 2008
From 1999
NSO
2020
Mexico
Mexican peso
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Micronesia
US dollar
NSO
2017/18
2003/04
SNA 1993
NSO
2019/20
Moldova
Moldovan leu
NSO
2021
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Mongolia
Mongolian tögrög  
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Montenegro
Euro
NSO
2020
2006
ESA 2010
NSO
2020
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
NSO
2020
2007
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2020
Mozambique
Mozambican metical
NSO
2020
2014
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Myanmar
Myanmar kyat
MEP
2019/20
2015/16
. . .
NSO
2020/21
Namibia
Namibian dollar
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Nauru
Australian dollar
IMF staff
2018/19
2006/07
SNA 2008
NSO and IMF 
Staff
2019/20
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NSO
2019/20
2000/01
SNA 1993
CB
2020/21
The Netherlands
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NSO
2021
20096
SNA 2008
From 1987
NSO and IMF 
Staff
2021
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan 
córdoba
CB
2020
2006
SNA 1993
From 1994
CB
2020
Niger
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
North Macedonia
Macedonian denar
NSO
2021
2005
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
Norway
Norwegian krone
NSO
2021
2019
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
126	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Japan
GAD
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
MoF
2020
BPM 6
Jordan
MoF
2020
2001
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Kazakhstan
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kenya
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Kiribati
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
NSO and IMF staff
2020
BPM 6
Korea
MoF
2019
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kosovo
MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kuwait
MoF
2020
2014
CG,SS
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Kyrgyz Republic
MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Lao P.D.R.
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Latvia
MoF
2020
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Lebanon
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2020
BPM 5
Lesotho
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
Liberia
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 5
Libya
CB
2021
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Lithuania
MoF
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Luxembourg
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Macao SAR
MoF
2020
2014
CG,SS
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Madagascar
MoF
2020
1986
CG
CB
CB
2020
BPM 6
Malawi
MoF
2021
2014
CG
C
NSO and GAD
2020
BPM 6
Malaysia
MoF
2020
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Maldives
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Mali
MoF
2019
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2019
BPM 6
Malta
NSO
2020
2001
CG,SS
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Marshall Islands
MoF
2019/20
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2019/20
BPM 6
Mauritania
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Mauritius
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Mexico
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Micronesia
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,SG
. . .
NSO
2017/18
BPM 6
Moldova
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Mongolia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Montenegro
MoF
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Morocco
MEP
2020
2001
CG
A
GAD
2020
BPM 6
Mozambique
MoF
2020
2001
CG,SG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Myanmar
MoF
2019/20
2014
CG,NFPC
C
IMF staff
2019/20
BPM 6
Namibia
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Nauru
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2019/20
BPM 6
Nepal
MoF
2019/20
2001
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
The Netherlands
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
New Zealand
NSO
2020
2014
CG, LG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Nicaragua
MoF
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
IMF staff
2020
BPM 6
Niger
MoF
2020
1986
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Nigeria
MoF
2020
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
North Macedonia
MoF
2021
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Norway
NSO and MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
127
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Oman
Omani rial
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Pakistan
Pakistan rupee
NSO
2020/21
2015/166
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Palau
US dollar
MoF
2019/20
2018/19
SNA 1993
MoF
2019/20
Panama
US dollar
NSO
2020
2007
SNA 1993
From 2007
NSO
2021
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea 
kina
NSO and MoF
2020
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Paraguay
Paraguayan 
guaraní
CB
2020
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Peru
Peruvian sol
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Philippines
Philippine peso
NSO
2021
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Poland
Polish zloty
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2015
NSO
2021
Portugal
Euro
NSO
2021
2016
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Puerto Rico
US dollar
NSO
2019/20
1954
. . .
NSO
2020
Qatar
Qatari riyal
NSO and MEP
2020
2018
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2020
Romania
Romanian leu
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2020
Russia
Russian ruble
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2021
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
NSO
2019
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2019
Samoa
Samoan tala
NSO
2020/21
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
San Marino
Euro
NSO
2020
2007
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
São Tomé and 
Príncipe dobra
NSO
2020
2008
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Senegal
CFA franc
NSO
2019
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Serbia
Serbian dinar
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2020
Seychelles
Seychelles rupee
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean 
leone
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2021
Singapore
Singapore dollar
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2021
Slovak Republic
Euro
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1997
NSO
2021
Slovenia
Euro
NSO
2021
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2021
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands 
dollar
CB
2017
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Somalia
US dollar
NSO
2020
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
South Africa
South African rand
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
South Sudan
South Sudanese 
pound
NSO and IMF 
staff
2018
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2019
Spain
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
St. Kitts and Nevis
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
St. Lucia
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Sudan
Sudanese pound
NSO
2019
1982
. . .
NSO
2019
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
128	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Oman
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 5
Pakistan
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
Palau
MoF
2019/20
2001
CG
. . .
MoF
2019/20
BPM 6
Panama
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Papua New Guinea
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 5
Paraguay
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Peru
CB and MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Philippines
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Poland
MoF and NSO
2020
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Portugal
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Puerto Rico
MEP
2019/20
2001
. . .
A
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
MoF
2020
1986
CG,other
C
CB and IMF staff
2020
BPM 5
Romania
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Russia
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Rwanda
MoF
2019
2014
CG
Mixed
CB
2019
BPM 6
Samoa
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
A
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
San Marino
MoF
2020
. . .
CG
. . .
Other
2019
BPM 6
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
MoF and Customs
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Saudi Arabia
MoF
2021
2014
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Senegal
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2020
BPM 6
Serbia
MoF
2020
1986/2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Seychelles
MoF
2020
1986
CG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Sierra Leone
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Singapore
MoF and NSO
2021/22
2014
CG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Slovak Republic
NSO
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Slovenia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Solomon Islands
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Somalia
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 5
South Africa
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,SS,other
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
South Sudan
MoF and MEP
2019
. . .
CG
C
MoF, NSO, MEP, and 
IMF Staff
2018
BPM 6
Spain
MoF and NSO
2020
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Sri Lanka
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
St. Kitts and Nevis
MoF
2021
1986
CG, SG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
St. Lucia
MoF
2019/20
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Sudan
MoF
2019
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2019
BPM 6
Suriname
MoF
2021
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
129
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Sweden
Swedish krona
NSO
2021
2020
ESA 2010
From 1993
NSO
2021
Switzerland
Swiss franc
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Syria
Syrian pound
NSO
2010
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2011
Taiwan Province of 
China
New Taiwan dollar
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Tajikistan
Tajik somoni
NSO
2020
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Tanzania
Tanzanian shilling
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Thailand
Thai baht
MEP
2020
2002
SNA 1993
From 1993
MEP
2021
Timor-Leste
US dollar
NSO
2019
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Togo
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Tonga
Tongan pa’anga
CB
2019/20
2016/17
SNA 1993
CB
2019/20
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and 
Tobago dollar
NSO
2020
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 1993
From 2009
NSO
2021
Turkey
Turkish lira
NSO
2021
2009
ESA 2010
From 2009
NSO
2021
Turkmenistan
New Turkmen 
manat
IMF staff
2020
2006
. . .
From 2007
NSO
2020
Tuvalu
Australian dollar
PFTAC advisors
2019
2016
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2021
United Arab 
Emirates
U.A.E. dirham
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
United Kingdom
British pound
NSO
2020
2019
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
United States
US dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
CB
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Uzbekistan
Uzbek som
NSO
2021
2020
SNA 1993
NSO and IMF 
staff
2021
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
NSO
2019
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolívar 
digital
CB
2018
1997
SNA 1993
CB
2020
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
West Bank and Gaza
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Yemen
Yemeni rial
IMF staff
2020
1990
SNA 1993
NSO, CB, and 
IMF staff
2020
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe dollar
NSO
2019
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2019
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
130	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Sweden
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Switzerland
MoF
2019
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Syria
MoF
2009
1986
CG
C
CB
2009
BPM 5
Taiwan Province of 
China
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Tajikistan
MoF
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Tanzania
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Thailand
MoF
2019/20
2001
CG,BCG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Timor-Leste
MoF
2019
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Togo
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Tonga
MoF
2019/20
2014
CG
C
CB and NSO
2019/20
BPM 6
Trinidad and Tobago
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Tunisia
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Turkey
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS,other
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Turkmenistan
MoF
2020
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Tuvalu
MoF
2019
. . .
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2019
BPM 6
Uganda
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Ukraine
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
United Arab 
Emirates
MoF
2020
2001
CG,BCG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 5
United Kingdom
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
United States
MEP
2020
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Uruguay
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG,SS,NFPC, 
NMPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Uzbekistan
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB and MEP
2021
BPM 6
Vanuatu
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Venezuela
MoF
2017
2001
BCG,NFPC,SS,other
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Vietnam
MoF
2020
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020
BPM 5
West Bank and Gaza
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Yemen
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
C
IMF staff
2020
BPM 5
Zambia
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Zimbabwe
MoF
2019
1986
CG
C
CB and MoF
2020
BPM 6
Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, 
Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to 
calculate the index. 
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers 
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public 
corporation; NMPC = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting. 
6Base year deflator is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
131
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in 
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally 
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for 
differences between the national authorities and the 
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions 
and projected fiscal outturns. When no official bud-
get has been announced, projections incorporate 
policy measures judged likely to be implemented. 
The medium-term fiscal projections are similarly 
based on a judgment about policies’ most likely 
path. For cases in which the IMF staff has insuf-
ficient information to assess the authorities’ budget 
intentions and prospects for policy implementation, 
an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed 
unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions 
used in regard to some of the advanced economies 
follow. (See also Tables B4 to B6 in the online sec-
tion of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal 
net lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the 
available information regarding budget outturn and 
budget plans for the federal government, on fiscal 
measures announced by the authorities, and on 
IMF staff macroeconomic projections. 
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on data 
from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the 
FY2022/23 budget published by the Common-
wealth Government in March 2022, the FY2021/22 
budget published by each state/territory govern-
ment, the FY2021/22 budget published by some 
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a 
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed 
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the 
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output 
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, 
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition 
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include 
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in 
interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluc-
tuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of struc-
tural balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of potential 
GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of 
the October 1993 WEO.) Estimates of the output gap and of 
the structural balance are subject to significant margins of uncer-
tainty. Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus financial assets 
corresponding to debt instruments.
state governments, and the IMF staff’s estimates 
and projections.
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on the 
2022 budget, the Austria Stability Programme, the 
Austria National Reform Programme 2021, the new 
EU recovery funds, and the latest announcement 
on fiscal measures.
Belgium: Projections are based on the 2021–24 
Stability Program, the Draft Budgetary Plan for 
2022, and other available information on the 
authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the 
IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections for 2021 reflect policy 
announcements.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts 
from the Economic and Fiscal Update 2021 and 
the latest provincial budgets. The IMF staff makes 
some adjustments to these forecasts, including for 
differences in macroeconomic projections. The IMF 
staff’s forecast also incorporates the most recent data 
releases from Statistics Canada’s National Economic 
Accounts, including quarterly federal, provincial, 
and territorial budgetary outturns.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’ 
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF 
staff’s projections for GDP, copper prices, deprecia-
tion, and inflation. 
China: After a significant tightening in 2021, 
the pace of fiscal tightening is projected to slow in 
2022 based on Article IV consultation findings and 
public statements by the authorities.
Denmark: Estimates for the current year are 
aligned with the latest official budget numbers, 
adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff’s macro-
economic assumptions. Beyond the current year, the 
projections incorporate key features of the medium-
term fiscal plan as embodied in the authorities’ latest 
budget. Structural balances are net of temporary 
fluctuations in some revenues (for example, North 
Sea revenue, pension yield tax revenue) and one-offs 
(COVID-19–related one-offs are, however, included).
France: Projections for 2022 onward are based on 
the measures of the 2018–22 budget laws adjusted 
for differences in revenue projections and assump-
tions on macroeconomic and financial variables. 
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
132	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2022 
and beyond are based on the provisional 2022 bud-
get, the federal government’s medium-term budget 
plan, and data updates from the national statisti-
cal agency (Destatis) and the ministry of finance, 
adjusted for differences in the IMF staff’s macro-
economic framework and assumptions concern-
ing revenue elasticities. The estimate of gross debt 
includes portfolios of impaired assets and noncore 
business transferred to institutions that are winding 
up as well as other financial sector and EU support 
operations.
Greece: Data since 2010 reflect adjustments in 
line with the primary balance definition under the 
enhanced surveillance framework for Greece.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projec-
tions are based on the authorities’ medium-term 
fiscal projections of expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF 
staff’s projections of the macroeconomic framework 
and fiscal policy plans announced in the 2020 
budget.
India: Projections are based on available informa-
tion on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions. Subnational 
data are incorporated with a lag of up to one year; 
general government data are thus finalized well after 
central government data. IMF and Indian presenta-
tions differ, particularly regarding disinvestment and 
license-auction proceeds, net versus gross record-
ing of revenues in certain minor categories, and 
some public sector lending. Starting in FY2020/21 
expenditure also includes the off-budget compo-
nent of food subsidies consistent with the revised 
treatment of food subsidies in the budget. The IMF 
staff adjusts expenditure to take out payments for 
previous years’ food subsidies, which are included as 
expenditure in budget estimates for FY2020/21.
Indonesia: The IMF staff’s projections are based 
on moderate tax policy and administration reforms, 
some expenditure realization, and a gradual increase 
in capital spending over the medium term in line 
with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the coun-
try’s Budget 2022. 
Israel: Projections differ from the authorities’ 
medium-term budget targets, assuming more mod-
est spending cuts.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the fiscal plans included in the 
government’s 2021 budget and amendments. The 
stock of maturing postal bonds is included in the 
debt projections.
Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures 
already announced by the government, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Korea: The forecast incorporates the overall fiscal 
balance in the 2022 annual budget and supple-
mentary budget, the medium-term fiscal plan 
announced with the 2022 budget, and the IMF 
staff’s adjustments.
Mexico: The 2020 public sector borrowing 
requirements estimated by the IMF staff adjust for 
some statistical discrepancies between above-the-line 
and below-the-line numbers. Fiscal projections for 
2022 are informed by the estimates in the 2022 
budget proposal; projections for 2023 onward 
assume continued compliance with rules established 
in the Fiscal Responsibility Law.
The Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2021–27 
are based on the IMF staff’s forecast framework and 
are also informed by the authorities’ draft budget 
plan and Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
projections. 
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the 
Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2021 and 
the IMF staff’s estimates. 
Portugal: The projections for the current year are 
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted 
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast. 
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption 
of unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the 
Puerto Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plans 
(FEGPs), which were prepared in January 2022 
and are certified by the Financial Oversight and 
Management Board. The 2022 Fiscal Plan calls for 
a series of structural reforms, such as earned income 
tax credit benefits; the Natural Assistance Program; 
a lowering of barriers to entry for foreign firms; 
Box A1 (continued)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
133
and investment in education, the power sector, 
and infrastructure. The new fiscal plan also pays 
particular attention to allocating strategic invest-
ment to emergency response and frontline service 
delivery, as the island is highly vulnerable to natural 
disasters and battling an ongoing pandemic. This 
plan represents an unprecedented level of fiscal 
support—over 100 percent of Puerto Rico’s gross 
national product. The Fiscal Plan also focuses on 
the implementation of fiscal measures (centraliza-
tion of fiscal authority, improvement of agencies’ 
efficiency, Medicaid reform, pension reform, reduc-
tion of appropriations, enhanced tax compliance, 
and optimized taxes and fees) that will result in a 
smaller government deficit in the long term. The 
IMF staff’s fiscal projections rely on the information 
presented above as well as on the assumption that 
the fiscal position will deteriorate over time. Previ-
ous WEO submissions (prior to fall 2021) relied 
on the assumption of fiscal consolidation. Although 
IMF policy assumptions are similar to those in the 
FEGP scenario with full measures, the IMF staff’s 
projections of fiscal revenues, expenditures, and bal-
ance are different from the FEGPs’. This stems from 
two main differences in methodologies: first, while 
the IMF staff’s projections are on an accrual basis, 
the FEGPs’ are on a cash basis. Second, the IMF 
staff and the FEGP make very different macroeco-
nomic assumptions. 
Russia: The fiscal rule has been suspended by the 
government in response to the sanctions imposed 
after the invasion of Ukraine. The projection 
assumes an increase in discretionary spending equal 
to the amount that would otherwise have been 
saved according to the fiscal rule and a decline in 
revenues due to the projected deep recession.
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff’s baseline fiscal 
projections are primarily based on its understand-
ing of government policies as outlined in the 2022 
budget. Export oil revenues are based on WEO 
baseline oil price assumptions and the IMF staff’s 
understanding of current oil policy under the 
OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC 
oil exporters) agreement. 
Singapore: FY2020 figures are based on budget 
execution. FY2021 projections are based on revised 
figures based on budget execution through end-
2021. FY2022 projections are based on the initial 
FY2022 budget of February 18, 2022. The IMF 
staff assumes gradual withdrawal of remaining 
pandemic-related measures and the implementa-
tion of various revenue measures announced in the 
FY2022 budget for the remainder of the projec-
tion period. These include (1) the increase of the 
Good and Services Tax (GST) from 7 percent to 
8 percent on 1 January 2023, and to 9 percent on 
1 January 2024; (2) the increase of the property tax 
in 2023 for non-owner-occupied properties (from 
10–20 percent to 12–36 percent) and owner-
occupied properties with an annual value in excess 
of $30,000 (from 4–16 percent to 6–32 percent); 
and (3) the increase of the carbon tax from S$5 per 
tonne of CO2 emissions to S$25 per tonne in 2024 
and 2025 and $45 per tonne in 2026 and 2027.
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions draw on the 
2022 Budget Review. Nontax revenue excludes 
transactions in financial assets and liabilities, as they 
involve primarily revenues associated with realized 
exchange rate valuation gains from the holding of 
foreign currency deposits, sale of assets, and concep-
tually similar items.
Spain: Fiscal projections for 2021 include 
COVID-19–related support measures, the legislated 
increase in pensions, and the legislated revenue 
measures. Fiscal projections from 2022 onward 
assume no policy changes. Disbursements under the 
EU Recovery and Resilience Facility are reflected in 
the projections for 2021–24.
Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2021 are based on 
preliminary information on the fall 2020 budget 
bill. The impact of cyclical developments on the fis-
cal accounts is calculated using the 2014 Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development 
elasticity2 to take into account output and employ-
ment gaps.
2 Robert Price, Thai-Thanh Dang, and Yvan Guillemette, 
“New Tax and Expenditure Elasticity Estimates for EU Budget 
Surveillance,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper 
1174 (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2014).
Box A1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
134	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Switzerland: The authorities’ announced discre-
tionary stimulus—as reflected in the fiscal projec-
tions for 2021 and 2022—is permitted within 
the context of the debt brake rule in the event of 
“exceptional circumstances.”
Turkey: The basis for the projections in the WEO 
and Fiscal Monitor is the IMF-defined fiscal bal-
ance, which excludes some revenue and expenditure 
items that are included in the authorities’ headline 
balance. 
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based 
on the latest GDP data published by the Office of 
National Statistics on February 11, 2022, and fore-
casts by the Office for Budget Responsibility from 
October 27, 2021. Revenue projections are adjusted 
for differences between the IMF staff’s forecasts of 
macroeconomic variables (such as GDP growth 
and inflation) and the forecasts of these variables 
assumed in the authorities’ fiscal projections. Pro-
jections assume that there is some additional fiscal 
consolidation relative to the policies announced to 
date starting in FY2023/24 with the goal of com-
plying with the new fiscal rules announced at the 
time of the Spending Review on October 27, 2021, 
and to secure public debt sustainability. The IMF 
staff’s data exclude public sector banks and the 
effect of transferring assets from the Royal Mail 
Pension Plan to the public sector in April 2012. 
Real government consumption and investment are 
part of the real GDP path, which, according to the 
IMF staff, may or may not be the same as projected 
by the UK Office for Budget Responsibility. Data 
are presented on a calendar year basis.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the 
July 2021 Congressional Budget Office baseline, 
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeco-
nomic assumptions. Projections incorporate the 
effects of the proposed American Jobs Plan; the 
American Families Plan; the Bipartisan Infrastruc-
ture Plan; the legislated American Rescue Plan; the 
Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supple-
mental Appropriations Act; the Families First Coro-
navirus Response Act; the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, 
and Economic Security Act; and the Paycheck 
Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement 
Act. Finally, fiscal projections are adjusted to reflect 
the IMF staff’s forecasts for key macroeconomic 
and financial variables and different account-
ing treatment of financial sector support and of 
defined-benefit pension plans, and are converted to 
a general government basis. 
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the 
established policy framework in each country. 
In most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative 
stance over the business cycle: official interest rates 
will increase when economic indicators suggest 
that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or 
range; they will decrease when indicators suggest 
inflation will not exceed the acceptable rate or 
range, that output growth is below its potential 
rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy 
is significant. With regard to interest rates, it is 
assumed that the three-month government bond 
yield for the United States will average 0.9 percent 
in 2022 and 2.4 percent in 2023, for the euro 
area will average –0.7 percent in 2022 and 0.0 
in 2023, and for Japan will average 0.0 percent 
in 2022 and 0.1 percent in 2023. Further, it is 
assumed that the 10-year government bond yield 
for the United States will average 2.6 percent in 
2022 and 3.4 percent in 2023, for the euro area 
will average 0.4 percent in 2022 and 0.6 percent 
in 2023, and for Japan will average 0.3 percent in 
2022 and 0.4 percent in 2023.
Argentina: Monetary projections are consistent 
with the overall macroeconomic framework, the 
fiscal and financing plans, and the monetary and 
foreign exchange policies under the crawling peg 
regime.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the IMF staff’s analysis and the expected infla-
tion path.
Austria: Monetary growth projections are in 
proportion to nominal GDP growth.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with the convergence of inflation toward the 
middle of the target range by the end of 2023.
Box A1 (continued)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
135
Canada: Monetary policy assumptions reflect 
the latest decision by the Bank of Canada and 
its updated forecast. In particular, the Bank of 
Canada has started raising interest rates and 
confirmed the increasing rate path into the 
future. The monetary policy response in the 
current forecast reflects the new data and the 
war in Ukraine. While the headline inflation 
is assumed to increase significantly, the policy 
response is muted due to the forward-looking 
nature of the monetary policy, reacting mostly 
to the core inflation at the monetary policy 
horizon.
Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with attaining the inflation target.
China: The overall monetary policy stance was 
moderately tight in 2021, but it is expected to be 
moderately accommodative in 2022.
Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg 
to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro 
area member countries are in line with market 
expectations.
Greece: Broad money projections are based on 
monetary financial institution balance sheets and 
deposit flow assumptions.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The 
IMF staff assumes that the currency board system 
will remain intact.
India: Monetary policy projections are consistent 
with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation 
target over the medium term.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in 
line with inflation within the central bank’s target 
band over the medium term.
Israel: Monetary policy assumptions are based on 
gradual normalization of monetary policy.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the actual outturn and policy plans 
by the Bank of Italy and the European Central 
Bank’s monetary policy stance forecast from the 
IMF’s euro area team. 
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with market expectations.
Korea: The projections assume that the policy 
rate evolves in line with market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with attaining the inflation target.
The Netherlands: Monetary projections are based 
on the IMF staff’s estimated six-month euro Lon-
don interbank offered rate projections.
New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on 
the IMF staff’s analysis and expected inflation path. 
Portugal: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the country desk officers’ spreadsheets, given 
input projections for the real and fiscal sectors.
Russia: Monetary projections assume that the 
Central Bank of the Russian Federation is adopting 
a tight monetary policy stance. The IMF staff team 
regards this as the right policy stance given the hike 
in inflation. 
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are 
based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg 
to the US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in 
line with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with maintaining inflation within the 
3–6 percent target band.
Spain: Monetary growth projections are propor-
tionate to nominal GDP growth.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with 
Riksbank projections.
Switzerland: The projections assume no change in 
the policy rate in 2022–23.
Turkey: The baseline assumes that the mon-
etary policy stance remains in line with market 
expectations.
United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate 
path is based on market interest rate expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal 
Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the 
federal funds target rate in line with the broader 
macroeconomic outlook.
Box A1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
136	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
List of Tables1
Output
A1.	 Summary of World Output
A2.	 Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3.	 Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
A4.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Inflation
A5. Summary of Inflation
A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Financial Policies
A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt
Foreign Trade
A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
1 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
137
Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
World
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.7
3.6
2.9
–3.1
6.1
3.6
3.6
3.3
Advanced Economies
1.6
2.0
2.3
1.8
2.5
2.3
1.7
–4.5
5.2
3.3
2.4
1.6
United States
1.8
2.3
2.7
1.7
2.3
2.9
2.3
–3.4
5.7
3.7
2.3
1.7
Euro Area
0.9
1.4
2.0
1.9
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.4
5.3
2.8
2.3
1.3
Japan
0.7
0.3
1.6
0.8
1.7
0.6
–0.2
–4.5
1.6
2.4
2.3
0.4
Other Advanced Economies2
2.7
3.0
2.2
2.3
2.9
2.5
1.9
–3.9
5.5
3.4
2.5
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.4
4.7
4.3
4.4
4.7
4.6
3.7
–2.0
6.8
3.8
4.4
4.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.5
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.6
6.4
5.3
–0.8
7.3
5.4
5.6
5.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.3
1.8
1.0
1.9
4.1
3.4
2.5
–1.8
6.7
–2.9
1.3
2.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.0
1.3
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.1
–7.0
6.8
2.5
2.5
2.4
Middle East and Central Asia
5.0
3.3
2.8
4.1
2.4
2.7
2.2
–2.9
5.7
4.6
3.7
3.7
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.6
5.0
3.2
1.5
3.0
3.3
3.1
–1.7
4.5
3.8
4.0
4.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.4
3.1
1.4
1.6
0.4
0.6
0.4
–4.5
5.6
4.6
3.2
2.8
Nonfuel
6.6
5.0
4.7
4.8
5.3
5.1
4.1
–1.7
6.9
3.7
4.5
4.5
Of Which, Primary Products
4.8
2.2
2.9
1.9
2.9
1.9
1.2
–5.2
7.8
3.4
3.4
3.4
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
5.4
4.5
4.1
4.1
4.7
4.6
3.4
–3.7
6.4
4.4
4.8
4.7
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2016–20
4.7
2.4
1.2
2.6
3.3
3.5
3.4
–0.9
3.2
0.2
5.0
5.5
Other Groups
European Union
1.2
1.7
2.5
2.1
3.0
2.2
2.0
–5.9
5.4
2.9
2.5
1.7
Middle East and North Africa
4.7
3.1
2.6
4.4
1.8
2.0
1.7
–3.3
5.8
5.0
3.6
3.5
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
6.4
4.6
4.3
4.5
4.7
4.6
3.6
–2.2
7.0
3.8
4.3
4.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
6.1
6.1
4.8
3.9
4.9
5.1
5.3
0.2
4.0
4.6
5.4
5.6
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
1.9
2.3
2.2
2.2
3.0
2.8
2.1
–4.3
5.2
2.9
2.6
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.8
3.3
3.4
3.7
3.5
3.2
–3.6
4.0
3.5
3.8
3.5
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.1
3.3
3.0
3.0
2.8
3.0
2.4
–6.1
4.4
3.3
3.6
3.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.3
5.0
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.4
4.5
–0.6
3.5
3.8
4.5
5.0
Output per Capita3
Advanced Economies
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.3
2.0
1.9
1.3
–5.0
5.0
3.0
2.1
1.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.1
2.8
2.8
3.3
3.3
2.4
–3.3
5.9
2.7
3.3
3.2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.9
3.2
3.0
3.1
3.5
3.6
2.5
–3.2
6.1
3.1
3.5
3.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.6
3.8
2.2
1.5
2.6
2.7
2.9
–2.1
2.5
2.4
3.1
3.4
World Growth Rate Based on Market 
Exchange Rates
2.7
2.8
2.8
2.6
3.2
3.2
2.5
–3.5
5.8
3.5
3.1
2.7
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
61,955
 79,322
 75,043
 76,267
 80,945
 86,085
 87,536
 85,239
 96,293  103,867  110,751  136,384
At Purchasing Power Parities
84,652
109,350 111,568 115,863  122,024 129,366  135,346  132,487  146,124  160,244  170,830  211,530
1Real GDP.
2Excludes euro area countries, Japan, and the United States.
3Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
138	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Q4 over Q42
Average
Projections
Projections 
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021:Q4
2022:Q4 2023:Q4
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
1.6
2.0
2.3
1.8
2.5
2.3
1.7
–4.5
5.2
3.3
2.4
1.6
4.7
2.5
2.0
United States
1.8
2.3
2.7
1.7
2.3
2.9
2.3
–3.4
5.7
3.7
2.3
1.7
5.6
2.8
1.7
Euro Area
0.9
1.4
2.0
1.9
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.4
5.3
2.8
2.3
1.3
4.6
1.8
2.3
Germany
1.3
2.2
1.5
2.2
2.7
1.1
1.1
–4.6
2.8
2.1
2.7
1.1
1.8
2.4
2.5
France
1.2
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.4
1.8
1.8
–8.0
7.0
2.9
1.4
1.4
5.4
0.9
1.5
Italy
–0.3
0.0
0.8
1.3
1.7
0.9
0.5
–9.0
6.6
2.3
1.7
0.5
6.2
0.5
2.2
Spain
0.6
1.4
3.8
3.0
3.0
2.3
2.1 –10.8
5.1
4.8
3.3
1.6
5.5
2.3
4.0
The Netherlands
1.1
1.4
2.0
2.2
2.9
2.4
2.0
–3.8
5.0
3.0
2.0
1.5
6.4
0.4
2.9
Belgium
1.6
1.6
2.0
1.3
1.6
1.8
2.1
–5.7
6.3
2.1
1.4
1.2
5.6
0.6
1.6
Ireland
1.6
8.7
25.2
2.0
8.9
9.0
4.9
5.9
13.5
5.2
5.0
3.0
10.0
13.3
0.0
Austria
1.5
0.7
1.0
2.0
2.3
2.5
1.5
–6.7
4.5
2.6
3.0
1.8
5.6
1.2
4.9
Portugal
–0.1
0.8
1.8
2.0
3.5
2.8
2.7
–8.4
4.9
4.0
2.1
1.9
5.9
0.3
3.8
Greece
–1.7
0.5
–0.2
–0.5
1.1
1.7
1.8
–9.0
8.3
3.5
2.6
1.2
7.7
3.5
1.8
Finland
1.2
–0.4
0.5
2.8
3.2
1.1
1.2
–2.3
3.3
1.6
1.7
1.3
3.0
0.9
1.7
Slovak Republic
4.2
2.6
4.8
2.1
3.0
3.8
2.6
–4.4
3.0
2.6
5.0
2.8
1.2
4.0
3.9
Lithuania
3.3
3.5
2.0
2.5
4.3
4.0
4.6
–0.1
4.9
1.8
2.6
2.5
5.2
0.8
3.6
Slovenia
1.5
2.8
2.2
3.2
4.8
4.4
3.3
–4.2
8.1
3.7
3.0
2.7
10.8
–0.3
3.5
Luxembourg
2.6
2.6
2.3
5.0
1.3
2.0
3.3
–1.8
6.9
1.8
2.1
2.5
4.8
1.8
2.3
Latvia
2.7
1.9
3.9
2.4
3.3
4.0
2.5
–3.8
4.7
1.0
2.4
3.3
2.7
3.0
0.5
Estonia
2.6
3.0
1.9
3.2
5.8
4.1
4.1
–3.0
8.3
0.2
2.2
3.3
8.8
–0.8
2.2
Cyprus 
1.3
–1.8
3.4
6.5
5.9
5.7
5.3
–5.0
5.5
2.1
3.5
2.9
5.9
0.9
5.1
Malta
2.9
7.6
9.6
3.4
11.1
6.0
5.9
–8.3
9.4
4.8
4.5
3.3
10.0
1.9
6.1
Japan
0.7
0.3
1.6
0.8
1.7
0.6
–0.2
–4.5
1.6
2.4
2.3
0.4
0.4
3.5
0.8
United Kingdom
1.2
3.0
2.6
2.3
2.1
1.7
1.7
–9.3
7.4
3.7
1.2
1.5
6.6
1.1
1.5
Korea
4.0
3.2
2.8
2.9
3.2
2.9
2.2
–0.9
4.0
2.5
2.9
2.3
4.1
2.0
3.4
Canada
1.9
2.9
0.7
1.0
3.0
2.8
1.9
–5.2
4.6
3.9
2.8
1.6
3.3
3.5
2.2
Taiwan Province of China
4.2
4.7
1.5
2.2
3.3
2.8
3.1
3.4
6.3
3.2
2.9
2.1
3.9
3.5
2.3
Australia
3.0
2.6
2.3
2.7
2.4
2.8
2.0
–2.2
4.7
4.2
2.5
2.6
4.2
3.5
2.1
Switzerland
2.2
2.4
1.6
2.0
1.7
2.9
1.2
–2.5
3.7
2.2
1.4
1.2
3.9
1.6
0.7
Sweden
2.0
2.7
4.5
2.1
2.6
2.0
2.0
–2.9
4.8
2.9
2.7
2.0
5.2
1.7
3.2
Singapore
6.7
3.9
3.0
3.6
4.7
3.7
1.1
–4.1
7.6
4.0
2.9
2.5
6.1
2.3
3.6
Hong Kong SAR
4.5
2.8
2.4
2.2
3.8
2.8
–1.7
–6.5
6.4
0.5
4.9
2.8
4.8
5.1
0.4
Czech Republic
2.5
2.3
5.4
2.5
5.2
3.2
3.0
–5.8
3.3
2.3
4.2
2.5
3.6
0.4
6.9
Israel
4.4
4.1
2.3
4.5
4.4
4.0
3.8
–2.2
8.2
5.0
3.5
3.5
9.6
1.2
4.1
Norway
1.6
2.0
2.0
1.1
2.3
1.1
0.7
–0.7
3.9
4.0
2.6
1.3
4.8
2.7
2.4
Denmark
0.9
1.6
2.3
3.2
2.8
2.0
2.1
–2.1
4.1
2.3
1.7
1.8
4.4
0.7
2.1
New Zealand
2.1
3.8
3.7
4.0
3.5
3.4
2.9
–2.1
5.6
2.7
2.6
2.3
3.1
3.3
1.9
Puerto Rico
–0.7
–1.2
–1.0
–1.3
–2.9
–4.2
1.5
–3.9
1.0
4.8
0.4
0.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
13.1
–2.0 –21.5
–0.7
10.0
6.5
–2.5 –54.0
18.0
15.5
23.3
3.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iceland
2.7
1.7
4.4
6.3
4.2
4.9
2.4
–7.1
4.3
3.3
2.3
2.3
3.9
2.6
2.5
Andorra
–0.3
2.5
1.4
3.7
0.3
1.6
2.0 –11.2
8.9
4.5
2.7
1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
San Marino
–1.7
–0.6
2.7
2.3
0.3
1.5
2.1
–6.6
5.2
1.3
1.1
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.3
1.8
2.1
1.5
2.2
2.1
1.6
–4.9
5.1
3.2
2.2
1.4
4.5
2.5
1.7
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.4
2.1
2.6
2.0
2.5
2.3
2.1
–4.4
5.2
3.5
2.3
1.6
5.1
2.5
2.1
United States
1.5
2.5
3.4
1.8
2.4
3.1
2.4
–3.0
6.9
4.0
2.1
1.6
6.1
3.0
1.5
Euro Area
0.5
1.3
2.3
2.4
2.3
1.8
2.5
–6.2
4.2
2.9
2.5
1.4
5.2
1.3
3.0
Germany
0.9
1.7
1.4
3.1
2.6
1.7
1.8
–4.0
2.2
2.7
3.6
1.3
3.0
4.0
2.7
France
1.3
1.5
1.5
1.4
2.5
1.4
2.1
–6.8
6.6
3.0
1.2
1.4
5.7
0.8
1.4
Italy
–0.7
0.1
1.2
1.8
1.8
1.3
–0.2
–8.5
6.8
2.8
2.1
0.6
7.8
0.2
3.2
Spain
0.1
1.9
4.1
2.1
3.3
3.0
1.6
–8.9
4.7
4.1
3.0
1.6
3.8
3.2
3.0
Japan
0.6
0.3
1.1
0.3
1.1
0.6
0.2
–3.7
0.6
2.0
2.1
0.4
0.4
3.0
0.8
United Kingdom
1.2
3.5
3.2
3.1
1.9
1.2
1.6 –10.1
8.5
5.4
0.8
1.5
4.8
2.9
1.4
Canada
2.9
1.7
–0.2
0.4
4.1
2.5
1.2
–6.4
6.0
5.9
2.3
1.7
4.5
6.0
0.3
Other Advanced Economies3
3.0
2.9
2.6
2.9
3.6
2.7
1.5
–2.7
4.8
3.2
3.0
2.5
5.1
2.1
2.9
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.2
1.9
2.4
1.7
2.2
2.2
1.8
–4.5
5.6
3.6
2.1
1.3
5.0
2.9
1.6
1In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
139
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
1.5
1.8
1.8
2.5
2.1
2.2
2.2
1.6
–5.8
5.3
3.8
2.4
United States
1.8
2.4
2.7
3.3
2.5
2.4
2.9
2.2
–3.8
7.9
3.2
1.4
Euro Area
0.6
1.2
0.9
1.9
2.0
1.8
1.5
1.3
–7.9
3.5
4.0
3.3
Germany
0.7
1.4
1.1
1.9
2.4
1.4
1.4
1.6
–5.9
0.1
4.7
5.6
France
1.3
1.2
0.9
1.4
1.6
1.7
0.8
1.9
–7.2
4.8
4.5
1.7
Italy
–0.3
0.4
0.1
1.9
1.2
1.5
1.0
0.2
–10.6
5.2
2.3
2.1
Spain
0.2
1.3
1.7
2.9
2.7
3.0
1.7
1.0
–12.0
4.6
5.2
3.4
Japan
0.9
0.0
–0.9
–0.2
–0.4
1.1
0.2
–0.5
–5.2
1.3
2.2
2.7
United Kingdom
1.2
1.6
2.6
3.6
3.7
1.6
2.4
1.3
–10.6
6.2
5.6
1.1
Canada
2.9
2.4
2.6
2.3
2.1
3.7
2.6
1.4
–6.1
5.1
9.6
1.2
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.1
2.5
2.9
2.6
2.8
2.8
1.8
–5.6
4.3
3.7
3.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.4
1.7
1.7
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.1
1.5
–5.5
5.6
3.8
2.0
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.7
0.6
1.7
2.0
0.8
1.5
2.4
1.8
3.3
1.3
1.2
United States
0.5
1.1
–0.8
1.6
1.9
0.0
1.2
2.0
2.0
1.1
0.4
1.4
Euro Area
1.3
1.4
0.8
1.4
1.9
1.1
1.1
1.8
1.1
3.8
0.7
0.8
Germany
1.5
2.1
1.7
2.9
4.0
1.7
1.0
3.0
3.5
3.1
–0.5
0.4
France
1.6
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.4
1.4
0.8
1.0
–3.2
6.3
1.0
0.9
Italy
–0.2
0.1
–0.6
–0.6
0.7
–0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
–0.2
Spain
2.8
1.5
–0.7
2.0
1.0
1.0
2.3
2.0
3.3
3.1
0.6
0.4
Japan
1.3
1.5
1.0
1.9
1.6
0.1
1.0
1.9
2.3
2.1
3.0
0.4
United Kingdom
1.6
2.1
2.0
1.3
0.5
0.6
0.4
4.2
–5.9
14.3
3.4
1.2
Canada
1.8
2.1
0.6
1.4
1.8
2.1
3.2
1.7
0.0
4.9
2.4
3.4
Other Advanced Economies1
2.8
3.2
2.7
2.8
3.5
2.4
3.5
3.8
4.6
4.2
3.0
1.5
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.9
1.3
0.2
1.6
1.8
0.4
1.1
2.0
1.1
3.0
1.0
1.1
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
1.0
2.8
3.4
3.6
2.6
3.8
3.0
3.0
–3.7
5.4
3.6
3.8
United States
1.3
3.6
5.1
3.7
2.1
3.8
4.4
3.1
–1.5
6.1
4.2
5.7
Euro Area
–0.2
2.6
1.4
4.7
4.0
3.9
3.1
6.8
–7.0
4.3
2.8
2.7
Germany
1.4
2.0
3.2
1.7
3.8
2.6
3.4
1.8
–2.2
1.5
1.7
2.4
France
1.0
1.9
0.0
0.9
2.5
5.0
3.3
4.1
–8.9
11.5
1.9
0.3
Italy
–2.5
2.6
–2.2
1.8
4.0
3.2
3.1
1.2
–9.1
17.0
5.5
3.7
Spain
–2.6
3.2
4.1
4.9
2.4
6.8
6.3
4.5
–9.5
4.3
4.5
5.2
Japan
–0.5
0.5
2.2
2.3
1.2
1.6
0.4
1.0
–4.6
–1.5
0.5
2.3
United Kingdom
0.5
2.3
6.8
6.3
4.7
3.3
–0.1
0.5
–9.5
5.9
6.3
–0.3
Canada
3.8
1.1
2.3
–5.2
–4.7
3.3
2.5
0.0
–2.8
7.2
5.2
3.9
Other Advanced Economies1
3.4
2.7
2.6
2.2
3.0
4.9
2.0
0.7
–1.6
6.2
3.6
3.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.8
2.7
3.7
2.8
2.2
3.4
3.1
2.3
–3.7
5.7
3.6
3.9
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
140	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.4
2.0
1.9
2.6
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
–4.0
5.0
3.2
2.4
United States
1.5
2.5
2.7
3.1
2.3
2.4
3.0
2.4
–2.5
6.6
3.0
2.3
Euro Area
0.6
1.5
1.0
2.3
2.4
2.1
1.7
2.6
–5.8
3.7
3.0
2.6
Germany
1.0
1.7
1.7
2.1
3.1
1.7
1.8
1.9
–3.0
1.1
2.7
3.7
France
1.3
1.3
0.8
1.2
1.8
2.3
1.4
2.2
–6.7
6.7
3.0
1.2
Italy
–0.7
0.8
–0.4
1.4
1.6
1.5
1.2
0.3
–8.2
6.5
2.7
2.0
Spain
0.1
1.7
1.6
3.1
2.3
3.3
2.7
1.9
–8.5
4.2
4.1
3.1
Japan
0.6
0.5
0.1
0.8
0.3
1.0
0.4
0.3
–3.6
0.8
2.4
2.1
United Kingdom
1.1
1.8
3.2
3.6
3.3
1.7
1.6
1.7
–9.5
7.7
5.3
0.9
Canada
2.9
1.9
2.1
0.3
0.5
3.3
2.7
1.2
–4.1
5.5
5.7
2.3
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.4
2.6
2.7
2.9
3.4
2.4
1.8
–2.7
4.7
3.4
3.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.2
1.9
1.9
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.1
1.8
–4.0
5.3
3.2
2.2
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
–0.2
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.3
0.3
–0.1
United States
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.3
–0.5
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.5
0.3
0.9
–0.2
Euro Area
–0.1
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.5
0.4
0.0
0.0
Germany
–0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.7
0.0
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–0.9
1.0
0.0
–0.1
France
0.0
0.1
0.7
0.3
–0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
Italy
0.0
0.1
0.5
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
–0.5
–0.3
0.3
0.1
0.2
Spain
–0.1
–0.1
0.2
–1.5
–0.1
0.0
0.3
–0.2
–0.5
0.6
–0.1
–0.1
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3
–0.1
0.1
0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.0
United Kingdom
0.1
0.0
0.4
–0.1
–0.2
0.2
–0.5
0.2
–0.7
0.4
–0.1
0.0
Canada
0.1
0.0
–0.4
–0.5
0.0
0.9
–0.1
0.1
–1.3
1.0
0.3
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
0.0
0.0
0.3
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.3
–0.2
0.0
0.2
–0.3
0.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.5
0.3
0.5
–0.1
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
0.2
–0.1
0.0
–0.3
–0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.3
0.1
United States
0.2
–0.4
–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
–0.3
–1.4
–0.4
0.1
Euro Area
0.4
0.0
0.1
–0.2
–0.4
0.4
0.1
–0.8
–0.3
1.3
0.0
–0.2
Germany
0.4
–0.2
0.7
0.3
–0.6
0.2
–0.5
–0.7
–0.8
0.8
–0.5
–0.7
France
–0.1
–0.2
–0.5
–0.4
–0.4
–0.1
0.4
–0.3
–1.1
0.2
–0.2
0.1
Italy
0.4
–0.2
–0.1
–0.4
–0.5
0.0
–0.3
0.7
–0.7
–0.1
–0.5
–0.4
Spain
0.6
0.0
–0.5
–0.1
1.0
–0.2
–0.6
0.5
–2.2
0.5
0.8
0.3
Japan
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.0
–0.5
–0.9
1.1
0.5
0.2
United Kingdom
0.0
–0.3
–1.1
–0.4
–0.1
0.7
–0.1
0.1
1.0
–1.5
–1.7
0.4
Canada
–1.0
–0.1
1.2
0.8
0.4
–1.1
0.2
0.6
0.5
–1.9
–1.9
0.5
Other Advanced Economies1
0.6
0.3
0.5
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.2
0.6
0.8
0.8
0.0
0.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
–0.4
–0.7
–0.4
0.1
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
141
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.5
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.6
6.4
5.3
–0.8
7.3
5.4
5.6
5.2
Bangladesh
6.2
6.1
6.6
7.1
7.3
7.9
8.2
3.5
5.0
6.4
6.7
6.9
Bhutan
7.9
4.0
6.2
7.4
6.3
3.8
4.4
–2.4
–3.7
4.4
4.5
5.8
Brunei Darussalam
0.0
–2.5
–0.4
–2.5
1.3
0.1
3.9
1.1
–0.7
5.8
2.6
2.1
Cambodia
7.9
7.1
7.0
6.9
7.0
7.5
7.1
–3.1
2.2
5.1
5.9
6.5
China
10.3
7.4
7.0
6.9
6.9
6.8
6.0
2.2
8.1
4.4
5.1
4.8
Fiji
1.6
5.6
4.5
2.4
5.4
3.8
–0.4
–15.2
–4.0
6.8
7.7
3.4
India1
7.7
7.4
8.0
8.3
6.8
6.5
3.7
–6.6
8.9
8.2
6.9
6.2
Indonesia
5.9
5.0
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.2
5.0
–2.1
3.7
5.4
6.0
5.2
Kiribati
1.4
–1.1
9.9
–0.5
–0.2
5.3
–0.5
–0.5
1.5
1.1
2.8
2.0
Lao P.D.R.
7.8
7.6
7.3
7.0
6.9
6.3
4.7
–0.4
2.1
3.2
3.5
4.3
Malaysia
5.0
6.0
5.0
4.4
5.8
4.8
4.4
–5.6
3.1
5.6
5.5
3.9
Maldives
5.0
7.3
2.9
6.3
7.2
8.1
6.9
–33.5
33.4
6.1
8.9
5.6
Marshall Islands
0.9
–1.0
1.6
1.4
3.3
3.1
6.8
–2.4
–1.5
2.0
3.2
1.6
Micronesia
–0.5
–2.3
4.6
0.9
2.7
0.2
1.2
–1.8
–3.2
–0.5
2.8
0.6
Mongolia
8.6
7.9
2.4
1.5
5.6
7.7
5.6
–4.6
1.4
2.0
7.0
5.0
Myanmar
9.1
8.2
7.5
6.4
5.8
6.4
6.8
3.2
–17.9
1.6
3.0
3.3
Nauru
. . .
27.2
3.4
3.0
–5.5
5.7
1.0
0.7
1.6
0.9
2.0
1.8
Nepal
4.2
6.0
4.0
0.4
9.0
7.6
6.7
–2.1
2.7
4.1
6.1
5.2
Palau
0.0
4.7
8.4
1.1
–3.3
–0.1
–1.9
–9.7
–17.1
8.1
18.8
2.5
Papua New Guinea
4.1
13.5
6.6
5.5
3.5
–0.3
4.5
–3.5
1.7
4.8
4.3
3.0
Philippines
5.4
6.3
6.3
7.1
6.9
6.3
6.1
–9.6
5.6
6.5
6.3
6.5
Samoa
1.7
0.1
4.3
8.1
1.1
–1.2
4.4
–2.6
–8.1
0.0
4.0
2.5
Solomon Islands
5.3
1.0
1.4
5.9
5.3
3.9
1.2
–4.3
–0.2
–4.0
3.2
3.0
Sri Lanka
6.4
5.0
5.0
4.5
3.6
3.3
2.3
–3.6
3.6
2.6
2.7
2.9
Thailand
4.0
1.0
3.1
3.4
4.2
4.2
2.2
–6.2
1.6
3.3
4.3
3.1
Timor-Leste2
5.3
4.5
2.8
3.4
–3.1
–0.7
2.1
–8.6
1.8
2.0
3.6
3.0
Tonga
0.1
2.0
1.2
6.6
3.3
0.3
0.7
0.7
–0.7
–1.6
3.0
1.8
Tuvalu
0.8
1.7
9.4
4.7
3.4
1.6
13.9
1.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
3.5
Vanuatu
3.5
3.1
0.4
4.7
6.3
2.9
3.2
–5.4
0.5
2.2
3.4
2.9
Vietnam
6.4
6.4
7.0
6.7
6.9
7.2
7.2
2.9
2.6
6.0
7.2
6.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.3
1.8
1.0
1.9
4.1
3.4
2.5
–1.8
6.7
–2.9
1.3
2.4
Albania
4.2
1.8
2.2
3.3
3.8
4.0
2.1
–3.5
8.5
2.0
2.8
3.4
Belarus 
6.5
1.7
–3.8
–2.5
2.5
3.1
1.4
–0.7
2.3
–6.4
0.4
0.6
Bosnia and Herzegovina
3.0
1.1
3.1
3.1
3.2
3.7
2.8
–3.1
5.8
2.4
2.3
3.0
Bulgaria
3.3
1.0
3.4
3.0
2.8
2.7
4.0
–4.4
4.2
3.2
4.5
2.8
Croatia
0.8
–0.3
2.5
3.5
3.4
2.9
3.5
–8.1
10.4
2.7
4.0
3.0
Hungary
1.1
4.2
3.8
2.3
4.3
5.4
4.6
–4.7
7.1
3.7
3.6
2.7
Kosovo
4.2
3.3
5.9
5.6
4.8
3.4
4.8
–5.3
9.5
2.8
3.9
3.5
Moldova
4.5
5.0
–0.3
4.4
4.7
4.3
3.7
–8.3
13.9
0.3
2.0
5.0
Montenegro
3.1
1.8
3.4
2.9
4.7
5.1
4.1
–15.3
12.4
3.8
4.2
3.0
North Macedonia
3.4
3.6
3.9
2.8
1.1
2.9
3.9
–6.1
4.0
3.2
2.7
3.5
Poland
4.0
3.4
4.2
3.1
4.8
5.4
4.7
–2.5
5.7
3.7
2.9
3.3
Romania
3.7
3.6
3.0
4.7
7.3
4.5
4.2
–3.7
5.9
2.2
3.4
3.5
Russia 
4.2
0.7
–2.0
0.2
1.8
2.8
2.2
–2.7
4.7
–8.5
–2.3
0.7
Serbia
3.8
–1.6
1.8
3.3
2.1
4.5
4.3
–0.9
7.4
3.5
4.0
4.0
Turkey
5.9
4.9
6.1
3.3
7.5
3.0
0.9
1.8
11.0
2.7
3.0
3.3
Ukraine1
2.5
–6.6
–9.8
2.4
2.4
3.5
3.2
–3.8
3.4
–35.0
. . .
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.0
1.3
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.1
–7.0
6.8
2.5
2.5
2.4
Antigua and Barbuda
1.3
3.8
3.8
5.5
3.1
6.9
4.9
–20.2
4.8
6.5
5.4
2.7
Argentina
4.9
–2.5
2.7
–2.1
2.8
–2.6
–2.0
–9.9
10.2
4.0
3.0
2.0
Aruba
0.6
0.0
3.6
2.1
5.5
1.3
–2.1
–22.3
16.8
2.7
3.7
1.4
The Bahamas
0.3
2.3
1.6
0.1
1.6
2.8
0.7
–14.5
5.6
6.0
4.1
1.5
Barbados
0.4
–0.1
2.4
2.5
0.5
–0.6
–1.3
–13.7
1.4
11.2
4.9
1.8
Belize
2.4
4.5
2.9
–0.2
2.1
2.0
2.0
–16.7
9.8
5.7
3.4
2.0
Bolivia
4.9
5.5
4.9
4.3
4.2
4.2
2.2
–8.7
6.1
3.8
3.7
3.4
Brazil
4.0
0.5
–3.5
–3.3
1.3
1.8
1.2
–3.9
4.6
0.8
1.4
2.0
Chile
4.6
1.8
2.1
1.8
1.3
4.0
0.8
–6.1
11.7
1.5
0.5
2.5
Colombia
4.8
4.5
3.0
2.1
1.4
2.6
3.2
–7.0
10.6
5.8
3.6
3.4
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
142	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
4.0
1.3
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.1
–7.0
6.8
2.5
2.5
2.4
Costa Rica
4.5
3.5
3.7
4.2
4.2
2.6
2.4
–4.1
7.6
3.3
3.1
3.2
Dominica
1.9
4.8
–2.7
2.8
–6.6
3.5
7.5
–11.0
3.7
6.8
5.0
2.5
Dominican Republic
5.1
7.1
6.9
6.7
4.7
7.0
5.1
–6.7
12.3
5.5
5.0
5.0
Ecuador
4.9
3.8
0.1
–1.2
2.4
1.3
0.0
–7.8
4.2
2.9
2.7
2.8
El Salvador
2.1
1.7
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.4
2.6
–7.9
10.3
3.0
2.3
2.0
Grenada
0.9
7.3
6.4
3.7
4.4
4.4
0.7
–13.8
5.6
3.6
3.6
2.8
Guatemala
3.6
4.4
4.1
2.7
3.1
3.3
3.9
–1.5
8.0
4.0
3.6
3.5
Guyana
3.5
1.7
0.7
3.8
3.7
4.4
5.4
43.5
19.9
47.2
34.5
3.7
Haiti
2.0
1.7
2.6
1.8
2.5
1.7
–1.7
–3.3
–1.8
0.3
1.4
1.7
Honduras
4.1
3.1
3.8
3.9
4.8
3.8
2.7
–9.0
12.5
3.8
3.5
3.9
Jamaica
0.2
0.6
0.9
1.5
0.7
1.8
1.0
–10.0
4.4
2.5
3.3
1.6
Mexico
2.2
2.8
3.3
2.6
2.1
2.2
–0.2
–8.2
4.8
2.0
2.5
2.0
Nicaragua
4.0
4.8
4.8
4.6
4.6
–3.4
–3.7
–2.0
10.3
3.8
2.2
3.0
Panama
8.0
5.1
5.7
5.0
5.6
3.7
3.0
–17.9
15.3
7.5
5.0
5.0
Paraguay
4.5
5.3
3.0
4.3
4.8
3.2
–0.4
–0.8
4.2
0.3
4.5
3.5
Peru
6.4
2.4
3.3
4.0
2.5
4.0
2.2
–11.0
13.3
3.0
3.0
3.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.1
7.6
0.7
3.9
0.9
2.7
4.8
–14.0
–3.6
10.0
4.7
2.7
St. Lucia
2.0
1.3
–0.2
3.8
3.5
2.9
–0.1
–20.4
6.8
9.7
6.0
1.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
1.3
1.1
2.8
4.1
1.7
3.1
0.4
–5.3
–0.5
5.0
6.4
2.7
Suriname
4.7
0.3
–3.4
–4.9
1.6
4.9
1.1
–15.9
–3.5
1.8
2.1
3.0
Trinidad and Tobago
3.4
–0.9
1.8
–6.3
–2.7
–0.7
–0.2
–7.4
–1.0
5.5
3.0
1.0
Uruguay1
5.6
3.2
0.4
1.7
1.6
0.5
0.4
–6.1
4.4
3.9
3.0
2.2
Venezuela
. . .
–3.9
–6.2
–17.0
–15.7
–19.6
–35.0
–30.0
–1.5
1.5
1.5
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
5.0
3.3
2.8
4.1
2.4
2.7
2.2
–2.9
5.7
4.6
3.7
3.7
Afghanistan1
8.9
2.7
1.0
2.2
2.6
1.2
3.9
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
3.2
3.8
3.7
3.2
1.4
1.2
0.8
–4.9
4.0
2.4
2.4
1.8
Armenia
5.9
3.6
3.3
0.2
7.5
5.2
7.6
–7.4
5.7
1.5
4.0
4.5
Azerbaijan
12.3
2.8
1.0
–3.1
0.2
1.5
2.5
–4.3
5.6
2.8
2.6
2.5
Bahrain
5.3
4.4
2.5
3.6
4.3
2.1
2.2
–4.9
2.2
3.3
3.0
3.1
Djibouti
4.4
7.1
7.7
6.9
5.1
8.5
6.6
1.0
4.0
3.0
5.0
6.0
Egypt
4.7
2.9
4.4
4.3
4.1
5.3
5.6
3.6
3.3
5.9
5.0
5.9
Georgia
5.9
4.4
3.0
2.9
4.8
4.8
5.0
–6.8
10.4
3.2
5.8
5.2
Iran
2.5
5.0
–1.4
8.8
2.8
–2.3
–1.3
1.8
4.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
Iraq
10.2
0.7
2.5
15.2
–3.4
4.7
5.8
–15.7
5.9
9.5
5.7
2.6
Jordan
5.5
3.4
2.5
2.0
2.1
1.9
2.0
–1.6
2.0
2.4
3.1
3.3
Kazakhstan
6.9
4.3
1.0
0.9
3.9
4.1
4.5
–2.6
4.0
2.3
4.4
3.1
Kuwait
4.3
0.5
0.6
2.9
–4.7
2.4
–0.6
–8.9
1.3
8.2
2.6
2.7
Kyrgyz Republic
4.5
4.0
3.9
4.3
4.7
3.5
4.6
–8.6
3.7
0.9
5.0
4.0
Lebanon1
5.3
2.5
0.6
1.6
0.8
–1.7
–7.2
–22.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya1
–6.4
–53.0
–13.0
–7.4
64.0
17.9
13.2
–59.7
177.3
3.5
4.4
3.6
Mauritania
4.3
4.3
5.4
1.3
6.3
4.5
5.8
–1.8
3.0
5.0
4.4
4.6
Morocco
4.6
2.7
4.5
1.1
4.2
3.1
2.6
–6.3
7.2
1.1
4.6
3.4
Oman
4.6
1.4
4.7
4.9
0.3
0.9
–0.8
–2.8
2.0
5.6
2.7
2.5
Pakistan
4.7
4.1
4.1
4.6
4.6
6.1
3.1
–1.0
5.6
4.0
4.2
5.0
Qatar
14.1
5.3
4.8
3.1
–1.5
1.2
0.7
–3.6
1.5
3.4
2.5
3.8
Saudi Arabia
4.5
3.7
4.1
1.7
–0.7
2.5
0.3
–4.1
3.2
7.6
3.6
2.8
Somalia
. . .
2.5
4.4
4.6
2.4
3.8
3.3
–0.3
2.0
3.0
3.6
4.1
Sudan3
0.7
4.7
4.9
4.7
0.8
–2.3
–2.5
–3.6
0.5
0.3
3.9
6.0
Syria4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
7.3
6.7
6.0
6.9
7.1
7.6
7.4
4.4
9.2
2.5
3.5
4.0
Tunisia1
3.7
3.1
1.0
1.1
2.2
2.5
1.5
–9.3
3.1
2.2
. . .
. . .
Turkmenistan
10.4
3.8
3.0
–1.0
4.7
0.9
–3.4
–3.0
4.9
1.6
2.5
1.8
United Arab Emirates
4.3
4.3
5.1
3.1
2.4
1.2
3.4
–6.1
2.3
4.2
3.8
4.2
Uzbekistan
7.7
6.9
7.2
5.9
4.4
5.4
5.7
1.9
7.4
3.4
5.0
5.5
West Bank and Gaza
7.7
–0.2
3.7
8.9
1.4
1.2
1.4
–11.3
6.0
4.0
3.5
2.0
Yemen
2.4
–0.2
–28.0
–9.4
–5.1
0.8
1.4
–8.5
–2.0
1.0
2.5
5.5
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
143
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.6
5.0
3.2
1.5
3.0
3.3
3.1
–1.7
4.5
3.8
4.0
4.4
Angola
8.4
4.8
0.9
–2.6
–0.2
–2.0
–0.7
–5.6
0.7
3.0
3.3
3.9
Benin
4.0
6.4
1.8
3.3
5.7
6.7
6.9
3.8
6.6
5.9
6.1
6.0
Botswana
3.3
5.7
–4.9
7.2
4.1
4.2
3.0
–8.7
12.5
4.3
4.2
4.0
Burkina Faso
5.9
4.3
3.9
6.0
6.2
6.7
5.7
1.9
6.9
4.7
5.0
5.3
Burundi
4.4
4.2
–3.9
–0.6
0.5
1.6
1.8
0.3
2.4
3.6
4.6
4.5
Cabo Verde
4.1
0.6
1.0
4.7
3.7
4.5
5.7
–14.8
6.9
5.2
5.8
4.5
Cameroon 
3.7
5.8
5.6
4.5
3.5
4.0
3.5
0.5
3.5
4.3
4.9
5.2
Central African Republic
–1.5
0.1
4.3
4.7
4.5
3.8
3.0
1.0
1.0
3.5
3.7
4.7
Chad
7.8
6.9
1.8
–5.6
–2.4
2.4
3.4
–2.2
–1.1
3.3
3.5
3.5
Comoros
3.0
2.1
1.3
3.5
4.2
3.6
1.8
–0.3
2.2
3.5
3.7
4.3
Democratic Republic of the Congo
6.3
9.5
6.9
2.4
3.7
5.8
4.4
1.7
5.7
6.4
6.9
6.6
Republic of Congo
4.8
6.7
–3.6
–10.7
–4.4
–4.8
–0.4
–8.1
–0.2
2.4
2.7
3.4
Côte d’Ivoire
2.8
8.8
8.8
7.2
7.4
6.9
6.2
2.0
6.5
6.0
6.7
6.0
Equatorial Guinea
7.6
0.4
–9.1
–8.8
–5.7
–6.2
–6.0
–4.9
–3.5
6.1
–2.9
–1.0
Eritrea
1.8
30.9
–20.6
7.4
–10.0
13.0
3.8
–0.6
2.9
4.7
3.6
3.8
Eswatini
3.8
0.9
2.2
1.1
2.0
2.4
2.6
–1.9
3.1
2.1
1.8
2.3
Ethiopia
10.9
10.3
10.4
8.0
10.2
7.7
9.0
6.1
6.3
3.8
5.7
7.0
Gabon
2.8
4.4
3.9
2.1
0.5
0.8
3.9
–1.9
0.9
2.7
3.4
3.8
The Gambia
2.5
–1.4
4.1
1.9
4.8
7.2
6.2
–0.2
5.6
5.6
6.2
5.0
Ghana
7.3
2.9
2.1
3.4
8.1
6.2
6.5
0.4
4.2
5.2
5.1
7.5
Guinea
3.6
3.7
3.8
10.8
10.3
6.4
5.6
6.4
4.2
4.8
5.8
5.1
Guinea-Bissau
3.5
1.0
6.1
5.3
4.8
3.4
4.5
1.5
3.8
3.8
4.5
5.0
Kenya
4.8
5.0
5.0
4.2
3.8
5.6
5.0
–0.3
7.2
5.7
5.3
5.4
Lesotho
3.6
2.1
3.3
1.9
–2.7
–0.3
0.0
–6.0
2.1
3.1
1.6
0.1
Liberia
7.4
0.7
0.0
–1.6
2.5
1.2
–2.5
–3.0
4.2
4.5
5.5
5.7
Madagascar
3.1
3.3
3.1
4.0
3.9
3.2
4.4
–7.1
3.5
5.1
5.2
5.0
Malawi
5.8
5.7
3.0
2.3
4.0
4.4
5.4
0.9
2.2
2.7
4.3
5.8
Mali
3.6
7.1
6.2
5.9
5.3
4.7
4.8
–1.2
3.1
2.0
5.3
5.0
Mauritius
4.0
3.7
3.6
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.0
–14.9
3.9
6.1
5.6
3.3
Mozambique
7.4
7.4
6.7
3.8
3.7
3.4
2.3
–1.2
2.2
3.8
5.0
13.1
Namibia
4.3
6.1
4.3
0.0
–1.0
1.1
–0.9
–8.5
0.9
2.8
3.7
2.5
Niger
5.3
6.6
4.4
5.7
5.0
7.2
5.9
3.6
1.3
6.9
7.2
6.3
Nigeria
7.3
6.3
2.7
–1.6
0.8
1.9
2.2
–1.8
3.6
3.4
3.1
2.9
Rwanda
8.0
6.2
8.9
6.0
4.0
8.6
9.5
–3.4
10.2
6.4
7.4
6.1
São Tomé and Príncipe
5.3
6.5
3.8
4.2
3.9
3.0
2.2
3.0
1.8
1.6
2.8
4.0
Senegal
3.2
6.2
6.4
6.4
7.4
6.2
4.6
1.3
6.1
5.0
9.2
4.0
Seychelles
4.4
4.7
5.6
5.4
4.5
3.2
3.1
–7.7
8.0
4.6
5.6
4.5
Sierra Leone
7.8
4.6
–20.5
6.4
3.8
3.5
5.3
–2.0
3.2
3.4
4.3
4.3
South Africa
3.3
1.4
1.3
0.7
1.2
1.5
0.1
–6.4
4.9
1.9
1.4
1.4
South Sudan
. . .
2.9
–0.2
–13.5
–5.8
–1.9
0.9
–6.6
5.3
6.5
5.6
4.4
Tanzania
6.5
6.7
6.2
6.9
6.8
7.0
7.0
4.8
4.9
4.8
5.2
6.0
Togo
3.0
5.9
5.7
5.6
4.3
5.0
5.5
1.8
5.1
5.6
6.2
6.5
Uganda
7.1
5.7
8.0
0.2
6.8
5.6
7.7
–1.4
5.1
4.9
6.5
6.8
Zambia
7.6
4.7
2.9
3.8
3.5
4.0
1.4
–2.8
4.3
3.1
3.6
4.8
Zimbabwe1
1.7
2.4
1.8
0.5
5.0
4.7
–6.1
–5.3
6.3
3.5
3.0
3.0
1See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, India, Lebanon, Libya, Tunisia, Ukraine, Uruguay, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
2Data for Timor-Leste excludes projections for oil exports from the Joint Petroleum Development Area.
3Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
4Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
144	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.5
1.4
2.9
4.4
2.4
1.8
United States
2.1
1.9
1.0
1.0
1.9
2.4
1.8
1.2
4.2
6.3
3.0
2.0
Euro Area
1.6
0.9
1.4
0.9
1.1
1.5
1.7
1.6
2.0
3.2
2.4
1.9
Japan
–1.0
1.7
2.1
0.4
–0.1
0.0
0.6
0.9
–0.9
0.4
0.4
0.5
Other Advanced Economies1
2.0
1.3
1.1
1.2
1.9
1.7
1.2
1.8
3.6
4.4
2.3
2.0
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.4
0.3
0.7
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
5.7
2.5
1.9
United States
2.4
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.2
4.7
7.7
2.9
2.0
Euro Area2
2.0
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
5.3
2.3
1.9
Japan
–0.1
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.3
1.0
0.8
1.0
Other Advanced Economies1
2.3
1.5
0.5
0.9
1.8
1.9
1.4
0.6
2.5
4.8
3.0
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
6.3
4.7
4.7
4.3
4.4
4.9
5.1
5.2
5.9
8.7
6.5
4.1
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.0
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.4
2.7
3.3
3.1
2.2
3.5
2.9
2.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
8.1
6.5
10.6
5.5
5.6
6.4
6.6
5.3
9.5
27.1
18.1
6.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.9
4.9
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
11.2
8.0
5.0
Middle East and Central Asia
8.4
6.5
5.6
5.7
6.9
9.8
7.8
10.6
13.2
12.8
10.5
6.9
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.6
6.4
6.7
10.3
10.6
8.3
8.1
10.2
11.0
12.2
9.6
6.7
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
8.4
5.6
5.6
7.6
6.4
8.8
7.1
9.5
12.1
11.5
9.2
7.6
Nonfuel
5.9
4.6
4.6
3.9
4.2
4.5
4.9
4.7
5.2
8.4
6.2
3.8
Of Which, Primary Products4
6.6
7.4
5.7
6.6
11.5
13.7
16.8
18.3
22.0
22.5
16.8
8.3
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
7.2
5.8
5.7
5.5
5.8
5.8
5.6
6.1
7.7
11.2
8.1
4.8
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2016–20
10.1
9.3
14.0
11.5
17.6
16.6
13.4
16.4
21.1
22.4
17.1
7.0
Other Groups
European Union
2.3
0.4
0.1
0.2
1.6
1.8
1.4
0.7
2.9
5.8
2.9
2.0
Middle East and North Africa
8.2
6.4
5.7
5.5
7.0
11.1
8.2
11.2
14.6
13.4
10.8
7.3
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
6.0
4.5
4.6
4.0
4.0
4.6
4.9
4.6
5.3
8.2
6.2
4.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
9.8
7.2
6.5
8.4
9.2
8.8
8.3
11.4
13.3
13.9
10.4
6.1
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
2.3
0.7
0.1
0.5
1.6
1.8
1.4
0.4
2.5
5.0
2.3
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
5.2
3.1
2.5
2.7
3.3
3.1
2.7
2.8
3.9
6.1
4.3
3.0
1Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
145
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average 
Projections
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.4
0.3
0.7
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
5.7
2.5
1.9
5.3
4.4
2.2
United States
2.4
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.2
4.7
7.7
2.9
2.0
7.4
5.3
2.3
Euro Area3
2.0
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
5.3
2.3
1.9
5.0
4.2
2.1
Germany
1.8
0.8
0.7
0.4
1.7
1.9
1.4
0.4
3.2
5.5
2.9
2.0
5.7
4.7
2.5
France
1.8
0.6
0.1
0.3
1.2
2.1
1.3
0.5
2.1
4.1
1.8
1.6
3.3
3.4
1.8
Italy
2.2
0.2
0.1
–0.1
1.3
1.2
0.6
–0.1
1.9
5.3
2.5
2.0
4.2
5.3
2.5
Spain
2.5
–0.2
–0.5
–0.2
2.0
1.7
0.7
–0.3
3.1
5.3
1.3
1.7
6.5
2.7
0.8
The Netherlands
1.8
0.3
0.2
0.1
1.3
1.6
2.7
1.1
2.8
5.2
2.3
2.0
6.3
3.0
2.4
Belgium
2.3
0.5
0.6
1.8
2.2
2.3
1.2
0.4
3.2
8.0
1.3
1.7
6.6
4.4
1.6
Ireland
1.3
0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.3
0.7
0.9
–0.5
2.4
5.7
2.7
2.0
5.6
5.7
2.7
Austria
2.1
1.5
0.8
1.0
2.2
2.1
1.5
1.4
2.8
5.6
2.2
2.0
3.8
4.3
2.0
Portugal
2.0
–0.2
0.5
0.6
1.6
1.2
0.3
–0.1
0.9
4.0
1.5
1.3
0.0
6.1
1.2
Greece
2.6
–1.4
–1.1
0.0
1.1
0.8
0.5
–1.3
0.6
4.5
1.3
1.9
4.4
2.4
1.5
Finland
2.0
1.2
–0.2
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.1
0.4
2.1
3.8
2.7
1.8
3.2
3.3
2.7
Slovak Republic
3.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.5
1.4
2.5
2.8
2.0
2.8
8.4
4.1
2.0
5.0
8.1
2.8
Lithuania
3.8
0.2
–0.7
0.7
3.7
2.5
2.2
1.1
4.6
13.3
4.3
2.3
10.7
9.3
3.6
Slovenia
2.7
0.2
–0.5
–0.1
1.4
1.7
1.6
–0.1
1.9
6.7
5.1
2.4
4.9
5.8
4.2
Luxembourg
2.8
0.7
0.1
0.0
2.1
2.0
1.7
0.0
3.5
5.6
2.0
2.0
5.4
3.5
2.0
Latvia
5.3
0.7
0.2
0.1
2.9
2.6
2.7
0.1
3.2
10.0
3.9
2.5
7.9
8.1
3.2
Estonia
4.4
0.5
0.1
0.8
3.7
3.4
2.3
–0.6
4.5
11.9
4.6
2.3
12.0
7.8
2.6
Cyprus
2.2
–0.3
–1.5
–1.2
0.7
0.8
0.5
–1.1
2.2
5.3
2.3
1.9
4.7
3.0
2.5
Malta
2.4
0.8
1.2
0.9
1.3
1.7
1.5
0.8
0.7
4.7
2.8
2.0
2.6
4.6
2.1
Japan
–0.1
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.3
1.0
0.8
1.0
0.4
1.1
0.9
United Kingdom 
2.7
1.5
0.0
0.7
2.7
2.5
1.8
0.9
2.6
7.4
5.3
2.0
5.4
7.6
3.5
Korea
2.9
1.3
0.7
1.0
1.9
1.5
0.4
0.5
2.5
4.0
2.4
2.0
3.7
3.6
2.0
Canada
1.8
1.9
1.1
1.4
1.6
2.3
1.9
0.7
3.4
5.6
2.4
2.0
4.7
4.6
2.2
Taiwan Province of China
1.4
1.3
–0.6
1.0
1.1
1.5
0.5
–0.2
1.8
2.3
2.2
1.4
2.6
2.3
2.2
Australia
2.7
2.5
1.5
1.3
2.0
1.9
1.6
0.9
2.8
3.9
2.7
2.5
3.7
3.3
2.5
Switzerland
0.6
0.0
–1.1
–0.4
0.5
0.9
0.4
–0.7
0.6
2.5
1.6
1.0
1.5
2.4
1.7
Sweden
1.5
0.2
0.7
1.1
1.9
2.0
1.7
0.7
2.7
4.8
2.2
2.0
3.9
4.3
2.2
Singapore
2.7
1.0
–0.5
–0.5
0.6
0.4
0.6
–0.2
2.3
3.5
2.0
1.5
4.0
2.3
2.0
Hong Kong SAR
2.5
4.4
3.0
2.4
1.5
2.4
2.9
0.3
1.6
1.9
2.1
2.5
2.4
1.9
2.2
Czech Republic
2.5
0.3
0.3
0.7
2.5
2.1
2.8
3.2
3.8
9.0
2.3
2.0
6.6
6.0
2.0
Israel
2.1
0.5
–0.6
–0.5
0.2
0.8
0.8
–0.6
1.5
3.5
2.0
1.8
2.8
3.1
2.1
Norway
1.7
2.0
2.2
3.6
1.9
2.8
2.2
1.3
3.5
3.5
1.8
2.0
5.3
2.3
2.0
Denmark
1.9
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.1
0.7
0.7
0.3
1.9
3.8
2.1
2.0
3.4
3.8
2.1
New Zealand
2.6
1.2
0.3
0.6
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.7
3.9
5.9
3.5
2.0
5.9
4.2
3.1
Puerto Rico
3.1
0.6
–0.8
–0.3
1.8
1.3
0.1
–0.5
2.3
4.4
3.3
1.8
4.1
4.7
1.9
Macao SAR
4.6
6.0
4.6
2.4
1.2
3.0
2.8
0.8
0.0
2.8
2.7
2.5
1.0
2.8
2.7
Iceland
6.2
2.0
1.6
1.7
1.8
2.7
3.0
2.9
4.5
6.9
5.5
2.5
5.1
7.4
4.7
Andorra
2.2
–0.1
–1.1
–0.4
2.6
1.3
0.7
0.3
1.7
2.9
1.3
1.7
3.3
1.8
0.9
San Marino
2.3
1.1
0.1
0.6
1.0
1.8
1.0
0.2
2.1
4.9
2.0
1.7
2.1
4.9
2.0
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Major Advanced Economies
1.9
1.5
0.3
0.8
1.8
2.1
1.5
0.8
3.3
6.1
2.7
1.8
5.6
4.7
2.2
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
146	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.0
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.4
2.7
3.3
3.1
2.2
3.5
2.9
2.7
3.0
3.7
2.5
Bangladesh
8.2
7.3
6.4
5.9
5.4
5.8
5.5
5.6
5.6
6.0
6.2
5.5
5.6
6.4
5.9
Bhutan
6.3
9.6
6.7
3.3
4.3
3.7
2.8
4.2
8.1
7.9
5.4
4.0
9.0
6.5
5.1
Brunei Darussalam
0.7
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–1.3
1.1
–0.4
1.9
1.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.5
Cambodia
6.2
3.9
1.2
3.0
2.9
2.4
2.0
2.9
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
4.1
3.0
3.0
China
3.1
2.0
1.4
2.0
1.6
2.1
2.9
2.4
0.9
2.1
1.8
2.0
1.8
2.5
1.4
Fiji
4.1
0.5
1.4
3.9
3.3
4.1
1.8
–2.6
0.2
4.0
3.0
2.5
3.0
4.5
3.2
India
8.2
5.8
4.9
4.5
3.6
3.4
4.8
6.2
5.5
6.1
4.8
4.0
6.1
5.7
4.5
Indonesia
7.1
6.4
6.4
3.5
3.8
3.3
2.8
2.0
1.6
3.3
3.3
2.9
1.9
4.0
3.1
Kiribati
1.7
2.1
0.6
1.9
0.4
0.6
–1.8
2.5
3.0
5.0
3.3
1.6
3.2
4.8
3.1
Lao P.D.R.
6.0
4.1
1.3
1.6
0.8
2.0
3.3
5.1
3.8
6.2
5.0
3.0
5.3
6.2
5.0
Malaysia
2.5
3.1
2.1
2.1
3.8
1.0
0.7
–1.1
2.5
3.0
2.4
2.5
3.2
3.0
2.4
Maldives
6.7
2.4
1.4
0.8
2.3
1.4
1.3
–1.6
0.2
2.3
2.0
2.0
0.2
2.3
2.0
Marshall Islands
4.1
1.1
–2.2
–1.5
0.1
0.8
–0.5
–0.2
3.5
5.3
3.0
2.0
3.5
5.3
3.0
Micronesia
4.4
0.7
0.0
–0.9
0.1
1.1
2.2
0.9
2.1
5.6
3.0
2.1
2.1
5.6
3.0
Mongolia
11.2
12.3
5.7
0.7
4.3
6.8
7.3
3.7
7.1
15.5
14.5
6.5
13.5
17.5
11.5
Myanmar
10.6
5.7
7.3
9.1
4.6
5.9
8.6
5.7
3.6
14.1
8.2
7.8
7.3
14.7
8.3
Nauru
. . .
0.3
9.8
8.2
5.1
0.5
4.3
–6.6
1.2
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.2
2.6
1.7
Nepal
7.9
9.0
7.2
9.9
4.5
4.1
4.6
6.1
3.6
5.8
5.8
5.4
4.2
6.9
5.7
Palau
3.8
4.0
2.2
–1.3
1.1
2.0
0.6
0.7
0.4
5.0
2.3
1.0
0.4
5.0
2.3
Papua New Guinea
4.4
5.2
6.0
6.7
5.4
4.7
3.7
4.9
4.5
6.4
5.4
4.5
5.7
6.0
5.2
Philippines
4.6
3.6
0.7
1.2
2.9
5.3
2.4
2.4
3.9
4.3
3.7
3.0
3.1
4.0
3.4
Samoa
5.2
–1.2
1.9
0.1
1.3
3.7
2.2
1.5
–3.0
8.3
4.8
3.0
4.1
6.6
3.0
Solomon Islands
7.7
5.3
–0.6
0.5
0.5
3.5
1.6
3.0
–0.1
5.4
3.2
3.6
3.5
4.5
3.0
Sri Lanka
8.6
2.8
2.2
4.0
6.6
4.3
4.3
4.6
6.0
17.6
12.9
5.0
12.1
17.2
9.5
Thailand
3.1
1.9
–0.9
0.2
0.7
1.1
0.7
–0.8
1.2
3.5
2.8
2.0
2.2
4.0
0.8
Timor-Leste
6.3
0.8
0.6
–1.5
0.5
2.3
0.9
0.5
3.8
6.0
4.0
2.0
5.3
6.0
4.0
Tonga
6.0
2.3
0.1
–0.6
7.2
6.8
3.3
0.4
1.4
6.1
4.3
2.7
6.9
5.1
3.5
Tuvalu
2.4
1.1
3.1
3.5
4.1
2.2
3.5
1.6
3.0
4.4
3.1
2.9
3.0
4.4
3.1
Vanuatu
2.4
0.8
2.5
0.8
3.1
2.4
2.7
5.3
3.0
4.8
3.9
2.9
3.2
5.0
3.1
Vietnam
10.4
4.1
0.6
2.7
3.5
3.5
2.8
3.2
1.9
3.8
3.2
3.5
1.9
3.8
3.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
8.1
6.5
10.6
5.5
5.6
6.4
6.6
5.3
9.5
27.1
18.1
6.8
15.0
26.0
14.7
Albania
2.7
1.6
1.9
1.3
2.0
2.0
1.4
1.6
2.0
5.5
3.7
3.0
3.7
4.8
3.0
Belarus
19.8
18.1
13.5
11.8
6.0
4.9
5.6
5.5
9.5
12.6
14.1
5.0
10.0
15.9
12.4
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2.6
–0.9
–1.0
–1.6
0.8
1.4
0.6
–1.1
2.0
6.5
3.0
2.0
1.8
5.9
2.7
Bulgaria3
5.0
–1.6
–1.1
–1.3
1.2
2.6
2.5
1.2
2.8
11.0
3.3
2.0
6.6
11.0
0.4
Croatia
2.9
–0.2
–0.5
–1.1
1.1
1.5
0.8
0.1
2.6
5.9
2.7
1.9
5.5
5.8
2.1
Hungary
4.8
–0.2
–0.1
0.4
2.4
2.8
3.4
3.3
5.1
10.3
6.4
3.0
7.4
10.7
4.5
Kosovo
2.4
0.4
–0.5
0.2
1.5
1.1
2.7
0.2
3.3
9.5
3.3
2.0
6.7
8.4
2.1
Moldova
8.5
5.1
9.6
6.4
6.5
3.6
4.8
3.8
5.1
21.9
6.5
5.0
13.9
15.7
5.0
Montenegro
3.5
–0.7
1.5
–0.3
2.4
2.6
0.4
–0.2
2.4
6.8
3.8
1.8
4.7
7.0
2.8
North Macedonia
2.4
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
1.4
1.5
0.8
1.2
3.2
6.9
3.6
2.0
4.9
5.2
3.3
Poland
2.8
0.0
–0.9
–0.6
2.0
1.6
2.3
3.4
5.1
8.9
10.3
2.5
8.6
8.1
7.9
Romania
6.5
1.1
–0.6
–1.6
1.3
4.6
3.8
2.6
5.0
9.3
4.0
2.5
8.2
7.6
3.4
Russia 
9.5
7.8
15.5
7.0
3.7
2.9
4.5
3.4
6.7
21.3
14.3
4.0
8.4
24.0
12.0
Serbia
9.6
2.1
1.4
1.1
3.1
2.0
1.9
1.6
4.1
7.7
4.7
3.0
7.9
6.0
4.0
Turkey
8.3
8.9
7.7
7.8
11.1
16.3
15.2
12.3
19.6
60.5
37.2
15.0
36.1
52.4
29.7
Ukraine4
10.1
12.1
48.7
13.9
14.4
10.9
7.9
2.7
9.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
10.0
. . .
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean5
4.9
4.9
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
11.2
8.0
5.0
11.6
10.0
7.1
Antigua and Barbuda
2.3
1.1
1.0
–0.5
2.4
1.2
1.4
1.1
1.6
4.4
3.5
2.0
1.2
5.4
2.4
Argentina4
8.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
25.7
34.3
53.5
42.0
48.4
51.7
43.5
24.2
50.9
48.0
42.0
Aruba
2.6
0.4
0.5
–0.9
–1.0
3.6
3.9
–1.3
0.7
4.6
2.4
1.3
3.6
4.0
1.4
The Bahamas
2.0
1.2
1.9
–0.3
1.5
2.3
2.5
0.0
3.2
7.3
4.5
2.4
5.5
6.7
3.5
Barbados
5.2
1.8
–1.1
1.5
4.4
3.7
4.1
2.9
3.0
6.0
4.5
2.3
5.0
4.3
3.5
Belize
2.3
1.2
–0.9
0.7
1.1
0.3
0.2
0.1
3.2
4.8
3.7
2.0
4.9
5.2
2.5
Bolivia
6.0
5.8
4.1
3.6
2.8
2.3
1.8
0.9
0.7
3.2
3.6
3.5
0.9
4.2
3.6
Brazil
5.5
6.3
9.0
8.7
3.4
3.7
3.7
3.2
8.3
8.2
5.1
3.0
10.1
6.7
3.5
Chile
3.1
4.7
4.3
3.8
2.2
2.3
2.3
3.0
4.5
7.5
4.5
3.0
7.1
6.0
3.9
Colombia
4.3
2.9
5.0
7.5
4.3
3.2
3.5
2.5
3.5
7.7
4.2
3.0
5.6
6.9
3.8
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
147
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2004–13 2014 2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
(continued)5
4.9
4.9
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
11.2
8.0
5.0
11.6
10.0
7.1
Costa Rica
8.8
4.5
0.8
0.0
1.6
2.2
2.1
0.7
1.7
5.4
3.7
3.0
3.3
5.2
3.4
Dominica
2.1
0.8
–0.9
0.1
0.3
1.0
1.5
–0.7
0.5
5.0
4.2
2.0
0.5
5.0
4.2
Dominican Republic
9.7
3.0
0.8
1.6
3.3
3.6
1.8
3.8
8.2
8.4
5.0
4.0
8.5
6.9
4.5
Ecuador
4.0
3.6
4.0
1.7
0.4
–0.2
0.3
–0.3
0.1
3.2
2.4
1.0
1.9
3.8
1.4
El Salvador
3.4
1.1
–0.7
0.6
1.0
1.1
0.1
–0.4
3.5
5.2
2.2
1.3
6.1
5.0
2.0
Grenada
3.0
–1.0
–0.6
1.7
0.9
0.8
0.6
–0.7
1.2
4.4
3.5
2.0
1.9
5.4
2.3
Guatemala
6.1
3.4
2.4
4.4
4.4
3.8
3.7
3.2
4.3
4.4
4.3
4.0
3.1
4.8
4.5
Guyana
5.4
0.7
–0.9
0.8
1.9
1.3
2.1
0.7
5.1
5.4
6.2
3.1
5.7
7.4
5.0
Haiti
9.5
3.2
5.3
11.4
10.6
11.4
17.3
22.9
15.9
25.5
14.3
9.4
13.1
24.9
12.0
Honduras
6.8
6.1
3.2
2.7
3.9
4.3
4.4
3.5
4.5
6.0
5.0
4.0
5.3
6.0
4.0
Jamaica
11.4
8.3
3.7
2.3
4.4
3.7
3.9
5.2
5.9
8.5
5.9
5.0
7.3
8.0
4.0
Mexico
4.2
4.0
2.7
2.8
6.0
4.9
3.6
3.4
5.7
6.8
3.9
3.0
7.4
5.9
3.4
Nicaragua
8.9
6.0
4.0
3.5
3.9
4.9
5.4
3.7
4.9
8.7
6.2
3.5
7.2
8.5
4.5
Panama
4.0
2.6
0.1
0.7
0.9
0.8
–0.4
–1.6
1.6
3.1
3.4
2.0
2.6
4.0
3.0
Paraguay
6.1
5.0
3.1
4.1
3.6
4.0
2.8
1.8
4.8
9.4
4.5
4.0
6.8
7.0
4.2
Peru
2.9
3.2
3.5
3.6
2.8
1.3
2.1
1.8
4.0
5.5
3.6
2.0
6.4
4.0
3.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.4
0.2
–2.3
–0.7
0.7
–1.0
–0.3
–0.6
0.2
4.2
3.9
2.0
1.9
6.6
1.3
St. Lucia
2.9
3.5
–1.0
–3.1
0.1
2.6
0.5
–1.8
2.4
6.4
2.7
2.0
4.1
5.4
2.3
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
3.4
0.2
–1.7
–0.2
2.2
2.3
0.9
–0.6
1.6
6.0
4.4
2.0
3.4
8.0
2.1
Suriname
8.5
3.4
6.9
55.5
22.0
6.9
4.4
34.9
59.1
38.9
22.6
4.9
60.6
25.8
17.6
Trinidad and Tobago
7.6
5.7
4.7
3.1
1.9
1.0
1.0
0.6
1.1
4.6
3.8
1.9
3.5
5.5
3.1
Uruguay
7.5
8.9
8.7
9.6
6.2
7.6
7.9
9.8
7.7
7.0
5.6
4.5
8.0
6.0
5.0
Venezuela4
24.1
62.2 121.7 254.9 438.1 65,374.1 19,906.0 2,355.1 1,588.5
500.0
500.0
. . .
686.4
500.0
500.0
Middle East and 
Central Asia
8.4
6.5
5.6
5.7
6.9
9.8
7.8
10.6
13.2
12.8
10.5
6.9
13.0
12.5
9.0
Afghanistan4
8.7
4.7
–0.7
4.4
5.0
0.6
2.3
5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
4.2
2.9
4.8
6.4
5.6
4.3
2.0
2.4
7.2
8.7
8.2
9.3
8.5
9.5
7.7
Armenia
5.1
3.0
3.7
–1.4
1.2
2.5
1.4
1.2
7.2
7.6
6.0
4.0
7.7
7.5
5.0
Azerbaijan
7.8
1.4
4.0
12.4
12.8
2.3
2.7
2.8
6.7
12.3
8.7
4.0
12.0
11.0
6.0
Bahrain
2.4
2.6
1.8
2.8
1.4
2.1
1.0
–2.3
–0.6
3.5
2.8
2.0
–0.4
3.0
2.3
Djibouti
4.2
1.3
–0.8
2.7
0.6
0.1
3.3
1.8
1.2
3.8
4.2
2.5
2.5
5.0
3.5
Egypt
9.8
10.1
11.0
10.2
23.5
20.9
13.9
5.7
4.5
7.5
11.0
7.4
4.9
10.7
8.6
Georgia
5.7
3.1
4.0
2.1
6.0
2.6
4.9
5.2
9.6
9.9
5.1
3.0
13.9
7.6
3.4
Iran
18.8
15.6
11.9
9.1
9.6
30.2
34.6
36.4
40.1
32.3
27.5
25.0
34.7
30.0
25.0
Iraq
. . .
2.2
1.4
0.5
0.2
0.4
–0.2
0.6
6.0
6.9
4.7
2.0
5.3
5.9
3.9
Jordan
4.7
3.0
–1.1
–0.6
3.6
4.5
0.7
0.4
1.3
2.8
2.5
2.5
2.3
2.8
2.5
Kazakhstan
8.4
6.7
6.7
14.6
7.4
6.0
5.2
6.8
8.0
8.5
7.1
4.0
8.4
8.5
6.0
Kuwait
4.0
3.1
3.7
3.5
1.5
0.6
1.1
2.1
3.4
4.8
2.3
2.5
4.1
3.4
2.8
Kyrgyz Republic
8.8
7.5
6.5
0.4
3.2
1.5
1.1
6.3
11.9
13.2
10.1
4.8
11.2
14.7
6.4
Lebanon4
4.1
1.1
–3.8
–0.8
4.5
6.1
2.9
84.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya4
5.1
2.4
14.8
24.0
28.0
–1.2
0.2
2.8
3.7
3.7
2.4
2.7
3.7
3.7
2.4
Mauritania
6.6
3.8
0.5
1.5
2.3
3.1
2.3
2.3
3.8
4.9
4.0
4.0
5.7
4.0
4.0
Morocco
1.8
0.4
1.4
1.5
0.7
1.6
0.2
0.6
1.4
4.4
2.3
2.0
3.2
4.0
2.2
Oman
3.9
1.0
0.1
1.1
1.6
0.9
0.1
–0.9
1.5
3.7
2.2
1.9
1.5
3.7
2.2
Pakistan
10.3
8.6
4.5
2.9
4.1
3.9
6.7
10.7
8.9
11.2
10.5
6.5
9.7
12.7
8.2
Qatar
5.4
4.2
0.9
2.7
0.4
0.3
–0.7
–2.7
2.3
3.5
3.2
1.5
5.9
1.2
5.2
Saudi Arabia
3.2
2.2
1.2
2.1
–0.8
2.5
–2.1
3.4
3.1
2.5
2.0
2.0
1.2
2.5
2.0
Somalia
. . .
1.3
0.9
0.0
4.0
4.3
4.5
4.3
4.6
9.4
3.6
3.3
5.7
8.7
3.5
Sudan6
16.5
36.9
16.9
17.8
32.4
63.3
51.0
163.3
359.1
245.1
111.4
8.1
318.2
244.4
69.2
Syria7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
9.3
6.1
5.8
5.9
7.3
3.8
7.8
8.6
8.7
10.0
10.5
6.5
8.0
12.0
9.0
Tunisia4
3.9
4.6
4.4
3.6
5.3
7.3
6.7
5.6
5.7
7.7
. . .
. . .
6.6
8.4
. . .
Turkmenistan
6.4
6.0
7.4
3.6
8.0
13.3
5.1
7.6
15.0
17.5
10.5
8.0
21.0
14.0
7.0
United Arab Emirates
4.8
2.3
4.1
1.6
2.0
3.1
–1.9
–2.1
0.2
3.7
2.8
2.0
0.2
3.7
2.8
Uzbekistan
11.6
9.1
8.5
8.8
13.9
17.5
14.5
12.9
10.8
11.8
11.3
5.1
10.0
12.1
11.3
West Bank and Gaza
3.8
1.7
1.4
–0.2
0.2
–0.2
1.6
–0.7
1.2
2.8
2.4
2.0
1.3
2.6
2.3
Yemen
11.4
8.2
22.0
21.3
30.4
27.6
12.0
23.1
63.8
59.7
34.0
10.8
85.1
46.0
25.8
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
148	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.6
6.4
6.7
10.3
10.6
8.3
8.1
10.2
11.0
12.2
9.6
6.7
11.5
11.6
8.9
Angola
16.2
7.3
9.2
30.7
29.8
19.6
17.1
22.3
25.8
23.9
13.2
6.4
27.0
18.0
12.0
Benin
3.3
–1.1
0.2
–0.8
1.8
0.8
–0.9
3.0
1.7
4.6
1.8
2.0
1.7
4.6
1.8
Botswana
8.4
4.4
3.1
2.8
3.3
3.2
2.7
1.9
6.7
8.9
4.5
4.5
8.7
8.9
4.5
Burkina Faso
2.6
–0.3
1.7
0.4
1.5
2.0
–3.2
1.9
3.9
6.0
2.0
2.0
8.0
4.0
2.0
Burundi
10.8
4.4
5.6
5.5
1.6
–4.0
–0.7
7.3
8.3
9.2
6.5
6.0
10.1
7.1
6.0
Cabo Verde
2.6
–0.2
0.1
–1.4
0.8
1.3
1.1
0.6
1.9
2.3
2.0
2.0
5.4
2.5
2.0
Cameroon
2.5
1.9
2.7
0.9
0.6
1.1
2.5
2.5
2.3
2.9
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.7
2.0
Central African Republic
3.3
17.8
1.4
4.9
4.2
1.6
2.8
0.9
4.3
4.0
3.6
2.5
2.7
5.4
2.4
Chad
2.6
1.7
4.8
–1.6
–0.9
4.0
–1.0
4.5
–0.8
4.1
3.1
3.0
1.0
3.8
3.1
Comoros
3.7
0.0
0.9
0.8
0.1
1.7
3.7
0.8
1.5
5.0
1.5
1.9
11.3
0.2
1.1
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
15.3
1.2
0.7
3.2
35.7
29.3
4.7
11.4
9.0
6.4
6.1
6.3
5.3
6.4
5.8
Republic of Congo
3.5
0.9
3.2
3.2
0.4
1.2
0.4
1.4
2.0
2.7
3.0
3.0
1.5
3.0
3.0
Côte d’Ivoire
2.2
0.5
1.2
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.8
2.4
4.2
5.5
2.3
2.0
5.6
4.2
1.7
Equatorial Guinea
4.4
4.3
1.7
1.4
0.7
1.3
1.2
4.8
–0.1
4.0
3.9
3.0
2.9
4.9
3.0
Eritrea
14.1
10.0
28.5
–5.6
–13.3
–14.4
–16.4
4.8
4.5
6.2
3.5
2.0
4.0
4.0
2.0
Eswatini
6.7
5.7
5.0
7.8
6.2
4.8
2.6
3.9
3.7
4.8
4.2
4.4
3.5
4.8
4.2
Ethiopia
16.6
7.4
9.6
6.6
10.7
13.8
15.8
20.4
26.8
34.5
30.5
12.4
35.1
33.4
28.1
Gabon
1.2
4.5
–0.1
2.1
2.7
4.8
2.0
1.3
1.1
2.9
2.6
2.0
1.7
3.6
1.7
The Gambia
5.5
6.3
6.8
7.2
8.0
6.5
7.1
5.9
7.4
8.0
8.0
5.0
7.6
8.5
7.5
Ghana
11.2
15.5
17.2
17.5
12.4
9.8
7.1
9.9
10.0
16.3
13.0
6.0
12.6
15.8
10.3
Guinea
19.0
9.7
8.2
8.2
8.9
9.8
9.5
10.6
12.6
12.7
12.3
7.8
12.5
12.8
11.8
Guinea-Bissau
2.8
–1.0
1.5
2.7
–0.2
0.4
0.3
1.5
3.3
4.0
3.0
2.0
5.8
0.7
3.0
Kenya
8.5
6.9
6.6
6.3
8.0
4.7
5.2
5.3
6.1
7.2
7.1
5.0
5.7
8.7
5.5
Lesotho
6.0
5.4
3.2
6.6
4.4
4.8
5.2
5.0
6.0
6.1
5.6
5.5
5.9
6.0
4.9
Liberia
8.6
9.9
7.7
8.8
12.4
23.5
27.0
17.0
7.8
8.2
6.9
5.0
5.5
10.7
8.2
Madagascar
10.1
6.1
7.4
6.1
8.6
8.6
5.6
4.2
5.8
8.8
6.8
5.8
6.2
8.3
6.6
Malawi
11.3
23.8
21.9
21.7
11.5
9.2
9.4
8.6
9.3
10.7
7.1
5.0
11.5
10.7
6.6
Mali
2.4
2.7
1.4
–1.8
1.8
1.7
–2.9
0.5
4.0
8.0
3.0
2.0
8.9
4.0
3.0
Mauritius
5.6
3.2
1.3
1.0
3.7
3.2
0.5
2.5
4.0
8.4
5.7
3.5
6.8
8.0
5.6
Mozambique
9.1
2.6
3.6
17.4
15.1
3.9
2.8
3.1
5.7
8.5
7.7
5.5
6.7
9.0
7.0
Namibia
5.8
5.3
3.4
6.7
6.1
4.3
3.7
2.2
3.6
5.5
4.6
4.5
4.5
6.0
4.5
Niger
2.6
–0.9
1.0
0.2
0.2
2.8
–2.5
2.9
3.8
5.0
3.0
2.0
4.9
5.0
3.0
Nigeria
11.5
8.0
9.0
15.7
16.5
12.1
11.4
13.2
17.0
16.1
13.1
11.5
15.6
15.6
12.4
Rwanda
8.3
1.8
2.5
5.7
4.8
1.4
2.4
7.7
0.8
8.0
7.0
5.0
1.9
7.5
6.8
São Tomé and Príncipe
16.6
7.0
6.1
5.4
5.7
7.9
7.7
9.8
8.1
14.5
9.2
5.0
9.5
15.0
5.0
Senegal
2.1
–1.1
0.9
1.2
1.1
0.5
1.0
2.5
2.2
3.0
2.2
2.0
3.8
0.8
3.4
Seychelles
8.1
1.4
4.0
–1.0
2.9
3.7
1.8
1.2
9.8
5.6
1.6
2.5
7.9
7.4
–4.2
Sierra Leone
9.5
4.6
6.7
10.9
18.2
16.0
14.8
13.4
11.9
17.3
14.5
7.8
17.9
16.7
12.3
South Africa
5.5
6.1
4.6
6.3
5.3
4.6
4.1
3.3
4.5
5.7
4.6
4.5
5.4
5.5
4.5
South Sudan
. . .
1.7
52.8
379.8
187.9
83.5
51.2
24.0
5.3
16.0
15.0
10.5
0.9
10.0
15.0
Tanzania
8.8
6.1
5.6
5.2
5.3
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.7
4.4
5.4
4.3
4.2
6.3
5.0
Togo
2.7
0.2
1.8
0.9
–0.2
0.9
0.7
1.8
4.3
4.6
2.0
1.7
6.2
0.2
3.9
Uganda
9.2
4.3
3.7
5.2
5.6
2.6
2.3
2.8
2.2
6.1
4.1
5.0
2.9
6.4
4.9
Zambia
11.2
7.8
10.1
17.9
6.6
7.0
9.2
15.7
20.5
15.7
9.2
7.0
16.6
10.8
8.8
Zimbabwe4
5.0
–0.2
–2.4
–1.6
0.9
10.6
255.3
557.2
98.5
86.7
46.5
7.0
60.7
85.8
42.0
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
4See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Argentina, Lebanon, Libya, Tunisia, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
149
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.3
–3.6
–3.0
–3.3
–3.2
–3.4
–3.8
–11.9
–8.4
–4.9
–3.3
–3.6
Output Gap2
–2.2
–2.8
–2.0
–1.7
–0.8
–0.1
0.2
–3.4
–0.9
0.4
0.6
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.2
–2.5
–2.2
–2.7
–2.9
–3.3
–3.9
–8.0
–6.5
–5.0
–3.6
–3.5
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
–6.5
–4.0
–3.5
–4.3
–4.6
–5.4
–5.7
–14.5
–10.2
–4.8
–4.0
–5.2
Output Gap2
–3.7
–4.0
–2.5
–2.1
–1.3
0.0
0.7
–3.3
0.3
1.6
1.5
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.5
–2.7
–2.5
–3.5
–4.2
–5.2
–6.1
–10.4
–8.0
–5.3
–4.6
–5.1
Net Debt 
60.6
81.1
80.9
81.9
80.3
81.2
83.0
98.7
101.3
95.8
94.9
105.6
Gross Debt 
82.3
104.6
105.1
107.2
106.2
107.5
108.8
134.2
132.6
125.6
123.7
127.4
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.3
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–0.9
–0.4
–0.6
–7.2
–5.5
–4.3
–2.5
–1.7
Output Gap2
–0.4
–2.9
–2.3
–1.6
–0.6
–0.1
0.1
–4.3
–2.4
–1.0
–0.4
0.1
Structural Balance2
–3.0
–0.7
–0.6
–0.5
–0.5
–0.3
–0.5
–4.5
–4.0
–3.5
–2.3
–1.7
Net Debt
62.8
76.1
75.0
74.5
72.4
70.6
69.1
79.6
79.2
79.2
78.1
75.1
Gross Debt
78.1
92.7
90.8
90.0
87.5
85.5
83.5
97.3
96.0
95.2
93.4
88.9
Germany 
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.7
0.6
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.9
1.5
–4.3
–3.7
–3.3
–0.7
0.4
Output Gap2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.3
0.1
1.0
0.8
0.4
–2.6
–2.1
–1.1
–0.3
0.0
Structural Balance2
–1.4
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.6
1.3
–3.1
–2.6
–2.0
–0.5
0.4
Net Debt
57.5
54.9
52.2
49.3
45.4
42.6
40.5
46.3
49.0
51.1
49.0
42.2
Gross Debt
72.3
75.3
72.0
69.0
64.7
61.3
58.9
68.7
70.2
70.9
67.7
58.7
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.4
–3.9
–3.6
–3.6
–3.0
–2.3
–3.1
–9.1
–7.0
–5.6
–3.8
–3.3
Output Gap2
–0.4
–2.2
–2.4
–2.5
–1.6
–0.8
0.0
–4.8
–1.8
–0.5
–0.6
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.1
–2.5
–2.1
–2.0
–1.9
–1.5
–2.1
–5.9
–5.9
–5.3
–3.4
–3.3
Net Debt
67.4
85.5
86.3
89.2
89.4
89.2
88.8
102.6
99.8
100.1
100.4
101.4
Gross Debt
77.1
94.9
95.6
98.0
98.1
97.8
97.4
115.2
112.3
112.6
112.9
114.0
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.4
–3.0
–2.6
–2.4
–2.4
–2.2
–1.5
–9.6
–7.2
–6.0
–3.9
–2.5
Output Gap2
–0.6
–4.1
–3.4
–2.6
–1.6
–1.1
–1.1
–6.1
–4.1
–1.2
–0.3
0.5
Structural Balance2
–3.4
–1.0
–0.6
–1.3
–1.6
–1.7
–1.0
–6.0
–4.6
–5.2
–3.7
–2.7
Net Debt
104.3
121.4
122.2
121.6
121.3
121.8
121.7
141.8
138.3
138.5
137.1
132.6
Gross Debt
114.3
135.4
135.3
134.8
134.2
134.4
134.1
155.3
150.9
150.6
148.7
142.9
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.3
–5.6
–3.7
–3.6
–3.1
–2.5
–3.0
–9.0
–7.6
–7.8
–3.5
–2.8
Output Gap2
–1.6
–2.3
–1.5
–1.5
–0.5
–0.7
–1.4
–2.7
–2.6
–1.7
–0.4
0.0
Structural Balance2
–5.8
–5.4
–4.2
–4.1
–3.3
–2.5
–2.5
–8.1
–6.9
–7.3
–3.3
–2.8
Net Debt
115.7
145.1
144.6
149.6
148.1
151.1
151.4
162.4
168.9
172.1
171.0
174.5
Gross Debt4
195.1
233.5
228.4
232.5
231.4
232.5
236.1
259.0
263.1
262.5
258.3
261.8
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.6
–5.5
–4.5
–3.3
–2.4
–2.2
–2.2
–12.8
–8.0
–4.3
–2.3
–1.0
Output Gap2
–1.1
–1.8
–1.0
–0.5
0.1
0.3
0.6
–3.5
–0.1
0.4
–0.7
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.8
–3.9
–3.6
–2.8
–2.3
–2.4
–2.7
0.5
–3.2
–4.4
–2.0
–1.1
Net Debt
52.9
77.3
77.6
76.9
75.7
74.8
74.1
90.2
84.3
76.1
71.3
59.2
Gross Debt
59.1
85.5
86.0
85.8
85.1
84.5
83.9
102.6
95.3
87.8
82.7
70.7
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.0
0.2
–0.1
–0.5
–0.1
0.4
0.0
–11.4
–4.7
–2.2
–0.8
–0.3
Output Gap2
0.0
1.0
–0.1
–0.9
0.4
0.6
0.4
–3.4
–1.5
0.3
0.8
0.0
Structural Balance2
–0.9
–0.6
0.0
0.1
–0.3
0.0
–0.2
–8.6
–3.6
–2.3
–1.3
–0.3
Net Debt5
26.5
28.5
28.6
28.5
25.8
25.7
23.1
33.6
33.2
32.1
31.6
27.6
Gross Debt
76.1
85.6
91.2
91.8
88.9
88.9
87.2
117.8
112.1
101.8
98.5
87.7
Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the 
relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the System 
of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Nonconsolidated basis.
5Includes equity shares.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
150	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
5.4
3.0
3.8
3.0
2.3
5.6
4.0
0.9
–7.9
10.1
5.0
4.4
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
4.1
0.5
–1.8
–13.3
–4.0
4.3
5.5
–2.4
–2.2
12.6
7.8
0.6
In SDRs
3.2
1.2
–1.7
–5.9
–3.4
4.6
3.3
0.0
–3.0
10.1
10.2
–0.5
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.5
2.8
3.8
3.8
2.1
4.9
3.6
1.3
–9.1
8.6
5.0
4.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.4
3.4
3.4
2.0
2.8
6.5
4.1
0.4
–4.8
12.3
4.1
3.6
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.7
3.2
3.9
4.8
2.5
4.8
3.8
2.1
–8.7
9.5
6.1
4.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
2.8
4.3
–0.6
1.7
7.5
5.1
–1.1
–7.9
11.8
3.9
4.8
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.3
0.3
1.8
1.1
–0.2
–0.4
0.2
0.8
0.7
–1.1
0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.5
–0.4
–0.7
–4.4
–1.5
1.5
1.1
–1.3
–1.2
1.4
1.9
–1.0
Trade in Goods 
World Trade1
Volume
5.3
3.1
3.0
2.3
2.1
5.6
3.8
0.2
–4.9
10.9
4.4
3.8
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
4.2
0.3
–2.4
–14.5
–4.8
4.9
5.8
–3.1
–2.6
14.0
9.0
0.2
In SDRs
3.4
1.1
–2.3
–7.2
–4.2
5.1
3.6
–0.7
–3.4
11.5
11.5
–0.9
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
2.6
0.8
–0.5
–3.0
–5.2
0.1
2.0
0.5
–3.2
6.8
8.8
2.9
Oil
13.7
–1.2
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
29.4
–10.2
–32.7
67.3
54.7
–13.3
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
8.4
2.2
–5.5
–17.1
–0.4
6.4
1.3
0.7
6.8
26.8
11.4
–2.5
Food
5.8
1.4
–1.6
–16.9
1.5
3.8
–1.2
–3.1
1.7
27.8
13.9
–5.7
Beverages
6.8
2.6
20.1
–7.2
–3.1
–4.7
–8.2
–3.8
3.5
22.7
15.7
–2.9
Agricultural Raw Materials
4.6
–1.0
–7.5
–11.5
0.0
5.2
2.0
–5.4
–3.3
15.8
4.3
–6.6
Metal
13.1
3.1
–12.2
–27.3
–5.3
22.2
6.6
3.7
3.5
46.8
9.9
–0.1
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
1.8
1.6
–0.4
5.3
–4.6
0.4
–0.1
3.0
–4.0
4.4
11.2
1.7
Oil
12.7
–0.4
–7.5
–42.7
–15.1
23.6
26.7
–8.0
–33.3
63.5
58.1
–14.3
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
7.5
3.0
–5.5
–10.0
0.3
6.6
–0.8
3.2
5.9
23.9
13.9
–3.5
Food
4.9
2.2
–1.5
–9.8
2.2
4.1
–3.3
–0.7
0.9
24.9
16.4
–6.7
Beverages
5.9
3.4
20.1
0.7
–2.5
–4.5
–10.1
–1.4
2.7
20.0
18.3
–4.0
Agricultural Raw Materials
3.7
–0.2
–7.5
–4.0
0.6
5.5
–0.1
–3.1
–4.1
13.2
6.6
–7.6
Metal
12.2
3.9
–12.1
–21.1
–4.7
22.5
4.4
6.2
2.7
43.6
12.3
–1.2
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
1.0
2.5
–0.5
16.2
–5.0
–1.9
–2.5
6.1
–5.1
2.9
15.5
1.4
Oil
11.9
0.4
–7.6
–36.8
–15.4
20.8
23.7
–5.2
–34.0
61.3
64.3
–14.5
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
6.7
3.9
–5.6
–0.7
–0.1
4.2
–3.1
6.3
4.7
22.2
18.3
–3.8
Food
4.1
3.1
–1.6
–0.5
1.8
1.7
–5.6
2.3
–0.3
23.2
20.9
–7.0
Beverages
5.1
4.3
20.0
11.1
–2.8
–6.6
–12.2
1.5
1.5
18.3
22.9
–4.2
Agricultural Raw Materials
2.9
0.6
–7.6
5.9
0.3
3.1
–2.5
–0.2
–5.2
11.7
10.7
–7.9
Metal
11.3
4.8
–12.2
–12.9
–5.0
19.7
1.9
9.4
1.5
41.6
16.7
–1.5
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
151
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Trade in Goods
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.4
2.7
3.1
3.1
1.7
4.9
3.1
0.5
–6.3
9.4
4.0
4.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.2
3.3
2.7
1.5
2.7
6.6
3.8
–0.6
–1.1
11.6
3.6
3.1
Fuel Exporters
4.8
0.1
–0.5
2.4
0.8
0.9
–0.8
–4.5
–6.2
1.0
8.8
–0.3
Nonfuel Exporters
7.9
3.9
3.7
1.3
3.0
7.6
4.7
0.2
–0.2
13.0
2.9
3.8
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.8
3.2
3.4
3.7
2.2
4.8
3.7
0.6
–5.7
10.9
5.6
3.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
3.1
2.7
–0.4
2.1
7.4
5.2
–0.1
–5.5
12.5
3.8
3.9
Fuel Exporters
9.9
–0.7
4.3
0.1
–6.8
–0.9
–3.3
1.5
–11.7
1.2
10.0
0.3
Nonfuel Exporters
9.0
3.6
2.4
–0.4
3.5
8.6
6.4
–0.2
–4.7
13.8
3.1
4.3
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
2.2
1.0
–1.9
–6.4
–2.2
4.3
2.8
–1.4
–2.2
10.4
8.6
–0.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.2
1.2
–3.2
–9.2
–7.0
7.0
5.1
0.3
–5.7
14.8
15.6
–2.2
Fuel Exporters
10.3
0.1
–7.6
–30.1
–10.8
15.7
15.2
–3.3
–22.2
38.8
39.1
–9.1
Nonfuel Exporters
5.0
1.6
–1.9
–3.6
–6.3
5.4
3.2
1.1
–2.7
11.6
12.1
–0.8
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.7
0.7
–2.0
–8.1
–3.5
4.5
3.4
–1.5
–3.3
9.1
10.0
–0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.3
1.7
–2.7
–5.0
–5.5
5.8
3.7
0.5
–3.1
13.2
13.4
–1.2
Fuel Exporters
4.2
2.0
–2.8
–2.5
–3.7
3.5
1.5
3.0
–1.3
10.9
13.2
–0.1
Nonfuel Exporters
4.3
1.6
–2.7
–5.4
–5.8
6.2
4.0
0.2
–3.3
13.5
13.4
–1.4
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.3
0.2
1.8
1.3
–0.2
–0.7
0.1
1.2
1.2
–1.3
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.7
–0.5
–0.5
–4.4
–1.6
1.1
1.3
–0.2
–2.7
1.4
2.0
–1.0
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
–0.9
–0.1
2.4
8.4
0.2
–3.5
–2.3
1.2
0.7
–6.2
–3.1
2.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.0
–0.2
–0.7
–10.6
–6.2
2.9
4.4
0.6
–3.5
8.7
7.2
–2.9
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.5
–0.4
–2.5
–8.8
0.9
4.2
0.2
–0.2
0.8
4.1
–0.3
–1.5
Middle East and Central Asia
4.3
–1.5
–3.9
–24.3
–5.5
9.8
10.8
–5.0
–17.8
21.0
18.5
–8.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.5
0.0
–3.8
–15.0
–1.4
9.3
4.8
–2.3
–0.1
10.5
5.0
–4.6
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.8
–1.9
–5.0
–28.3
–7.4
11.8
13.5
–6.1
–21.2
25.2
22.9
–9.0
Nonfuel
0.7
0.0
0.9
1.9
–0.5
–0.7
–0.8
0.8
0.6
–1.7
–1.1
0.5
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
17,868
25,194
23,795
21,127
20,752
22,882
25,073
24,652
22,253
27,635
31,144 32,625
Goods
14,187
19,483
18,639
16,201
15,745
17,457
19,109
18,540
17,222
21,752
24,631 25,532
Average Oil Price3
13.7
–1.2
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
29.4
–10.2
–32.7
67.3
54.7
–13.3
In US Dollars a Barrel
77.74
68.22
96.25
50.79
42.84
52.81
68.33
61.39
41.29
69.07
106.83
92.63
Export Unit Value of Manufactures4
2.6
0.8
–0.5
–3.0
–5.2
0.1
2.0
0.5
–3.2
6.8
8.8
2.9
1Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
2As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 82 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) 
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16 
shares in world commodity imports.
3Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 
4Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
152	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
225.4
272.6
367.7
488.9
401.2
337.9
207.8
379.3
–65.0
23.4
435.8
United States
–370.0
–408.9
–397.6
–361.7
–438.2
–472.1
–616.1
–806.6
–877.8
–855.4
–636.7
Euro Area
316.9
313.5
364.0
402.1
392.4
306.7
250.0
345.2
257.1
344.1
479.3
Germany
280.3
288.8
295.1
288.9
316.3
294.3
272.5
314.0
249.8
313.4
369.3
France
–27.3
–9.0
–12.0
–19.8
–23.2
–7.9
–49.8
–27.4
–54.0
–51.3
–30.3
Italy
41.0
26.4
48.9
50.7
52.9
64.8
70.9
69.1
36.6
52.5
75.7
Spain
23.3
24.2
39.1
36.4
26.7
29.3
10.6
13.4
4.3
6.6
27.3
Japan
36.8
136.4
197.8
203.5
177.8
176.0
148.8
141.7
117.2
142.2
202.0
United Kingdom
–157.9
–152.7
–145.6
–98.1
–112.6
–76.8
–69.0
–82.5
–184.4
–178.1
–161.2
Canada
–41.9
–54.4
–47.2
–46.2
–41.0
–35.5
–29.4
1.2
24.6
–2.1
–51.0
Other Advanced Economies1
350.8
350.4
330.0
333.2
331.6
349.2
409.1
602.3
518.4
487.7
502.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
160.0
–75.5
–99.2
–22.5
–52.2
0.7
160.1
365.3
682.3
420.7
–112.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
227.6
296.7
212.2
166.4
–51.3
92.9
319.5
247.9
156.0
132.7
–21.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
–10.9
34.2
–8.4
–20.0
66.1
50.0
0.3
71.1
130.9
70.3
–13.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
–190.2
–172.8
–102.5
–94.9
–142.1
–107.7
–8.9
–82.0
–65.9
–70.6
–107.3
Middle East and Central Asia
198.4
–140.6
–146.0
–39.1
114.8
22.5
–101.7
149.1
496.4
343.4
102.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
–64.8
–92.9
–54.5
–34.8
–39.7
–57.0
–49.1
–20.8
–35.1
–55.1
–71.6
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
250.9
–144.6
–99.0
40.8
204.7
78.4
–84.2
204.7
601.0
426.5
160.4
Nonfuel
–88.9
71.0
1.9
–61.2
–254.8
–75.9
246.2
162.9
83.7
–3.2
–270.3
Of Which, Primary Products
–57.9
–65.2
–45.4
–57.9
–76.5
–49.3
–5.0
–19.8
–23.2
–29.7
–39.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–384.5
–352.7
–271.3
–306.6
–382.4
–300.5
–114.2
–295.0
–346.9
–367.9
–491.8
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2016–20
–56.0
–72.7
–67.3
–55.9
–46.1
–47.6
–30.5
–30.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
World
385.4
197.1
268.5
466.4
349.0
338.6
367.9
744.6
617.2
444.1
323.5
European Union
451.9
443.2
472.3
502.2
509.1
450.6
437.2
560.8
348.5
441.5
602.6
Middle East and North Africa
190.1
–122.0
–120.7
–19.4
130.5
41.8
–86.3
154.4
489.9
343.7
116.3
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
202.9
–1.0
–59.2
11.0
2.3
58.8
212.7
430.3
769.7
504.3
–19.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
–42.9
–74.5
–40.1
–33.5
–54.5
–58.1
–52.6
–65.0
–87.4
–83.6
–93.3
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
153
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.7
–0.1
0.0
0.6
United States
–2.1
–2.2
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.2
–2.9
–3.5
–3.5
–3.2
–2.1
Euro Area
2.3
2.7
3.0
3.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
Germany
7.2
8.6
8.5
7.8
7.9
7.6
7.1
7.4
5.9
6.9
6.9
France
–1.0
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
–0.3
–1.9
–0.9
–1.8
–1.7
–0.8
Italy
1.9
1.4
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.2
3.7
3.3
1.8
2.4
3.0
Spain
1.7
2.0
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.9
0.3
0.4
1.5
Japan
0.8
3.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.0
2.9
2.4
2.7
3.2
United Kingdom
–5.1
–5.2
–5.3
–3.6
–3.9
–2.7
–2.5
–2.6
–5.5
–4.8
–3.5
Canada
–2.3
–3.5
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.1
1.1
–0.1
–1.8
Other Advanced Economies1
5.0
5.4
5.0
4.7
4.4
4.7
5.6
7.2
5.9
5.3
4.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.5
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.5
0.9
1.5
0.9
–0.2
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
1.5
1.9
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.6
0.4
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.3
1.0
–0.3
–0.5
1.7
1.3
0.0
1.7
3.2
1.7
–0.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
–3.2
–3.3
–2.0
–1.7
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–1.6
–1.2
–1.2
–1.5
Middle East and Central Asia
4.9
–3.9
–4.1
–1.1
2.9
0.5
–2.5
3.0
8.3
5.6
1.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
–3.6
–5.7
–3.6
–2.2
–2.3
–3.2
–3.0
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
–2.3
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
6.1
–4.0
–2.9
1.2
5.4
2.0
–2.3
4.4
10.6
7.3
2.3
Nonfuel
–0.3
0.3
0.0
–0.2
–0.8
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.2
0.0
–0.5
Of Which, Primary Products
–2.8
–3.2
–2.3
–2.7
–3.7
–2.5
–0.3
–0.9
–1.0
–1.2
–1.3
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–2.8
–2.8
–2.1
–2.2
–2.7
–2.0
–0.8
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–2.1
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2016–20
–4.8
–6.6
–6.3
–5.5
–4.3
–4.2
–2.7
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
World
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
European Union
2.9
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.2
2.9
2.9
3.3
2.0
2.4
2.7
Middle East and North Africa
5.8
–4.3
–4.2
–0.7
4.0
1.2
–2.6
3.6
9.5
6.6
1.9
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
0.7
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.7
1.1
1.8
1.1
0.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
–2.1
–3.8
–2.1
–1.7
–2.6
–2.6
–2.3
–2.7
–3.3
–2.9
–2.2
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
154	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
1.5
2.0
2.7
3.3
2.5
2.2
1.5
2.2
–0.3
0.1
1.8
United States
–15.5
–17.9
–17.8
–15.1
–17.3
–18.7
–28.9
–31.9
–30.0
–27.0
–16.4
Euro Area
8.9
9.7
11.2
11.3
10.1
8.0
7.2
8.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
15.8
18.3
18.5
16.6
16.8
16.2
16.3
15.6
12.3
14.7
14.6
France
–3.1
–1.2
–1.5
–2.4
–2.5
–0.9
–6.6
–3.0
–5.2
–4.7
–2.3
Italy
6.5
4.8
8.9
8.4
8.1
10.2
12.8
10.1
5.0
6.6
7.7
Spain
5.1
6.0
9.4
7.9
5.3
6.0
2.7
2.7
0.8
1.1
3.6
Japan
4.3
17.4
24.4
23.2
19.1
19.5
18.8
15.5
11.8
13.4
16.6
United Kingdom
–18.2
–19.0
–18.9
–12.1
–12.7
–8.6
–8.8
–9.6
–20.0
–17.4
–12.5
Canada
–7.3
–11.0
–9.8
–8.9
–7.4
–6.3
–6.1
0.2
3.3
–0.3
–6.2
Other Advanced Economies1
8.4
9.4
9.0
8.3
7.7
8.3
10.5
12.3
9.3
8.4
7.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.0
–0.9
–1.3
–0.3
–0.7
0.0
2.0
3.4
5.4
3.2
–0.8
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.7
7.8
5.8
4.1
–1.1
2.1
7.3
4.4
2.5
2.0
–0.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.7
2.9
–0.7
–1.5
4.3
3.3
0.0
4.0
7.0
3.7
–0.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
–15.3
–16.0
–9.7
–8.1
–11.2
–8.6
–0.8
–6.0
–4.3
–4.4
–5.7
Middle East and Central Asia
12.7
–10.5
–12.0
–3.3
6.7
1.2
–8.8
9.4
22.5
16.4
4.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
–14.2
–27.0
–17.1
–9.4
–9.4
–13.8
–14.6
–4.7
–6.3
–9.8
–10.9
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
14.8
–10.9
–8.3
2.8
12.5
5.1
–7.7
13.4
27.4
21.1
8.4
Nonfuel
–1.3
1.1
0.0
–0.9
–3.3
–1.0
3.4
1.8
0.8
0.0
–2.0
Of Which, Primary Products
–11.8
–15.4
–10.8
–12.3
–15.1
–9.9
–1.1
–3.3
–3.4
–4.1
–4.5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–10.6
–11.0
–8.5
–8.4
–9.5
–7.4
–3.2
–6.5
–6.7
–6.7
–7.2
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2016–20
–17.3
–29.1
–29.9
–21.7
–15.5
–16.0
–12.2
–9.7
–10.2
–14.0
–11.6
Memorandum
World
1.7
1.0
1.3
2.0
1.3
1.4
1.7
2.7
1.9
1.3
0.8
European Union
6.3
6.9
7.2
7.0
6.4
5.8
6.1
6.5
3.8
4.5
5.0
Middle East and North Africa
13.8
–10.1
–11.0
–2.0
8.6
2.8
–8.4
10.9
24.9
18.5
6.2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
2.7
0.1
–0.8
0.1
–0.1
0.6
2.8
4.3
6.6
4.2
–0.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
–8.1
–15.5
–8.3
–6.0
–8.5
–8.5
–8.3
–8.8
–10.0
–9.0
–7.4
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
155
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.7
–0.1
0.0
0.6
United States
–2.1
–2.2
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.2
–2.9
–3.5
–3.5
–3.2
–2.1
Euro Area1
2.3
2.7
3.0
3.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
Germany
7.2
8.6
8.5
7.8
7.9
7.6
7.1
7.4
5.9
6.9
6.9
France
–1.0
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
–0.3
–1.9
–0.9
–1.8
–1.7
–0.8
Italy
1.9
1.4
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.2
3.7
3.3
1.8
2.4
3.0
Spain
1.7
2.0
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.9
0.3
0.4
1.5
The Netherlands
8.2
6.3
8.1
10.8
10.8
9.4
7.0
9.5
7.4
7.3
6.1
Belgium
0.8
1.4
0.6
0.7
–0.8
0.2
0.8
0.9
0.5
0.9
1.7
Ireland
1.1
4.4
–4.2
0.5
4.9
–19.9
–2.7
13.9
10.2
8.4
7.0
Austria
2.5
1.7
2.7
1.4
0.9
2.1
1.9
–0.6
–0.6
0.8
2.1
Portugal
0.2
0.2
1.2
1.3
0.6
0.4
–1.1
–1.1
–2.6
–1.4
–0.4
Greece
–2.4
–1.5
–2.4
–2.6
–3.6
–2.2
–7.3
–6.4
–6.3
–6.1
–2.7
Finland
–1.3
–0.9
–2.0
–0.8
–1.8
–0.3
0.8
0.9
0.4
0.0
–0.4
Slovak Republic
1.1
–2.1
–2.7
–1.9
–2.2
–3.4
0.1
–2.0
–5.0
–4.8
–2.3
Lithuania
3.2
–2.8
–0.8
0.6
0.3
3.5
7.3
2.7
–0.7
–2.1
–0.9
Slovenia
5.1
3.8
4.8
6.2
6.0
6.0
7.4
3.3
–0.5
–1.4
–2.7
Luxembourg
4.9
4.8
4.8
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.3
2.8
2.0
2.7
3.9
Latvia
–1.6
–0.6
1.6
1.3
–0.2
–0.7
2.9
–2.9
–1.6
–1.7
–0.2
Estonia
0.7
1.8
1.2
2.3
0.8
2.5
–0.3
–1.1
1.6
1.8
–0.4
Cyprus
–4.1
–0.4
–4.2
–5.1
–4.0
–5.7
–10.1
–7.6
–9.4
–8.3
–5.6
Malta
8.5
2.7
–0.6
5.9
6.4
5.4
–3.1
–5.1
–1.7
–1.4
1.8
Japan
0.8
3.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.0
2.9
2.4
2.7
3.2
United Kingdom
–5.1
–5.2
–5.3
–3.6
–3.9
–2.7
–2.5
–2.6
–5.5
–4.8
–3.5
Korea
5.6
7.2
6.5
4.6
4.5
3.6
4.6
4.9
2.2
3.2
4.1
Canada
–2.3
–3.5
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.1
1.1
–0.1
–1.8
Taiwan Province of China
11.3
13.6
13.1
14.1
11.6
10.7
14.2
14.7
13.2
11.6
8.5
Australia
–3.0
–4.6
–3.3
–2.6
–2.1
0.6
2.6
3.5
3.0
0.5
–0.1
Switzerland
7.5
9.4
8.0
6.3
6.1
5.4
2.8
9.3
6.3
7.0
7.0
Sweden
4.2
3.3
2.4
3.0
2.7
5.5
6.1
5.5
4.9
4.4
3.6
Singapore
18.0
18.7
17.6
17.3
15.2
14.5
16.8
18.1
13.0
12.7
12.0
Hong Kong SAR
1.4
3.3
4.0
4.6
3.7
5.9
7.0
11.2
10.9
9.4
7.4
Czech Republic
0.2
0.4
1.8
1.5
0.4
0.3
3.6
–0.8
–0.7
–1.2
–0.5
Israel
4.1
5.2
3.6
3.6
2.8
3.4
5.4
4.6
3.2
3.1
2.2
Norway
10.8
8.0
4.5
5.5
8.0
2.9
1.1
15.3
19.9
16.8
10.4
Denmark
8.9
8.2
7.8
8.0
7.3
8.8
8.1
8.4
7.3
7.1
6.6
New Zealand
–3.1
–2.8
–2.1
–2.8
–4.0
–2.9
–0.8
–5.8
–6.5
–5.3
–4.3
Puerto Rico
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
32.7
23.3
26.5
30.8
33.0
33.8
15.2
13.8
3.5
14.9
26.2
Iceland
4.4
5.6
8.1
4.2
3.5
5.8
0.8
–2.8
0.6
1.0
0.9
Andorra
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
18.0
14.6
15.9
16.9
17.4
19.2
San Marino
. . .
. . .
. . .
–0.1
–1.9
6.2
3.7
2.7
0.3
1.2
0.2
Memorandum
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Major Advanced Economies
–0.7
–0.5
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.7
–0.9
–1.5
–1.2
–0.4
Euro Area2
3.0
3.4
3.6
3.6
3.5
3.0
2.8
3.6
2.3
2.8
3.2
1Data corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
2Data calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
156	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Emerging and Developing Asia
1.5
1.9
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.6
0.4
–0.1
Bangladesh
0.8
1.8
1.9
–0.5
–3.5
–1.5
–1.7
–1.3
–3.2
–2.9
–2.4
Bhutan
–27.1
–27.9
–30.2
–23.6
–18.4
–20.5
–12.4
–11.8
–10.6
–9.7
0.2
Brunei Darussalam
31.9
16.7
12.9
16.4
6.9
6.6
4.5
5.6
18.2
15.0
13.0
Cambodia
–8.6
–8.7
–8.5
–7.9
–11.8
–15.0
–12.1
–26.7
–17.4
–9.5
–9.2
China
2.2
2.6
1.7
1.5
0.2
0.7
1.7
1.8
1.1
1.0
0.4
Fiji
–5.8
–4.5
–3.6
–6.7
–8.3
–12.5
–12.6
–16.9
–13.0
–10.6
–8.2
India
–1.3
–1.0
–0.6
–1.8
–2.1
–0.9
0.9
–1.6
–3.1
–2.7
–2.6
Indonesia
–3.1
–2.0
–1.8
–1.6
–2.9
–2.7
–0.4
0.3
4.5
0.5
–1.5
Kiribati
31.5
33.0
10.8
37.4
38.8
48.8
39.1
16.9
7.1
9.9
10.0
Lao P.D.R.
–23.3
–22.3
–11.0
–11.1
–13.0
–9.1
–4.5
–5.0
–6.0
–6.9
–7.1
Malaysia
4.3
3.0
2.4
2.8
2.2
3.5
4.2
3.5
3.9
3.9
3.6
Maldives
–3.7
–7.5
–23.6
–21.6
–28.4
–26.6
–35.5
–15.6
–24.2
–17.7
–8.3
Marshall Islands
2.0
15.6
13.5
5.0
4.0
–25.9
16.2
3.4
–4.1
–2.7
–3.9
Micronesia
6.1
4.5
7.2
10.3
21.0
16.6
2.5
0.7
–0.7
–2.5
–5.5
Mongolia
–15.8
–8.2
–6.3
–10.1
–16.7
–15.2
–5.1
–13.0
0.2
–1.5
–5.0
Myanmar
–4.5
–3.5
–4.2
–6.8
–4.7
–2.8
–3.4
–1.3
–0.1
–0.5
–1.0
Nauru
27.3
–19.1
4.1
12.3
8.0
4.9
2.8
4.1
–2.2
0.1
–0.1
Nepal
4.0
4.4
5.5
–0.3
–7.1
–6.9
–1.0
–8.2
–11.4
–7.4
–2.7
Palau
–19.4
–8.9
–13.4
–19.4
–15.6
–31.1
–48.3
–56.9
–51.5
–27.0
–20.4
Papua New Guinea
14.1
24.5
28.4
28.4
24.5
20.6
20.9
22.0
25.1
22.3
18.6
Philippines
3.6
2.4
–0.4
–0.7
–2.6
–0.8
3.2
–1.8
–2.7
–2.2
–1.8
Samoa
–9.1
–2.8
–4.5
–1.9
0.9
3.0
0.2
–15.3
–12.5
–7.2
–2.4
Solomon Islands
–3.8
–2.7
–3.5
–4.2
–3.0
–9.8
–1.6
–5.8
–11.9
–11.9
–9.5
Sri Lanka
–2.5
–2.3
–2.1
–2.6
–3.2
–2.2
–1.3
–4.3
–7.1
–4.6
–3.1
Thailand
2.9
6.9
10.5
9.6
5.6
7.0
4.2
–2.1
–0.1
2.0
3.3
Timor-Leste
75.6
12.8
–33.0
–17.5
–12.1
6.5
–16.2
1.8
–28.0
–35.3
–38.9
Tonga
–6.3
–10.1
–6.5
–6.4
–6.3
–0.9
–3.9
4.9
–3.1
–18.3
–15.3
Tuvalu
–3.7
–70.6
13.9
11.5
53.9
–16.9
–7.9
2.1
–8.6
0.3
–9.7
Vanuatu
7.8
0.3
3.4
–4.4
12.2
13.6
2.5
–1.9
–7.8
–6.0
–4.3
Vietnam
3.7
–0.9
0.2
–0.6
1.9
3.7
4.4
–0.5
–0.1
0.8
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.3
1.0
–0.3
–0.5
1.7
1.3
0.0
1.7
3.2
1.7
–0.3
Albania
–10.8
–8.6
–7.6
–7.5
–6.8
–7.6
–8.7
–7.7
–8.8
–8.0
–7.5
Belarus
–6.6
–3.3
–3.4
–1.7
0.0
–1.9
–0.4
2.7
–1.2
–1.0
–0.9
Bosnia and Herzegovina
–7.4
–5.1
–4.8
–4.8
–3.3
–2.8
–3.8
–2.4
–5.0
–3.9
–3.5
Bulgaria
1.2
0.0
3.1
3.3
0.9
1.9
–0.3
–2.0
–2.2
–2.0
–0.1
Croatia
0.3
3.4
2.3
3.5
1.9
3.0
–0.1
2.0
–0.4
0.3
2.0
Hungary
1.2
2.3
4.5
2.0
0.2
–0.7
–1.6
–0.9
–1.3
0.1
0.5
Kosovo
–7.2
–8.8
–8.0
–5.5
–7.6
–5.7
–7.0
–9.1
–8.9
–7.0
–5.7
Moldova
–6.0
–6.0
–3.6
–5.7
–10.6
–9.3
–7.7
–10.5
–13.0
–12.0
–8.5
Montenegro
–12.4
–11.0
–16.2
–16.1
–17.0
–14.3
–26.0
–9.2
–13.8
–13.0
–12.5
North Macedonia
–0.5
–2.0
–2.9
–1.0
–0.1
–3.3
–3.4
–3.5
–5.8
–3.6
–2.5
Poland
–2.6
–0.9
–0.8
–0.4
–1.3
0.5
2.9
–0.9
–2.9
–2.7
–2.0
Romania
–0.3
–0.8
–1.6
–3.1
–4.6
–4.9
–5.0
–7.1
–7.0
–6.5
–5.6
Russia 
2.8
5.0
1.9
2.0
7.0
3.9
2.4
6.9
12.4
8.1
3.1
Serbia
–5.6
–3.5
–2.9
–5.2
–4.8
–6.9
–4.1
–4.4
–6.1
–5.7
–5.0
Turkey
–4.1
–3.2
–3.1
–4.8
–2.8
0.7
–4.9
–1.8
–5.7
–2.0
–1.6
Ukraine1
–3.9
1.7
–1.5
–2.2
–3.3
–2.7
3.3
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean
–3.2
–3.3
–2.0
–1.7
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–1.6
–1.2
–1.2
–1.5
Antigua and Barbuda
0.3
2.2
–2.4
–8.0
–14.5
–7.5
–18.4
–19.7
–23.6
–16.8
–10.2
Argentina
–1.6
–2.7
–2.7
–4.8
–5.2
–0.8
0.9
1.3
0.5
0.4
0.7
Aruba
–4.8
3.9
4.6
1.0
–0.5
2.5
–13.1
9.0
–2.7
–4.1
1.3
The Bahamas
–19.7
–12.4
–12.3
–13.7
–9.3
–2.7
–23.5
–19.3
–18.1
–12.6
–5.2
Barbados
–9.2
–6.1
–4.3
–3.8
–4.0
–3.1
–6.9
–11.4
–12.3
–9.0
–3.8
Belize
–8.1
–10.1
–9.1
–8.6
–8.0
–9.5
–8.1
–8.9
–9.3
–8.9
–7.7
Bolivia
1.7
–5.8
–5.6
–5.0
–4.3
–3.3
–0.4
0.5
–1.5
–2.0
–4.0
Brazil
–4.1
–3.0
–1.4
–1.1
–2.7
–3.5
–1.7
–1.7
–1.5
–1.6
–2.1
Chile
–3.6
–2.8
–2.6
–2.8
–4.6
–5.2
–1.9
–6.7
–4.5
–3.4
–2.5
Colombia
–5.2
–6.4
–4.5
–3.2
–4.2
–4.6
–3.4
–5.7
–3.3
–3.4
–3.9
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
157
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
–3.2
–3.3
–2.0
–1.7
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–1.6
–1.2
–1.2
–1.5
Costa Rica
–4.7
–3.4
–2.1
–3.6
–3.0
–1.3
–1.1
–3.3
–3.5
–3.2
–2.7
Dominica
–5.4
–4.7
–7.7
–8.6
–42.4
–37.9
–30.0
–31.4
–32.1
–26.0
–13.0
Dominican Republic
–3.2
–1.8
–1.1
–0.2
–1.5
–1.3
–2.0
–2.5
–3.5
–2.5
–2.2
Ecuador
–0.7
–2.2
1.1
–0.2
–1.2
–0.1
2.6
2.5
2.9
2.5
2.1
El Salvador
–5.4
–3.2
–2.3
–1.9
–3.3
–0.6
0.5
–4.3
–6.7
–5.5
–5.1
Grenada
–11.6
–12.5
–11.0
–14.4
–16.1
–14.6
–21.0
–24.5
–27.9
–20.6
–12.4
Guatemala
–3.3
–1.2
1.0
1.1
0.9
2.3
5.5
2.7
0.0
0.3
0.5
Guyana
–6.7
–3.4
1.5
–4.9
–29.0
–54.1
–14.5
–30.0
45.4
36.3
24.5
Haiti
–7.3
–5.1
–1.8
–2.2
–2.9
–1.1
1.1
0.5
0.8
–0.6
–0.8
Honduras
–6.9
–4.7
–3.1
–1.2
–6.6
–2.7
2.8
–4.9
–4.4
–4.8
–4.2
Jamaica
–8.0
–3.0
–0.3
–2.7
–1.6
–2.3
–0.3
0.7
–5.2
–2.1
–4.3
Mexico
–1.9
–2.6
–2.2
–1.7
–2.0
–0.3
2.4
–0.4
–0.6
–0.7
–1.1
Nicaragua
–8.0
–9.9
–8.5
–7.2
–1.8
6.0
5.9
–2.6
–3.0
–1.4
–2.1
Panama
–13.4
–9.0
–7.8
–6.0
–7.6
–5.0
2.2
–2.9
–4.1
–3.3
–2.7
Paraguay
–0.1
–0.4
3.6
3.0
0.1
–0.5
2.7
0.8
–2.9
0.4
0.7
Peru
–4.5
–5.0
–2.6
–1.3
–1.7
–1.0
0.8
–2.8
–1.5
–1.4
–1.4
St. Kitts and Nevis
0.3
–8.3
–12.3
–10.5
–5.5
–2.1
–8.0
–4.8
–5.0
–3.3
–1.0
St. Lucia
–2.5
0.0
–6.5
–2.0
1.5
5.7
–14.7
–10.9
–5.3
–1.0
0.1
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
–24.7
–14.7
–12.7
–11.7
–10.2
–3.1
–15.6
–24.5
–27.7
–26.4
–8.9
Suriname
–7.4
–15.3
–4.8
1.9
–3.0
–11.3
9.1
5.2
–1.0
0.2
–1.1
Trinidad and Tobago
15.0
8.2
–3.5
6.1
6.8
4.3
–0.6
4.5
9.9
7.3
4.7
Uruguay
–3.0
–0.3
0.8
0.0
–0.4
1.6
–0.8
–1.9
–0.2
0.0
–1.3
Venezuela
2.4
–5.0
–1.4
6.1
8.8
6.8
–9.3
–1.4
9.0
6.5
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
4.9
–3.9
–4.1
–1.1
2.9
0.5
–2.5
3.0
8.3
5.6
1.4
Afghanistan1
6.5
3.7
9.0
7.6
12.2
11.7
11.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
–4.4
–16.4
–16.5
–13.1
–9.6
–9.9
–12.7
–2.8
2.9
–0.2
–5.0
Armenia
–7.8
–2.7
–1.0
–1.5
–7.0
–7.4
–3.8
–2.4
–6.2
–5.9
–5.7
Azerbaijan
13.9
–0.4
–3.6
4.1
12.8
9.1
–0.5
15.2
37.2
28.5
17.1
Bahrain
4.6
–2.4
–4.6
–4.1
–6.4
–2.1
–9.3
6.7
10.8
7.7
1.7
Djibouti
23.9
29.2
–1.0
–4.8
14.2
17.0
10.7
–1.0
–4.7
–3.2
1.5
Egypt
–0.9
–3.7
–6.0
–6.1
–2.4
–3.6
–3.1
–4.6
–4.3
–4.6
–2.6
Georgia
–10.1
–11.8
–12.5
–8.0
–6.8
–5.5
–12.4
–9.8
–11.4
–7.5
–5.6
Iran
2.6
0.3
2.9
3.1
5.2
0.6
–0.1
2.0
3.5
2.0
0.5
Iraq
2.6
–6.4
–7.5
–4.7
4.3
0.5
–10.8
5.9
15.8
10.1
1.7
Jordan
–7.1
–9.0
–9.7
–10.6
–6.9
–2.1
–8.1
–10.1
–5.9
–4.6
–3.1
Kazakhstan
2.8
–3.3
–5.9
–3.1
–0.1
–4.0
–3.8
–3.0
3.0
0.3
–2.1
Kuwait
33.4
3.5
–4.6
8.0
14.4
12.5
3.2
16.1
31.3
27.2
19.0
Kyrgyz Republic
–17.0
–15.9
–11.6
–6.2
–12.1
–12.1
4.5
–5.2
–12.2
–9.3
–6.0
Lebanon1
–28.8
–19.8
–23.4
–26.2
–28.4
–28.0
–14.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya1
–78.3
–53.5
–25.4
14.7
26.8
11.9
–20.7
21.6
27.9
19.1
5.4
Mauritania
–22.2
–15.5
–11.0
–10.0
–13.3
–10.5
–7.1
–2.2
–14.0
–13.4
–0.6
Morocco
–6.0
–2.1
–4.1
–3.4
–5.3
–3.7
–1.5
–2.9
–6.0
–4.0
–3.1
Oman
5.2
–15.9
–19.1
–15.6
–5.4
–5.5
–12.0
–3.7
5.9
5.6
1.5
Pakistan
–1.1
–0.9
–1.6
–3.6
–5.4
–4.2
–1.5
–0.6
–5.3
–4.1
–2.5
Qatar
24.0
8.5
–5.5
4.0
9.1
2.4
–2.0
14.7
19.9
15.1
4.8
Saudi Arabia
9.8
–8.7
–3.7
1.5
8.8
4.8
–3.1
6.6
19.5
14.8
4.6
Somalia
–6.5
–6.3
–7.1
–7.7
–6.2
–10.4
–10.8
–14.9
–12.8
–12.4
–13.2
Sudan 
–5.8
–8.5
–6.5
–9.4
–14.0
–15.6
–17.5
–5.9
–6.6
–7.0
–6.1
Syria2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
–3.4
–6.1
–4.2
2.1
–4.9
–2.2
4.1
2.8
–1.4
–2.2
–1.9
Tunisia1
–9.3
–9.1
–8.8
–9.7
–10.4
–7.8
–5.9
–6.2
–10.1
. . .
. . .
Turkmenistan
–7.8
–17.3
–23.1
–11.1
4.9
2.8
–3.3
2.0
5.8
5.9
1.4
United Arab Emirates
13.5
4.9
3.7
7.1
9.8
8.9
5.9
11.7
18.5
14.0
8.2
Uzbekistan
2.6
1.0
0.2
2.4
–6.8
–5.6
–5.0
–7.0
–9.5
–7.4
–5.0
West Bank and Gaza
–13.6
–13.9
–13.9
–13.2
–13.2
–10.4
–12.3
–12.7
–12.8
–12.4
–9.6
Yemen
–0.7
–6.2
–2.8
–1.4
–0.8
–3.8
–6.0
–4.7
–12.3
–9.9
–6.3
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
158	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Sub-Saharan Africa
–3.6
–5.7
–3.6
–2.2
–2.3
–3.2
–3.0
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
–2.3
Angola
–2.6
–8.8
–3.1
–0.5
7.3
6.1
1.5
11.3
11.0
4.9
–0.3
Benin
–6.7
–6.0
–3.0
–4.2
–4.6
–4.0
–1.7
–4.5
–5.8
–5.5
–4.0
Botswana
11.1
2.2
8.0
5.6
0.4
–7.0
–10.8
–0.5
0.5
2.8
3.3
Burkina Faso
–7.2
–7.6
–6.1
–5.0
–4.1
–3.3
–0.1
–3.1
–5.7
–5.3
–4.9
Burundi
–15.6
–11.5
–11.1
–11.7
–11.4
–11.6
–10.2
–13.5
–18.6
–15.7
–11.8
Cabo Verde
–9.1
–3.2
–3.8
–7.8
–5.2
–0.4
–15.9
–12.5
–11.5
–8.6
–5.6
Cameroon
–3.9
–3.6
–3.1
–2.6
–3.5
–4.3
–3.7
–3.3
–1.6
–2.9
–3.5
Central African Republic
–13.3
–9.1
–5.3
–7.8
–8.0
–4.9
–8.5
–10.6
–11.0
–8.4
–5.4
Chad
–8.9
–13.8
–10.4
–7.1
–1.4
–4.4
–7.6
–4.5
1.3
–2.3
–6.6
Comoros
–3.8
–0.3
–4.4
–2.1
–2.9
–3.3
–1.6
–3.4
–8.3
–8.2
–7.4
Democratic Republic of the Congo
–4.8
–3.9
–4.1
–3.3
–3.5
–3.2
–2.2
–1.0
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
Republic of Congo
1.0
–39.0
–48.7
–6.0
–0.1
0.4
–0.1
15.4
26.0
14.7
2.3
Côte d’Ivoire 
1.0
–0.4
–0.9
–2.0
–3.9
–2.3
–3.2
–3.7
–4.8
–4.4
–3.6
Equatorial Guinea
–4.3
–17.7
–26.0
–7.8
–2.1
–0.9
–4.2
–3.4
–1.6
–2.0
–5.2
Eritrea
17.3
20.8
15.3
24.0
15.4
13.0
11.4
13.5
13.5
13.3
11.4
Eswatini
11.6
13.0
7.9
6.2
1.3
4.3
6.7
0.5
–2.1
–0.2
0.3
Ethiopia
–7.9
–11.5
–10.9
–8.5
–6.5
–5.3
–4.6
–3.2
–4.5
–4.4
–3.7
Gabon
7.6
–5.6
–11.1
–8.7
–2.1
–0.9
–6.0
–6.9
1.7
–0.1
–1.8
The Gambia
–7.3
–9.9
–9.2
–7.4
–9.5
–6.1
–3.2
–9.5
–14.9
–11.8
–9.4
Ghana
–6.8
–5.7
–5.1
–3.3
–3.0
–2.7
–3.1
–3.0
–3.6
–3.5
–3.4
Guinea
–14.4
–12.5
–30.7
–6.7
–19.2
–11.5
–13.7
–4.0
–9.6
–8.5
–6.8
Guinea-Bissau
0.5
1.8
1.4
0.3
–3.6
–8.8
–2.6
–3.1
–5.6
–4.8
–3.6
Kenya
–9.3
–6.3
–5.4
–7.0
–5.5
–5.3
–4.7
–5.4
–5.8
–5.3
–5.0
Lesotho
–5.2
–4.0
–6.7
–2.6
–1.4
–2.1
–2.0
–9.3
–15.6
–8.9
–4.4
Liberia
–34.7
–28.1
–22.9
–22.3
–21.3
–19.6
–16.3
–17.8
–16.1
–15.9
–14.0
Madagascar
–0.3
–1.6
0.5
–0.4
0.7
–2.3
–5.4
–5.5
–6.5
–6.2
–3.6
Malawi
–5.8
–12.2
–13.1
–17.8
–12.0
–12.6
–13.8
–14.5
–17.3
–15.4
–8.3
Mali
–4.7
–5.3
–7.2
–7.3
–4.9
–7.5
–2.3
–4.5
–5.3
–4.9
–4.8
Mauritius
–5.4
–3.6
–4.0
–4.6
–3.9
–5.4
–12.5
–11.1
–14.0
–8.0
–4.8
Mozambique
–36.3
–37.4
–32.2
–19.6
–30.3
–19.1
–27.6
–22.4
–44.9
–39.0
–9.0
Namibia
–9.4
–13.6
–16.5
–4.4
–3.4
–1.8
3.0
–7.3
–6.9
–4.4
–2.3
Niger
–12.1
–15.3
–11.4
–11.4
–12.6
–12.2
–13.4
–15.8
–15.8
–13.8
–7.8
Nigeria
0.2
–3.1
1.3
3.4
1.5
–3.3
–4.0
–0.8
–1.1
–1.1
–0.7
Rwanda
–11.4
–12.7
–15.3
–9.5
–10.1
–11.9
–11.9
–10.5
–11.4
–10.3
–6.2
São Tomé and Príncipe
–20.7
–12.0
–6.1
–13.2
–12.3
–12.1
–10.3
–9.7
–12.1
–8.7
–4.6
Senegal
–7.0
–5.7
–4.2
–7.3
–8.8
–7.9
–10.9
–11.8
–13.0
–8.4
–4.2
Seychelles
–22.4
–18.1
–19.7
–19.1
–17.4
–16.2
–23.0
–20.3
–30.0
–23.6
–16.1
Sierra Leone
–9.4
–23.6
–7.6
–18.3
–12.4
–14.3
–6.8
–13.0
–17.2
–13.7
–7.8
South Africa
–4.8
–4.3
–2.7
–2.4
–3.0
–2.6
2.0
3.7
1.3
–1.0
–2.0
South Sudan
–1.2
1.7
16.8
4.8
7.3
1.5
–15.6
–7.6
9.5
1.1
1.3
Tanzania
–9.8
–7.7
–4.2
–2.6
–3.1
–2.6
–1.8
–3.3
–4.3
–3.6
–2.5
Togo
–6.8
–7.6
–7.2
–1.5
–2.6
–0.8
–1.5
–3.3
–5.9
–6.4
–2.6
Uganda
–6.5
–6.0
–2.8
–4.8
–5.7
–6.2
–9.3
–7.9
–7.0
–9.8
–9.0
Zambia
2.1
–2.7
–3.3
–1.7
–1.3
0.6
12.0
6.7
4.4
4.3
3.6
Zimbabwe1
–12.0
–8.0
–3.4
–1.3
–3.7
4.0
4.7
3.6
2.5
1.5
–2.5
1See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Lebanon, Libya, Tunisia, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
2Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
159
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
305.5
335.6
432.1
462.0
435.2
225.8
108.9
374.7
–24.2
81.9
Direct Investment, Net
244.0
2.7
–246.7
355.4
–53.3
37.5
113.4
412.5
39.8
2.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
58.8
216.7
484.6
17.5
461.1
126.0
257.4
404.0
95.6
108.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
1.8
–85.6
32.4
21.8
51.9
27.1
85.7
59.2
35.6
56.2
Other Investment, Net
–139.1
–24.5
–16.9
–177.9
–152.4
–32.5
–706.4
–1,104.4
–331.3
–216.1
Change in Reserves
140.0
226.6
178.5
244.8
127.9
67.6
358.9
602.8
135.7
130.2
United States
Financial Account Balance 
–297.1
–333.1
–363.6
–344.6
–348.4
–480.4
–653.0
–729.3
–879.5
–857.1
Direct Investment, Net
135.7
–209.4
–174.6
28.6
–344.3
–180.0
100.4
12.3
–92.3
–99.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–114.9
–53.5
–195.0
–221.4
32.2
–190.6
–490.1
8.6
–265.6
–296.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
–54.3
–27.0
7.8
24.0
–20.4
–41.7
–5.8
–22.2
–14.5
–15.3
Other Investment, Net
–259.9
–37.0
–4.0
–174.1
–20.8
–72.7
–266.4
–838.9
–507.2
–445.8
Change in Reserves
–3.6
–6.3
2.1
–1.7
5.0
4.7
9.0
111.0
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Financial Account Balance 
372.6
338.5
313.2
392.8
344.9
233.1
225.4
374.9
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
89.3
244.3
150.8
74.1
127.9
80.0
–172.1
344.0
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
87.0
133.5
529.8
402.6
272.6
–105.0
612.9
498.7
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
49.7
126.5
11.2
12.9
46.9
7.8
10.5
82.2
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
142.2
–177.4
–395.7
–95.5
–132.4
243.3
–240.8
–704.1
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
4.4
11.6
17.1
–1.2
29.8
7.1
15.0
154.1
. . .
. . .
Germany
Financial Account Balance
319.3
260.1
289.0
312.5
291.7
208.6
247.1
372.5
249.8
313.4
Direct Investment, Net
87.3
68.5
48.0
37.9
25.1
84.6
–4.0
120.5
69.9
66.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
179.9
210.5
220.0
229.6
181.2
78.0
48.9
301.9
127.9
171.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
51.2
33.7
31.7
12.6
26.8
27.5
109.9
72.2
4.3
37.7
Other Investment, Net
4.3
–50.2
–12.5
33.9
58.2
19.1
92.3
–159.8
47.6
37.6
Change in Reserves
–3.4
–2.5
1.9
–1.4
0.5
–0.6
–0.1
37.7
0.0
0.0
France
Financial Account Balance
–10.3
–0.8
–18.6
–36.1
–28.4
–21.9
–59.9
–57.6
–51.7
–48.9
Direct Investment, Net
47.1
7.8
41.7
11.1
60.2
5.4
41.0
26.4
27.3
29.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–23.8
43.2
0.2
30.2
19.3
–76.9
–41.5
–18.9
–18.2
–16.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
–31.7
14.5
–17.6
–1.4
–30.5
4.1
–27.2
20.6
7.0
0.3
Other Investment, Net
–2.9
–74.2
–45.4
–72.6
–89.7
42.3
–36.8
–112.7
–70.1
–65.7
Change in Reserves
1.0
8.0
2.5
–3.4
12.3
3.2
4.6
27.0
2.2
3.8
Italy
Financial Account Balance
78.4
42.9
37.4
61.2
38.8
60.8
71.5
43.2
49.7
71.5
Direct Investment, Net
3.1
2.0
–12.3
0.5
–6.1
1.6
21.7
9.6
9.7
10.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
3.2
111.7
157.1
102.0
156.5
–58.0
123.8
151.2
–39.7
–15.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.9
1.3
–3.6
–8.4
–3.3
2.9
–3.3
0.9
0.6
0.6
Other Investment, Net
75.2
–72.7
–102.5
–35.9
–111.5
110.6
–75.2
–143.1
79.0
75.6
Change in Reserves
–1.3
0.6
–1.3
3.0
3.1
3.6
4.6
24.5
0.0
0.0
Spain
Financial Account Balance
22.8
31.8
39.2
40.0
38.3
28.3
20.2
38.2
28.6
29.2
Direct Investment, Net
14.2
33.4
12.4
14.1
–19.9
7.4
22.4
–11.4
6.5
7.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–8.8
12.0
64.9
37.1
28.1
–53.5
90.9
35.5
14.4
14.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
1.3
4.2
2.8
8.7
–1.2
–8.5
–8.1
5.0
0.0
0.0
Other Investment, Net
10.9
–23.3
–50.1
–24.0
28.7
82.1
–84.6
–3.1
7.7
7.9
Change in Reserves
5.2
5.5
9.1
4.1
2.6
0.8
–0.4
12.2
0.0
0.0
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
160	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Japan
Financial Account Balance
58.9
180.9
266.5
168.3
183.9
227.9
128.6
98.4
114.2
138.8
Direct Investment, Net
118.7
133.3
137.5
155.0
134.6
218.5
89.5
120.1
140.6
148.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–42.3
131.5
276.3
–50.6
92.2
87.4
37.0
–198.6
27.0
49.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
34.0
17.7
–16.1
30.4
0.9
3.2
8.4
22.3
22.3
22.3
Other Investment, Net
–60.0
–106.7
–125.6
10.0
–67.9
–106.7
–17.2
91.7
–87.3
–92.7
Change in Reserves
8.5
5.1
–5.7
23.6
24.0
25.5
10.9
62.8
11.5
11.5
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
–141.6
–165.9
–159.9
–84.4
–102.9
–89.7
–56.1
–60.9
–187.4
–181.5
Direct Investment, Net
–176.1
–106.0
–297.4
46.1
–4.9
–51.6
–83.6
80.2
27.0
7.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
16.3
–231.7
–200.1
–120.1
–361.1
38.2
–17.3
–349.4
–183.1
–200.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
31.2
–128.6
29.3
13.3
11.2
11.3
39.0
–39.4
5.9
6.4
Other Investment, Net
–24.7
268.2
299.5
–32.4
227.2
–86.6
9.2
223.4
–37.1
4.7
Change in Reserves
11.7
32.2
8.8
8.8
24.8
–1.1
–3.3
24.4
0.0
0.0
Canada
Financial Account Balance
–43.1
–51.8
–45.4
–44.2
–35.8
–38.3
–29.3
2.7
24.5
–2.2
Direct Investment, Net
1.3
23.6
33.5
53.4
20.4
29.2
23.4
30.2
34.3
33.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–32.8
–36.2
–103.6
–74.9
3.4
–1.6
–67.8
–41.4
15.5
–17.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–16.9
–47.8
19.1
–23.5
–58.2
–66.0
13.8
–6.3
–25.2
–18.4
Change in Reserves
5.3
8.6
5.6
0.8
–1.5
0.1
1.3
20.2
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
297.2
295.2
325.3
309.4
355.5
339.8
410.4
528.0
517.1
500.9
Direct Investment, Net
–6.1
–102.5
–79.7
–158.3
32.6
–43.3
64.7
–109.6
–164.2
–190.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
174.0
324.7
247.6
151.4
372.6
309.0
300.2
464.6
354.0
347.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–22.4
–12.0
3.2
–5.6
31.9
20.0
–9.0
–18.2
–4.6
–11.4
Other Investment, Net
40.3
–90.9
3.9
108.4
–131.1
23.2
–269.2
–51.1
216.0
244.6
Change in Reserves
111.5
176.0
150.2
213.1
49.5
30.8
323.8
241.8
115.3
110.0
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Financial Account Balance
15.0
–300.4
–409.7
–267.4
–242.4
–131.5
63.8
233.3
734.7
474.8
Direct Investment, Net
–434.2
–344.1
–260.6
–313.0
–373.4
–363.5
–343.9
–510.6
–303.4
–370.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–88.4
124.6
–58.3
–209.0
–101.9
–54.0
13.7
80.8
76.4
–13.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
412.5
480.0
389.0
66.9
106.4
112.2
279.3
153.8
394.4
354.0
Change in Reserves
95.3
–584.9
–483.2
187.2
127.8
171.2
80.9
511.4
564.6
498.8
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
161
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
153.6
72.1
–27.5
–57.8
–259.9
–54.2
152.1
70.5
176.5
152.8
Direct Investment, Net
–201.6
–139.0
–26.2
–108.5
–169.6
–144.6
–164.6
–295.9
–151.7
–158.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–125.2
81.7
31.1
–70.1
–99.5
–72.9
–107.4
–31.2
–64.8
–106.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.7
0.8
–4.6
2.2
4.7
–2.6
15.8
10.4
10.8
10.9
Other Investment, Net
281.6
460.5
357.0
–80.0
–17.3
70.0
240.9
136.7
229.4
186.8
Change in Reserves
196.4
–332.7
–384.8
199.2
22.8
97.0
167.7
252.7
153.6
220.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
–26.2
68.6
10.3
–23.0
110.0
63.5
12.5
112.1
159.0
97.7
Direct Investment, Net
0.3
–22.1
–45.7
–28.8
–25.4
–53.3
–36.7
–28.6
11.6
–15.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
23.9
53.4
–9.4
–34.5
11.0
–1.6
20.5
36.4
60.7
47.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
5.8
5.0
0.4
–2.5
–2.8
1.4
0.0
–2.3
4.1
2.6
Other Investment, Net
66.5
40.2
29.6
26.6
79.8
23.8
32.1
–27.5
57.4
27.5
Change in Reserves
–122.7
–7.9
35.4
16.4
47.4
93.2
–3.4
134.3
25.5
36.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
–196.3
–187.9
–106.4
–108.9
–160.7
–120.5
2.8
–88.2
–67.2
–70.8
Direct Investment, Net
–141.1
–132.8
–124.7
–121.4
–149.0
–114.9
–89.2
–98.6
–109.2
–124.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–108.2
–50.8
–50.5
–39.3
–14.2
1.7
1.6
–4.6
–4.7
–17.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
6.8
1.4
–2.9
3.9
4.1
4.9
5.7
0.9
3.1
3.3
Other Investment, Net
6.5
22.8
50.6
30.7
–15.4
20.7
68.3
–36.2
15.3
46.0
Change in Reserves
39.8
–31.6
18.7
13.2
11.5
–32.3
12.2
50.3
28.2
21.6
Middle East and Central Asia
Financial Account Balance
161.8
–185.3
–220.5
–33.0
109.0
34.7
–74.8
138.6
487.7
338.9
Direct Investment, Net
–43.7
–12.4
–29.7
–16.8
–8.9
–22.1
–25.4
–20.0
–21.0
–29.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
129.7
61.8
–12.2
–41.1
5.2
28.0
85.9
35.7
76.6
60.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
68.1
–52.1
–38.9
88.9
79.3
21.0
–58.6
83.6
89.1
102.6
Change in Reserves
–9.2
–196.3
–148.0
–57.3
41.2
7.1
–85.6
46.8
355.9
213.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
–78.0
–67.7
–65.5
–44.7
–40.8
–55.0
–28.8
0.3
–21.3
–43.7
Direct Investment, Net
–48.2
–37.7
–34.3
–37.4
–20.6
–28.7
–27.9
–67.4
–33.2
–42.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–8.6
–21.5
–17.4
–24.0
–4.5
–9.2
13.1
44.4
8.6
2.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.5
–0.3
0.9
0.3
–0.6
0.3
0.7
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
Other Investment, Net
–10.2
8.6
–9.2
0.7
–19.9
–23.2
–3.4
–2.8
3.2
–8.9
Change in Reserves
–9.0
–16.5
–4.6
15.7
4.8
6.2
–10.0
27.2
1.4
6.7
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
162	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
185.4
–181.6
–184.5
18.3
179.6
76.3
–48.3
204.2
583.8
414.2
Direct Investment, Net
–29.5
–11.5
–19.4
10.1
15.0
–6.8
–11.0
–5.4
–5.9
–10.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
137.7
67.7
–9.9
–35.5
6.5
26.6
85.6
57.4
85.2
71.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
94.7
–18.0
0.4
115.9
113.1
45.0
–44.7
107.0
140.1
137.1
Change in Reserves
–34.6
–233.8
–164.2
–65.8
52.5
10.2
–87.7
51.6
376.7
223.2
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
–170.4
–118.8
–225.2
–285.6
–422.0
–207.8
112.1
29.1
150.9
60.6
Direct Investment, Net
–404.7
–332.6
–241.2
–323.0
–388.4
–356.7
–332.9
–505.1
–297.5
–359.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–226.1
56.9
–48.4
–173.5
–108.4
–80.6
–71.9
23.4
–8.7
–85.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
11.8
6.8
–6.2
3.9
6.6
8.3
28.6
21.9
18.1
16.9
Other Investment, Net
317.8
498.0
388.7
–48.9
–6.7
67.2
324.0
46.9
254.3
217.0
Change in Reserves
129.9
–351.1
–319.0
253.0
75.3
160.9
168.7
459.8
188.0
275.6
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
–377.7
–304.2
–268.1
–328.8
–358.0
–295.0
–94.0
–265.7
–301.6
–324.0
Direct Investment, Net
–285.2
–280.1
–292.3
–272.3
–312.0
–300.3
–251.7
–271.4
–290.9
–331.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–211.8
–52.6
–64.4
–123.6
–35.3
–34.2
–46.7
–44.0
–9.8
–55.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–11.0
38.4
25.7
–32.1
–16.2
–62.2
45.0
–154.7
6.3
–21.4
Change in Reserves
120.6
–11.8
74.6
92.4
3.6
104.8
149.1
209.8
–10.3
81.7
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears 
and/or Rescheduling 
during 2016–20
Financial Account Balance
–46.9
–66.8
–72.2
–50.3
–40.1
–40.6
–19.4
–21.3
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
–22.9
–37.3
–28.5
–19.6
–23.7
–28.6
–21.1
–25.6
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
–4.5
1.0
–9.1
–28.9
–16.5
–12.8
7.5
–21.5
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–6.0
–23.4
–37.0
–10.4
–4.3
5.2
8.9
19.7
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
–13.2
–6.8
2.8
8.9
4.9
–3.9
–14.2
7.4
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance
320.5
35.2
22.4
194.6
192.8
94.3
172.7
608.0
710.5
556.7
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available 
because of data constraints.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
163
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2004–13
2008–15
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024–27
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.5
0.0
0.8
1.0
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.7
0.0
0.1
0.5
Current Account Balance
–0.5
0.0
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.7
–0.1
0.0
0.5
Savings
21.7
21.5
22.6
23.3
23.4
23.4
23.1
24.1
23.7
23.8
24.2
Investment
22.2
21.4
21.6
22.1
22.3
22.6
22.2
22.5
22.9
22.9
22.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.0
–2.8
–2.2
–1.8
–2.2
–2.2
–3.0
–3.5
–3.5
–3.2
–2.4
Current Account Balance
–4.0
–2.8
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.2
–2.9
–3.5
–3.5
–3.2
–2.4
Savings
16.9
17.2
18.9
19.5
19.6
19.4
19.2
20.0
20.6
21.2
21.8
Investment
20.9
19.8
20.6
20.8
21.1
21.4
21.2
21.4
22.1
22.5
22.4
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.2
0.8
3.1
3.0
2.6
2.1
1.9
2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
0.1
0.7
3.0
3.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
Savings
22.7
22.5
24.3
24.9
25.4
25.8
24.8
26.4
25.0
25.1
25.5
Investment
21.8
20.8
20.7
21.3
21.9
22.9
22.0
22.8
22.8
22.4
22.4
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
0.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
5.9
6.6
8.6
7.7
8.0
7.5
6.9
7.4
5.9
6.9
7.0
Current Account Balance
5.9
6.6
8.5
7.8
7.9
7.6
7.1
7.4
5.9
6.9
7.0
Savings
26.2
26.8
28.5
28.8
29.9
29.7
28.2
30.1
28.6
28.6
28.9
Investment
20.3
20.2
20.0
21.0
21.9
22.1
21.1
22.7
22.7
21.8
21.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.3
–0.7
–0.4
–0.8
–0.7
–0.2
–1.8
–0.5
–1.8
–1.6
–1.0
Current Account Balance
–0.3
–0.7
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
–0.3
–1.9
–0.9
–1.8
–1.7
–1.1
Savings
22.4
21.9
22.1
22.7
23.0
24.1
21.8
24.1
23.2
23.1
23.3
Investment
22.7
22.6
22.6
23.4
23.9
24.4
23.7
25.0
25.0
24.8
24.3
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.4
–0.7
2.4
2.7
2.5
3.1
3.7
3.3
2.4
3.3
3.4
Current Account Balance
–1.4
–0.8
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.2
3.7
3.3
1.8
2.4
2.8
Savings
19.0
18.1
20.2
20.6
21.1
21.5
21.5
23.3
21.8
21.8
22.1
Investment
20.4
18.9
17.6
18.1
18.5
18.2
17.7
20.0
20.0
19.4
19.2
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.6
0.9
0.5
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.3
–1.2
3.4
3.0
2.4
2.4
1.2
1.9
2.0
1.9
1.9
Current Account Balance
–4.8
–1.7
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.9
0.3
0.4
1.3
Savings
20.1
19.2
21.9
22.2
22.4
23.0
21.5
22.4
21.5
21.8
22.3
Investment
24.9
20.9
18.8
19.4
20.5
20.9
20.7
21.5
21.2
21.4
21.0
Capital Account Balance
0.5
0.5
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.9
1.7
1.5
0.5
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.8
2.1
3.8
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.8
2.3
2.6
3.1
Current Account Balance
2.9
2.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.0
2.9
2.4
2.7
3.1
Savings
27.6
26.3
28.8
29.3
29.1
29.3
28.4
28.1
27.7
27.9
28.2
Investment
24.7
24.2
24.8
25.2
25.6
25.8
25.4
25.2
25.4
25.2
25.0
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.1
–3.9
–5.4
–3.7
–4.0
–2.7
–2.6
–2.7
–5.5
–4.9
–3.8
Current Account Balance
–3.1
–3.8
–5.3
–3.6
–3.9
–2.7
–2.5
–2.6
–5.5
–4.8
–3.7
Savings
13.6
12.5
12.4
14.6
14.0
15.3
14.2
14.5
12.1
12.4
13.8
Investment
16.7
16.4
17.7
18.2
17.9
18.0
16.7
17.1
17.6
17.2
17.4
Capital Account Balance
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
164	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Projections
Averages
Average
2004–13
2008–15
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024–27
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.9
–2.7
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.1
1.1
–0.1
–1.3
Current Account Balance
–0.9
–2.7
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.1
1.1
–0.1
–1.3
Savings
22.6
21.3
19.7
20.7
21.0
21.0
20.5
23.8
24.5
23.8
23.1
Investment
23.5
24.0
22.8
23.6
23.4
23.1
22.3
23.7
23.4
23.9
24.4
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.0
4.2
5.0
4.7
4.6
4.7
5.7
7.1
6.0
5.3
4.8
Current Account Balance
4.0
4.3
5.0
4.7
4.4
4.7
5.6
7.2
5.9
5.3
4.8
Savings
30.4
30.4
30.4
30.7
30.3
30.1
31.5
33.1
32.5
31.8
31.1
Investment
26.2
25.8
25.2
25.7
25.7
25.3
25.6
25.4
25.9
26.0
25.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.4
1.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.1
0.6
1.0
1.6
1.0
0.2
Current Account Balance
2.3
1.1
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.5
0.9
1.5
0.9
0.1
Savings
32.0
32.5
31.0
31.5
32.4
32.2
32.8
33.4
34.6
34.5
34.1
Investment
30.0
31.7
31.5
31.9
32.9
32.5
32.8
32.7
33.2
33.7
34.1
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.3
2.2
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.6
0.4
0.1
Current Account Balance
3.2
2.2
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.6
0.4
0.1
Savings
42.0
42.9
39.9
40.1
39.9
39.5
40.1
39.5
39.9
40.3
40.1
Investment
39.0
40.7
38.6
39.2
40.2
39.0
38.6
38.5
39.3
39.8
40.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.4
–0.4
0.1
–0.2
2.2
1.8
0.7
2.2
3.9
2.4
0.7
Current Account Balance
–0.6
–0.7
–0.3
–0.5
1.7
1.3
0.0
1.7
3.2
1.7
0.2
Savings
23.2
23.3
23.5
24.1
25.5
24.2
23.7
25.9
25.5
23.8
22.9
Investment
23.6
23.8
23.7
24.6
23.6
22.8
23.7
24.2
22.2
22.0
22.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.6
0.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.6
–2.1
–2.0
–1.7
–2.6
–2.0
0.0
–1.6
–1.2
–1.2
–1.4
Current Account Balance
–0.7
–2.2
–2.0
–1.7
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–1.6
–1.2
–1.2
–1.4
Savings
21.0
19.6
16.6
16.3
16.5
16.8
17.1
17.9
19.7
19.7
19.8
Investment
21.7
22.0
18.3
18.3
19.2
18.9
18.0
19.7
20.5
20.7
21.1
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Middle East and Central Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
9.0
6.4
–3.9
–1.1
2.7
0.5
–2.3
3.0
8.2
5.6
2.4
Current Account Balance
9.2
6.3
–4.1
–1.1
2.9
0.5
–2.5
3.0
8.3
5.6
2.4
Savings
35.9
33.8
23.5
26.1
28.9
28.1
25.9
30.6
35.6
33.1
30.3
Investment
28.2
29.1
28.9
29.3
28.4
30.2
30.6
28.7
28.1
28.3
28.5
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.4
–1.4
–3.2
–1.8
–1.9
–2.8
–2.5
–0.7
–1.3
–2.1
–2.2
Current Account Balance
0.2
–2.1
–3.6
–2.2
–2.3
–3.2
–3.0
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
–2.5
Savings
20.6
19.5
17.7
18.4
19.3
19.6
20.3
20.3
19.4
18.9
18.8
Investment
20.5
21.5
21.0
20.5
21.3
22.9
23.2
21.4
21.1
21.4
21.3
Capital Account Balance
1.2
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022	
165
Projections
Averages
Average
2004–13
2008–15
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024–27
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
12.0
8.0
–2.8
1.0
5.2
1.9
–2.1
4.3
10.4
7.2
3.5
Current Account Balance
12.2
8.1
–2.9
1.2
5.4
2.0
–2.3
4.4
10.6
7.3
3.5
Savings
38.6
35.1
24.2
27.1
31.6
30.8
27.8
33.8
39.4
36.3
32.2
Investment
27.9
29.0
27.6
28.4
28.6
31.5
33.5
30.6
29.1
29.4
29.2
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.9
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.7
–0.1
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.1
–0.3
Current Account Balance
0.7
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–0.8
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.2
0.0
–0.3
Savings
30.9
32.0
31.9
32.0
32.5
32.3
33.4
33.3
33.9
34.2
34.3
Investment
30.3
32.1
32.0
32.3
33.4
32.6
32.7
32.9
33.7
34.3
34.7
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.7
–2.5
–1.9
–2.0
–2.4
–1.8
–0.5
–1.7
–1.9
–1.9
–1.9
Current Account Balance
–2.0
–2.8
–2.1
–2.2
–2.7
–2.0
–0.8
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–2.1
Savings
23.3
23.0
22.1
22.2
22.5
22.4
22.7
22.8
23.0
23.2
23.6
Investment
25.4
25.7
24.2
24.5
25.2
24.6
23.7
24.8
25.3
25.4
25.8
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2016–20
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.3
–3.6
–6.0
–5.0
–3.9
–3.9
–2.1
–2.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
–2.2
–4.3
–6.3
–5.5
–4.3
–4.2
–2.7
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Savings
21.0
19.0
15.2
16.3
17.7
16.8
14.7
15.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Investment
23.3
23.1
21.9
22.5
22.0
21.9
18.1
17.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Capital Account Balance
0.9
0.7
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.8
0.7
0.5
0.3
Current Account Balance
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.3
Savings
25.0
25.5
25.9
26.6
27.0
27.0
27.0
28.0
28.4
28.4
28.6
Investment
24.7
25.1
25.4
26.0
26.5
26.6
26.4
26.7
27.3
27.6
27.9
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted by 
GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’ 
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of 
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to 
the current account balance (CAB) (S − I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In 
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: WAR SETS BACK THE GLOBAL RECOVERY
166	
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
Averages
2004–13
2014–23
2020
2021
2022
2023
2020–23
2024–27
World Real GDP
4.1
3.0
–3.1
6.1
3.6
3.6
2.5
3.3
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.9
–4.5
5.2
3.3
2.4
1.5
1.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.4
3.9
–2.0
6.8
3.8
4.4
3.2
4.5
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
1.6
1.3
–1.3
2.4
1.9
2.0
1.2
1.6
World Trade, Volume1
5.4
3.0
–7.9
10.1
5.0
4.4
2.7
3.7
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.7
3.2
–8.7
9.5
6.1
4.5
2.6
3.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
2.8
–7.9
11.8
3.9
4.8
2.9
4.8
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.5
2.8
–9.1
8.6
5.0
4.7
2.1
3.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.4
3.4
–4.8
12.3
4.1
3.6
3.6
4.3
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.3
0.8
0.7
–1.1
0.3
0.2
0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.5
–0.4
–1.2
1.4
1.9
–1.0
0.2
–0.5
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
2.6
0.8
–3.2
6.8
8.8
2.9
3.7
1.5
Oil
13.7
–1.2
–32.7
67.3
54.7
–13.3
10.8
–5.9
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
8.4
2.2
6.8
26.8
11.4
–2.5
10.1
–0.4
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.9
0.7
3.1
5.7
2.5
3.0
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.3
5.4
5.2
5.9
8.7
6.5
6.6
4.5
Interest Rates 
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate2 
1.3
–0.6
–0.3
–2.5
–4.4
–0.4
–1.9
0.5
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
–0.5
0.5
0.4
0.7
–0.1
0.0
0.3
0.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.3
0.3
0.5
0.9
1.5
0.9
0.9
0.1
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
27.5
30.1
32.6
30.7
28.1
27.2
29.7
25.8
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.3
10.8
11.3
10.6
10.0
9.7
10.4
9.3
1Data refer to trade in goods and services.
2GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States.
Annual Percent Change
Percent
Percent of GDP
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
167
World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment,  
Commodities, and Capital Flows	
April 2011
World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks	
September 2011
World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain	
April 2012
World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth	
October 2012
World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks	
April 2013
World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions	
October 2013
World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven	
April 2014
World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties	
October 2014
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors	
April 2015
World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices	
October 2015
World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long	
April 2016
World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies	
October 2016
World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?	
April 2017
World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery,  
Long-Term Challenges	
October 2017
World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change	
April 2018
World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth	
October 2018	
World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery	
April 2019
World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers	
October 2019
World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown	
April 2020
World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent	
October 2020
World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries	
April 2021
World Economic Outlook: Uncharted Territory: Recovery during a Pandemic	
October 2021
World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery	
April 2022
I.  Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios	
April 2011, Box 1.2
Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement	
October 2014, Box 3.3
Tariff Scenarios	
October 2016, Scenario Box
World Growth Projections over the Medium Term	
October 2016, Box 1.1
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices	
April 2019, Box 1.2
On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis	
April 2019, Box 3.3
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices	
October 2019, Box 1.3
Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19	
April 2020, Scenario Box
Alternative Scenarios	
October 2020, Scenario Box
Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights	
October 2020, Box 1.1
Scenario Box	
April 2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS
168
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
Downside Scenarios	
October 2021, Scenario Box
Scenario Box	
April 2022, Scenario Box
II.  Historical Surveys
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
What Is the Effect of Recessions?	
October 2015, Box 1.1
III.  Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?	
April 2012, Box 1.2
How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?	
October 2012, Box 1.3
Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?	
October 2012, Chapter 4
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe	
April 2013, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?	
April 2013, Chapter 4
What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?	
October 2013, Box 1.2
Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages	
October 2013, Chapter 3
Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the  
Caucasus and Central Asia	
October 2013, Box 3.1
Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy	
October 2013, Box 3.2
Saving and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 3.1
On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,  
and after the Global Financial Crisis	
April 2014, Chapter 4
The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies	
April 2014, Box 4.1
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011	
October 2014, Box 1.2
Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	
October 2014, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output	
April 2015, Chapter 3
Steady as She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output	
April 2015, Box 3.1
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries— 
The Role of External Factors	
April 2016, Box 1.2
Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market  
Reforms in Advanced Economies	
April 2016, Chapter 3
Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated  
External Environment	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2017, Box 2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence  
over the Forecast Horizon	
October 2017, Box 1.3
Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality	
April 2018, Chapter 3
Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?	
April 2018, Chapter 4
Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth	
April 2018, Box 1.3
Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.2
Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.3
The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown	
October 2018, Chapter 2
SELECTED TOPICS
169
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle	
October 2019, Box 1.4
Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can  
Structural Reforms Play?	
October 2019, Chapter 3
Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an 
Era of Low Rates and High Debt	
April 2020, Chapter 2
The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects	
October 2020, Chapter 2
An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns	
October 2020, Box 2.1
Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook	
April 2021, Box 1.1
After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage	
April 2021, Chapter 2
A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector	
April 2021, Box 2.1
Research and Innovation: Fighting the Pandemic and Boosting Long-Term Growth	
October 2021, Chapter 3
IV.  Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2011, Appendix 1.2
Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances	
April 2011, Chapter 3
Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production	
April 2011, Box 3.1
Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?	
April 2011, Box 3.2
Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity	
April 2011, Box 3.3
Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends	
April 2011, Appendix 3.1
The Energy and Oil Empirical Models	
April 2011, Appendix 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
September 2011,  
	
	 Appendix 1.1
Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices	
September 2011, Box 1.4
Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy	
September 2011, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Review	
April 2012, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters	
April 2012, Chapter 4
Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.1
Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.2
Commodity Market Review	
October 2012, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Unconventional Energy in the United States	
October 2012, Box 1.4
Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?	
October 2012, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Review	
April 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?	
April 2013, Chapter 3
Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?	
April 2013, Box 3.1
Commodity Market Review	
October 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.1
Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.2
Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting	
April 2014, Box 1.3
Commodity Prices and Forecasts	
April 2014, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas	
October 2014, Chapter 1,  
in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
170
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment	
April 2015, Chapter 1,  
in an Era of Low Oil Prices	
	 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?	
April 2015, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy	
October 2015, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift	
October 2015, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath  
of the Commodity Boom	
October 2015, Chapter 2
The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon	
October 2015, Box 2.1
Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?	
October 2015, Box 2.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the	
April 2016, Chapter 1, 
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	
	 Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and	
October 2016, Chapter 1, 
Markets in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?	
October 2016, Box 3.3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and	
April 2017, Chapter 1, 
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market 	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2017, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?	
April 2018, Box 1.2
The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles	
April 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
October 2018, Box 1.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand	
October 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
October 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
October 2018, Chapter 3
Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 3.1
Commodity Special Feature	
April 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Is Happening with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
House Prices and Consumer Price Inflation	
October 2021, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Inflation Scares	
October 2021, Chapter 2
Core Inflation in the COVID-19 Crisis  	
October 2021, Box 2.2
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment	
April 2022, Special Feature
SELECTED TOPICS
171
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
V.  Fiscal Policy
Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances	
September 2011, Chapter 4
Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?	
October 2012, Box 1.1
The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies	
October 2012, Box 1.2
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance	
April 2013, Box 1.2
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.5
Commodity Booms and Public Investment	
October 2015, Box 2.2
Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant	
October 2017, Chapter 4
The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions	
October 2017, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes	
April 2018, Box 1.5
Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries	
October 2019, Box 2.4
VI.  Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
Financial Conditions Indices	
April 2011, Appendix 1.1
House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets	
April 2011, Box 1.1
International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking	
April 2011, Box 1.3
Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications	
September 2011, Box 1.2
Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?	
September 2011, Box 1.3
Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging	
April 2012, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy	
October 2012, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening	
October 2013, Box 1.1
Credit Supply and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 1.1
Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	
April 2014, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates	
April 2014, Chapter 3
Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update	
October 2014, Box 1.1
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Box 2.2
A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Box 3.5
Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?	
October 2017, Box 1.2
The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
October 2018, Box 2.3
Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
October 2018, Box 3.2
Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy?	
April 2020, Box 2.1
Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help?	
April 2020, Chapter 3
Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings	
April 2020, Box 3.1
Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks?	
April 2020, Box 3.2
Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:  
Assessment and Policy Options	
April 2020, Box 1.3
172
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19	
April 2021, Chapter 4
Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness	
April 2021, Box 4.1
Monetary Expansions and Inflationary Risks	
October 2021, Box 1.3
Policy Responses and Expectations in Inflation Acceleration Episodes	
October 2021, Box 2.3
Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects	
April 2022, Box 1.2
Private Sector Debt and the Global Recovery	
April 2022, Chapter 2
Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich, and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2022, Box 2.2
VII.  Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies	
September 2011, Box 1.1
The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession	
April 2012, Box 1.1
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment	
April 2016, Box 3.2
Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects	
April 2018, Chapter 2
Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus  
Advanced Economies	
April 2018, Box 2.1
Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates	
April 2018, Box 2.4
Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil	
April 2018, Box 3.3
The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
October 2018, Box 2.1
The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:  
The Case of Industrial Robots	
October 2018, Box 2.2
Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies	
April 2019, Box 1.1
Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities	
April 2019, Box 1.3
Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in  
Advanced Economies	
October 2019, Chapter 2
Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities	
October 2019, Box 2.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration	
April 2020, Chapter 4
Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation	
April 2020, Box 4.1
Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.2
Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the  
COVID-19 Shock 	
April 2021, Chapter 3
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples	
April 2022, Box 1.1
Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability	
April 2022, Box 2.1
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
SELECTED TOPICS
173
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
VIII.  Exchange Rate Issues
Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets	
April 2014, Box 1.4
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?	
October 2015, Chapter 3
The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade	
October 2015, Box 3.1
Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains	
October 2015, Box 3.2
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
IX.  External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery	
April 2011, Box 2.1
International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?	
April 2011, Chapter 4
External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points	
September 2011, Box 1.5
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
External Rebalancing in the Euro Area	
October 2013, Box 1.3
The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows	
October 2013, Chapter 4
Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions	
October 2013, Box 4.1
The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom	
October 2014, Box 1.SF.1
Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?	
October 2014, Chapter 4
Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment	
October 2014, Box 4.1
A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area	
October 2014, Box 4.2
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2015, Box 1.2
Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits	
October 2015, Box 1.2
Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies	
October 2015, Box 1.3
Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2016, Box 1.1
Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Chapter 2
Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2016, Box 2.1
The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization	
April 2016, Box 3.3
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?	
October 2016, Chapter 2
The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with  
China’s Final Demand	
April 2017, Box 2.3
Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and  
Developing Economies	
April 2017, Box 2.4
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters	
October 2017, Box 1.4
Remittances and Consumption Smoothing	
October 2017, Box 1.5
A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators	
April 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Services Trade	
April 2018, Box 3.2
Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2018, Box 4.3
Global Trade Tensions	
October 2018, Scenario Box
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?	
April 2019, Chapter 3
Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries	
April 2019, Box 3.2
Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia	
April 2019, Box 3.4
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs	
April 2019, Chapter 4
174
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
Gross versus Value-Added Trade	
April 2019, Box 4.1
Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
April 2019, Box 4.2
Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?	
April 2019, Box 4.3
The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S.–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models	
April 2019, Box 4.4
A No-Deal Brexit	
April 2019, Scenario Box
Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production	
October 2019,  
	
	 Scenario Box 1.1
Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario	
October 2019,  
	
	 Scenario Box 1.2
The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018	
October 2019, Box 1.2
Global Trade and Value Chains in the Pandemic	
April 2022, Chapter 4
Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Box 4.1
The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data	
April 2022, Box 4.2
Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France	
April 2022, Box 4.3
X.  Regional Issues
East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe	
April 2012, Box 2.1
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions	
April 2018, Box 2.3
XI.  Country-Specific Analyses
Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?	
April 2011, Box 1.4
Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?	
April 2012, Box 1.3
The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation	
April 2012, Box 3.1
Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland	
April 2012, Box 3.2
Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?	
October 2013, Box 1.4
Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?	
April 2014, Box 1.2
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade	
October 2014, Box 3.1
Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?	
October 2015, Box 3.3
The Japanese Experience with Deflation	
October 2016, Box 3.2
Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas	
April 2018, Box 2.2
Immigration and Wages in Germany	
April 2020, Box 4.2
The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean	
April 2020, Box 4.3
XII.  Climate Change Issues
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?	
October 2017, Chapter 3
The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones	
October 2017, Box 3.1
The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis	
October 2017, Box 3.2
Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies	
October 2017, Box 3.3
Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets	
October 2017, Box 3.4
Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution	
October 2017, Box 3.5
Mitigating Climate Change	
October 2017, Box 3.6
The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies	
April 2019, Box 3.1
SELECTED TOPICS
175
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
What’s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions?	
October 2019, Box 1.SF.1
Mitigating Climate Change—Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies	
October 2020, Chapter 3
Glossary	
October 2020, Box 3.1
Zooming in on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization	
October 2020, Box 3.2
Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters	
April 2021, Box 1.2
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
Clean Tech and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1 
	
	 Special Feature
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
XIII.  Special Topics
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up  
Human Development?	
October 2015, Box 2.3
Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms	
April 2016, Box 3.1
Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method	
April 2016, Box 3.4
A Global Rush for Land	
October 2016, Box 1.SF.1
Conflict, Growth, and Migration	
April 2017, Box 1.1
Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity	
April 2017, Box 1.2
Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Cases of Brazil, Russia, India,  
China, and South Africa	
April 2017, Box 2.1
Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview	
April 2017, Box 3.1
The Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation	
April 2017, Box 3.2
Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World	
April 2017, Box 3.3
Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income	
April 2017, Box 3.4
Smartphones and Global Trade	
April 2018, Box 1.1
Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?	
April 2018, Box 1.4
The Changing Service Content of Manufactures	
April 2018, Box 3.1
Patent Data and Concepts	
April 2018, Box 4.1
International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers	
April 2018, Box 4.2
Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation	
April 2018, Box 4.4
Increasing Market Power	
October 2018, Box 1.1
Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
October 2018, Box 1.5
Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
October 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects	
April 2019, Chapter 2
The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving	
April 2019, Box 2.1
Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power	
April 2019, Box 2.2
The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments, and Implications for the Global Outlook	
October 2019, Box 1.1
Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare	
October 2019, Box 2.1
The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures	
October 2019, Box 2.3
The Political Effects of Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.1
The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.2
The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate–Growth Differentials in 
Advanced Economies	
April 2020, Box 2.2
176
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
Social Unrest during COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.4
The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the  
United States	
October 2020, Box 2.2
Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure	
April 2021, Box 2.2
Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle	
April 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Annex 1.SF.1
Food Insecurity and Prices during COVID-19	
October 2021, Box 2.1
mRNA Vaccines and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.1
Intellectual Property, Competition, and Innovation	
October 2021, Box 3.3
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
177
IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,  
APRIL 2022
E
xecutive Directors broadly agreed with staff’s 
assessment of the global economic outlook, 
risks, and policy priorities. They noted 
that the war in Ukraine has led to a costly 
­humanitarian crisis, with economic and financial 
repercussions and spillovers—through commodity mar-
kets, confidence, trade, and financial channels—that 
have prompted a downgrade to the global economic 
outlook and increased inflationary pressures at a time 
when the global economy has not yet recovered from 
the COVID-19 crisis. Directors concurred that the 
sharp increase in uncertainty could make economic 
projections especially volatile. They agreed that emerg-
ing risks—from an intensification of the war, further 
sanctions on Russia, fragmentation in financial and 
trade markets, and a sharper-than-expected slowdown 
in China due to COVID-19 outbreaks—on top of 
the continued risk of new, more virulent COVID-19 
strains have further tilted the balance of risks to the 
downside. Moreover, Directors noted that the war in 
Ukraine has increased the likelihood of food short-
ages and wider social tensions given higher food and 
energy prices, which would further adversely impact 
the outlook.
Against this backdrop, Directors agreed that policy 
priorities differ across countries, reflecting local 
circumstances and differences in trade and financial 
exposures. Directors emphasized that the layering of 
strains—slowing economic growth, persistent and 
rising inflation pressures, increased food and energy 
insecurity, continued supply chain disruptions, and 
COVID-19 flare-ups—further complicates national 
policy choices, particularly for countries where policy 
space shrank after the necessary response to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. At the global level, Directors 
stressed that multilateral cooperation and dialogue 
remain essential to defuse geopolitical tensions and 
avoid fragmentation, end the pandemic, and respond 
to the myriad challenges facing our interconnected 
world, particularly climate change.
Directors concurred that, in many countries, fiscal 
policy is operating in a highly uncertain environ-
ment of elevated inflation, slowdown in growth, high 
debt, and tightening borrowing conditions. While 
­acknowledging that fiscal policy has a role to play in 
moments of large adverse shocks, Directors considered 
that, particularly for countries with tighter budget 
constraints, fiscal support should focus on priority 
areas and target the most vulnerable. They emphasized 
that, in countries where economic growth is strong and 
where inflation is elevated, fiscal policy should phase 
out pandemic-related exceptional support, moving 
toward normalization. Directors acknowledged that 
many emerging markets and low-income countries face 
difficult choices given limited fiscal space and higher 
demands on governments due to energy disruptions 
and the pressing need to ensure food security. In this 
context, they underscored that a sound and credible 
medium-term fiscal framework, including spending 
prioritization and measures to raise revenues, can help 
manage urgent needs while ensuring debt sustain-
ability. Directors stressed that short-term measures 
to mitigate high food and energy prices should not 
undermine actions to ensure greater resilience through 
investment in health, food, and cleaner energy sources.
Directors concurred that monetary authorities 
should act decisively to prevent inflationary pressures 
from becoming entrenched and avoid a de-anchoring 
of inflation expectations. They noted that central banks 
in many advanced and emerging market economies 
need to continue tightening the monetary policy stance 
to bring inflation credibly back to target and preserve 
hard-built policy credibility. Directors stressed that 
transparent, data-driven, and clearly communicated 
monetary policy is critical to avoid financial insta-
bility. They considered that, should global financial 
The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the  
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on April 11, 2022.
178
International Monetary Fund | April 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: War Sets Back the Global Recovery
­conditions tighten suddenly, emerging and developing 
economies could face capital outflows and should 
be ready to use all available tools, including foreign 
exchange interventions and capital flow management 
measures, when needed and in line with the Fund’s 
Institutional View on the Liberalization and Manage-
ment of Capital Flows and without substituting for 
exchange rate flexibility and warranted macroeconomic 
adjustments.
Directors agreed that the war in Ukraine will test 
the resiliency of the financial system. They noted that, 
although no systemic event has materialized so far, 
financial stability risks have risen along many dimen-
sions while global financial conditions have tightened 
significantly. Directors concurred that, in those emerg-
ing markets where the sovereign-bank nexus could pose 
vulnerabilities, it should be closely monitored. They 
also noted risks of fragmentation of capital markets 
and payment systems, the creation of blocks of central 
bank digital currencies, a more widespread use of 
crypto assets, and more frequent cyberattacks. Direc-
tors recommended tightening selected macroprudential 
tools to tackle pockets of elevated vulnerabilities while 
avoiding procyclicality and a disorderly tightening of 
financial conditions. They also called for comprehen-
sive global standards and a multifaceted strategy for 
crypto assets and for a more robust oversight of fintech 
firms and decentralized finance platforms. 
Directors agreed that strong multilateral coopera­
tion is essential to respond to existing and unfold-
ing humanitarian crises, safeguard global liquidity, 
manage debt distress, ensure food security, mitigate 
and adapt to climate change, and end the pandemic. 
Noting that many countries are coping with higher 
volatility, increased spending from the pandemic and 
­humanitarian crises, and tightening financial condi-
tions, Directors called on the Fund and other multi-
lateral institutions to stand ready to provide financial 
support. At the same time, they noted that prompt 
and orderly debt restructuring, particularly by improv-
ing the G20 Common Framework, will be necessary in 
cases where liquidity support is insufficient. Directors 
noted that increasingly dire climate change develop-
ments heighten the urgency for tangibly advancing 
the green economic transformation. They stressed the 
importance of intensifying efforts to implement the 
COP26 roadmap together with appropriate measures 
to address energy security concerns. Directors con-
sidered that international cooperation in corporate 
taxation and carbon pricing could also help mobilize 
resources to promote the necessary investments and 
reduce inequality. As the pandemic persists, Directors 
underscored that prompt, equitable, and wider access 
to vaccinations, testing, and treatments remains a key 
priority. They also reiterated that measures to address 
the scars from the pandemic remain crucial to boost 
long-term prospects and create a more resilient and 
inclusive global economy. Above all, Directors called 
for a peaceful resolution of the war in Ukraine, an end 
to the resulting humanitarian crisis, and a return to the 
rules-based international order that helped lift millions 
out of poverty over the past decades.
View the latest 
IMF Publications 
Catalog to learn 
more about new  
titles covering the 
global economy.
Mention code Spring 22 
to receive a 25% discount 
for orders placed online at 
bookstore.IMF.org.
INTERNATIONAL 
MONETARY FUND
IMF.org/pubs
IMF.org/pubs
IMF PUBLICATIONS
Spring 2022
IMF PUBLICATIONS
Spring – Summer 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK	
APRIL 2022
IN THIS ISSUE: 
CHAPTER 1
Global Prospects and Policies
CHAPTER 2
Private Sector Debt and 
the Global Recovery
CHAPTER 3
A Greener Labor Market:
Employment, Policies, and 
Economic Transformation­
CHAPTER 4
Global Trade and Value Chains 
during the Pandemic
