2021 APR WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Managing Divergent Recoveries 2021 APR WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Managing Divergent Recoveries  2021 International Monetary Fund Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company Cataloging-in-Publication Data Joint Bank-Fund Library Names: International Monetary Fund. Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund) Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and financial surveys. Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial surveys, 0256-6877. Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online) Subjects: LCSH: Economic development Periodicals. | International economic relations  Periodicals. | Debts, External Periodicals. | Balance of payments Periodicals. | International finance Periodicals. | Economic forecasting Periodicals. Classification: LCC HC10.W79 HC10.80 ISBN 978-1-51357-502-5 (English Paper) 978-1-51357-574-2 (English ePub) 978-1-51357-575-9 (English Web PDF) The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on March 25, 2021. The views expressed in this publication are those of the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF s Executive Directors or their national authorities. Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2021. World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries. Washington, DC, April. Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail: International Monetary Fund, Publication Services P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org www.imfbookstore.org www.elibrary.imf.org International Monetary Fund | April 2021 iii CONTENTS Assumptions and Conventions viii Further Information x Data xi Preface xii Foreword xiii Executive Summary xvi Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies 1 Divergent Recoveries amid High Uncertainty 1 Pandemic Continues to Exact a Severe Human Toll 1 Unprecedented Policy Actions Prevented Far Worse Outcomes 3 Outlook: Emerging Divergences and Challenges for Policy 4 Diverging Paths, GDP below Pre-Pandemic Projections 7 Inflation Pressure to Remain Contained in Most Countries 12 Cross-Border Services Trade Expected to Remain Subdued 14 One Overarching Uncertainty and Many Risks 14 Policy Priorities 16 Tailor Policies to the Stages of the Pandemic and Recovery 16 Phase 1: Escaping the Crisis 17 Phase 2: Safeguarding the Recovery 18 Phase 3: Investing in the Future 19 Scenario Box 22 Box 1.1. Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook 24 Box 1.2. Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters 27 Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts 29 References 41 Chapter 2. After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage 43 Introduction 43 Demand and Supply in a Low-Contact Economy: A Primer on the Pandemic Shock 45 Analysis of Historical Recessions 47 Implications for the Medium Term: How Persistent Are Output Damages from COVID-19 Likely to Be? 53 Policies to Limit Persistent Damage 55 Conclusions 56 Box 2.1. A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector 57 Box 2.2. Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure 58 References 60 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES iv International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Chapter 3. Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the COVID-19 Shock 63 Introduction 63 Sectoral Shocks, Trends in Reallocation, and the Business Cycle 67 Labor Market Transitions, Inequality, and Recessions 70 Policy Responses to the COVID-19 Shock: Job Retention versus Worker Reallocation 72 Conclusions 77 References 79 Chapter 4. Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19 81 Introduction 81 Spillovers from Monetary Policy Surprises in Advanced Economies 85 Spillovers from Economic News in Advanced Economies 89 Determinants of Emerging Market Monetary Policy Reactions 91 Conclusions 95 Box 4.1. Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness 97 References 98 Statistical Appendix 101 Assumptions 101 What s New 101 Data and Conventions 101 Country Notes 103 Classification of Countries 104 General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification 105 Table A. Classification, by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2020 106 Table B. Advanced Economies, by Subgroup 107 Table C. European Union 107 Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings 108 Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification 109 Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods 111 Table G. Key Data Documentation 112 Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for Selected Economies 122 List of Tables 127 Output (Tables A1 A4) 128 Inflation (Tables A5 A7) 135 Financial Policies (Table A8) 140 Foreign Trade (Table A9) 141 Current Account Transactions (Tables A10 A12) 143 Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13) 150 Flow of Funds (Table A14 A15) 154 World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics 159 IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, April 2021 169 contents International Monetary Fund | April 2021 v Tables Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections 8 Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Exchange Rate Weights 10 Table 1.SF.1. Food Supply Shocks  Impact on Food Inflation 33 Table 1.SF.2. Food Supply Shocks Correlations 34 Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 35 Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 36 Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 37 Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 38 Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 39 Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 40 Table 2.1 Differential Impact across Sectors 45 Online Tables Statistical Appendix Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in Goods and Services Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria: External Debt by Maturity WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES vi International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario: Selected Economic Indicators Figures Figure 1.1. A Race between Virus and Vaccines 2 Figure 1.2. Confirmed Vaccine Procurement 2 Figure 1.3. Global Activity Indicators 3 Figure 1.4. Hardest-Hit Groups 3 Figure 1.5. Growth Surprise and Rebound in COVID-19 Cases 3 Figure 1.6. Global Imports: Contributions, by Types of Goods and Regions 4 Figure 1.7. Employment and Labor Force Participation 4 Figure 1.8. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions 5 Figure 1.9. Global Education Losses Due to the COVID-19 Pandemic 5 Figure 1.10. Change in EMBI Spreads 5 Figure 1.11. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, April 2020 March 2021 6 Figure 1.12. Output Gap Projections, 2020 23 6 Figure 1.13. Effect of Lockdowns on Activity: Beginning versus End, 2020 7 Figure 1.14. Fiscal Stance, 2019 21 7 Figure 1.15. Commodity Prices 10 Figure 1.16. Medium-Term GDP Losses Relative to Pre-COVID-19, by Region 11 Figure 1.17. Headline Inflation: Cyclical and Noncyclical Contributions 12 Figure 1.18. Trend Inflation in Advanced Economies 13 Figure 1.19. Five-Year, Five-Year Inflation Swaps 13 Figure 1.20. Current Account and International Investment Positions 14 Figure 1.21. Bankruptcies, Current and Past Recessions 19 Figure 1.22. Cumulative Global Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 2020 versus 2019 21 Scenario Figure 1. Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against the COVID-19 Virus 22 Figure 1.1.1. Global Manufacturing: Selected Industries 24 Figure 1.1.2. Global Manufacturing, by Industry 25 Figure 1.1.3. Correlation between Lockdowns in Advanced Economies and Durables Consumption 25 Figure 1.1.4. Inventory in Advanced Economies and Manufacturing Outlook 26 Figure 1.2.1. Heterogeneous Effects and Frequency of Weather-Related Natural Disasters 27 Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments 29 Figure 1.SF.2. Global Oil Inventory 30 Figure 1.SF.3. Undernourishment, Diet Composition, and Income 31 Figure 1.SF.4. The Impact of the Pandemic 31 Figure 1.SF.5. Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle 32 Figure 1.SF.6. Small Crop-Area Countries Experience Larger Production Shocks 33 Figure 2.1. Value Added during Recessions, by Sector Group 45 Figure 2.2. Consumption Patterns during COVID-19 in the United States 46 Figure 2.3. Sectoral Price Changes in the United States 46 Figure 2.4. Employment, by Sector Group 47 Figure 2.5. Impact on US Small Businesses 47 Figure 2.6. Medium-Term Output Losses and Channels of Impact 48 Figure 2.7. Recovery Paths Following Deep and Shallow Recessions 49 Figure 2.8. Own and Spillover Effects 50 Figure 2.9. Own and Spillover Effects from Sectoral Shocks 51 contents International Monetary Fund | April 2021 vii Figure 2.10. Recovery from Negative Sectoral Shocks 52 Figure 2.11. Relative Own and Spillover Effects from the COVID-19 Shock 52 Figure 2.12. Medium-Term Output Losses 54 Figure 2.13. Expected Medium-Term Output Losses: Explanatory Factors and Revisions 55 Figure 2.1.1. COVID-19 Damage to the Hotel and Restaurant Sector 57 Figure 2.2.1. Where Are Education Losses Larger? 58 Figure 3.1. Labor Market Conditions in Advanced Economies 64 Figure 3.2. Labor Market Conditions in Emerging Market and Developing Economies 64 Figure 3.3. Sectoral Employment Growth and the Business Cycle 67 Figure 3.4. Changes in Sectoral Online Job Posting Trends 68 Figure 3.5. Labor Market Turnover across Business Cycles 69 Figure 3.6. Sectoral Employment, by Vulnerability to Automation, Skill Level, and Business Cycle 69 Figure 3.7. Labor Market Transition Probabilities across Business Cycles and Demographic Groups 70 Figure 3.8. Occupational Switches 72 Figure 3.9. Public Spending on Retention and Reallocation Policies: Before COVID-19 and Response to COVID-19 73 Figure 3.10. Effects of Job Retention and Worker Reallocation Policies 74 Figure 3.11. Model Simulations with Lockdown Shocks and Labor Market Policies 75 Figure 3.12. Impact of Policies on Income Inequality 77 Figure 4.1. Cumulative Portfolio Flows 82 Figure 4.2. Monetary Policy in Advanced Economies 82 Figure 4.3. Credit Risk Premiums in Emerging Market Economies 82 Figure 4.4. Policy Rate Cuts in Emerging Market Economies between March and August 2020 82 Figure 4.5. Asset Purchase Program Announcement Dates in Emerging Market Economies and the VIX 83 Figure 4.6. Change in Emerging Market Government Bond Yield Curves in Response to Monetary Policy Surprises 86 Figure 4.7. Effects of US Monetary Policy Surprises on Selected Variables 86 Figure 4.8. Time Variation in the Sensitivity of Emerging Market Yields to US Monetary Policy Surprises 87 Figure 4.9. Spillover Amplifiers from US Monetary Policy Surprises 87 Figure 4.10. Counterfactual: Emerging Market Financial Conditions Absent Federal Reserve Easing 89 Figure 4.11. Effects of Swap Line Announcements for Brazil and Mexico 89 Figure 4.12. Effects of Positive News about US Economic Activity 90 Figure 4.13. Effect of Positive News about COVID-19 Vaccines 91 Figure 4.14. Determinants of Asset Purchase Program Choice during COVID-19: Policy Frameworks 93 Figure 4.15. Determinants of Asset Purchase Program Choice during COVID-19: Fiscal Position 93 Figure 4.16. Determinants of Asset Purchase Program Choice during COVID-19: Other Instruments 94 Figure 4.17. Determinants of Policy Rate Cuts during COVID-19: Policy Frameworks 94 Figure 4.18. Determinants of Policy Rate Cuts during COVID-19: Domestic Conditions 95 Figure 4.1.1. Asset Purchase Program Announcement: Effect on Bond Yields 97 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES viii International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during January 18, 2021 to February 15, 2021, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism II, which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and mon- etary policies for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $58.52 a barrel in 2021 and $54.83 a barrel in 2022 and will remain unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that the six-month London interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits will average 0.3 percent in 2021 and 0.4 percent in 2022; that the three-month euro deposit rate will average  0.5 percent in 2021 and 2022; and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will yield, on average,  0.1 percent in 2021 and 0.0 percent in 2022. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would, in any event, be involved in the projections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through March 22, 2021. The following conventions are used throughout the WEO: . . . to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;   between years or months (for example, 2020 21 or January June) to indicate the years or months covered, including the beginning and ending years or months; and / between years or months (for example, 2020/21) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.  Billion  means a thousand million;  trillion  means a thousand billion.  Basis points  refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to   of 1 percentage point). Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and government finance data for each country. For some countries, the figures for 2020 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country. What is new in this publication:   The emerging market and middle-income economies group has been added to selected Chapter 1 and Statistical Appendix tables and comprises emerging market and developing economies that are not classified as low-income developing countries.   Starting with the April 2021 WEO, GDP data and forecasts for New Zealand are reported on a production basis rather than an expenditure basis. In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:   If no source is listed in tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.   When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.   Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding. As used in this report, the terms  country  and  economy  do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis. Assumptions and Conventions International Monetary Fund | April 2021 ix Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of the weighted group data. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the part of the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES x International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY FURTHER INFORMATION Corrections and Revisions The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents. Print and Digital Editions Print Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/29821. Digital Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the IMF eLibrary at http://www.elibrary.imf.org/APR21WEO. Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at www.imf.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly: Copyright and Reuse Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/ terms.htm. International Monetary Fund | April 2021 xi This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary. imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger com- pilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages. The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histori- cal data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF s International Financial Statistics. The WEO data and metadata provided are  as is  and  as available,  and every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents. For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm). Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum (telephone inquiries cannot be accepted): World Economic Studies Division Research Department International Monetary Fund 700 19th Street, NW Washington, DC 20431, USA Fax: (202) 623-6343 Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum DATA WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES xii International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY PREFACE The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF s surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out in particular by the IMF s area departments namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department  together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and the Fiscal Affairs Department. The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Gita Gopinath, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Petya Koeva Brooks, Deputy Director, Research Department; Malhar Nabar, Division Chief, Research Department; and Oya Celasun, Assistant Director, Research Department and Head of the IMF s Spillover Taskforce. The primary contributors to this report are Philip Barrett, John Bluedorn, Christian Bogmans, Francesca Caselli, Wenjie Chen, Sonali Das, Philipp Engler, Niels-Jakob Hansen, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian, Giacomo Magistretti, Jorge Mondragon, Jean-Marc Natal, Andrea Pescatori, Roberto Piazza, Ervin Prifti, Evgenia Pugacheva, Galen Sher, Ippei Shibata, Marina M. Tavares, Nico Valckx, and Philippe Wingender. Other contributors include Gavin Asdorian, Srijoni Banerjee, Eric Bang, Mariya Brussevich, Luisa Calixto, Marina Conesa Martinez, Allan Dizioli, Ananta Dua, Angela Espiritu, Chanpheng Fizzarotti, Chiara Fratto, Brendan Harnoys Vannier, Jinjin He, Mandy Hemmati, Youyou Huang, Benjamin Hunt, Yi Ji, Christopher Johns, Piyusha Khot, Eduard Laurito, Jungjin Lee, Claire Mengyi Li, Borislava Mircheva, Nadia Mounir, Susanna Mursula, Futoshi Narita, Savannah Newman, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, David de Padua, Ilse Peirtsegaele, H l ne Poirson, Yiyuan Qi, Daniela Rojas Fernandez, Max Rozycki, Susie Xiaohui Sun, Nicholas Tong, Shan Wang, Dong Wenchuan, Yarou Xu, Hannah Leheng Yang, and Huiyuan Zhao. Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production and editorial support from Christine Ebrahimzadeh, and editorial assistance from Lucy Scott Morales, James Unwin, and Vector Talent Resources. The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on March 25, 2021. However, both projections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive Directors or to their national authorities. International Monetary Fund | April 2021 xiii I t is one year since COVID-19 was declared a global pandemic, a year of terrible loss of lives and livelihoods. Like many around the world, the team that produces the World Economic Outlook has also lost loved ones to the widening reach of the pandemic. The rising human toll worldwide and the millions of people that remain unemployed are grim markers of the extreme social and economic strain that the global community still confronts. Yet, even with high uncertainty about the path of the pandemic, a way out of this health and economic crisis is increasingly visible. Thanks to the ingenuity of the scientific community, we have multiple vaccines that can reduce the severity and frequency of infections. In parallel, adaptation to pandemic life has enabled the global economy to do well despite subdued overall mobility, leading to a stronger-than-anticipated rebound, on average, across regions. Additional fiscal support in some economies, (especially the United States) on top of an already unprecedented fiscal response last year and contin- ued monetary accommodation further uplift the economic outlook. We are now projecting a stronger recovery in 2021 and 2022 for the global economy compared to our previ- ous forecast, with growth projected to be 6 percent in 2021 and 4.4 percent in 2022. Nonetheless, the outlook presents daunting challenges related to divergences in the speed of recovery both across and within countries and the potential for persistent economic damage from the crisis. As Chapter 1 emphasizes, multispeed recoveries are under way in all regions and across income groups, linked to stark differences in the pace of vaccine rollout, the extent of economic policy support, and structural factors such as reliance on tourism. Among advanced economies, the United States is expected to surpass its pre-COVID GDP level this year, while many others in the group will return to their pre-COVID levels only in 2022. Similarly, among emerging market and developing economies, China had already returned to pre-COVID GDP in 2020, whereas many others are not expected to do so until well into 2023. The divergent recovery paths are likely to create sig- nificantly wider gaps in living standards between devel- oping countries and others, compared to pre-pandemic expectations. Cumulative per capita income losses over 2020 22, compared to pre-pandemic projections, are equivalent to 20 percent of 2019 per capita GDP in emerging markets and developing economies (exclud- ing China), while in advanced economies the losses are expected to be relatively smaller, at 11 percent. This has reversed gains in poverty reduction, with an additional 95 million people expected to have entered the ranks of the extreme poor in 2020, and 80 million more undernourished than before. With a fuller understanding of how the shock has transmitted across sectors and borders, and based on past experiences of deep recessions, we are now better able to assess the likely medium-term losses. Many variables differences in initial exposure to the shock, economic structures, and policy support inform our projections for persistent damages and scarring over the medium term, as discussed in Chapter 2. Although medium-term losses for the global economy are expected to be smaller than in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the cross-country pattern of damages is, however, likely to be different this time, with low-income countries and emerging markets  suffering more compared to the fallout from the crisis a decade earlier when advanced economies were harder hit. These divergences, however, are not just occurring between countries but also within them. As discussed in Chapter 3 (and in the April 2021 Fiscal Monitor), within-country income inequality will likely increase because young workers and those with relatively lower skills remain more heavily affected in not only advanced but also emerging markets and develop- ing economies. In the latter group of countries, female employment rates remain below that of men, exacerbating these disparities. Some of these effects reflect how the crisis has affected some sectors more than others: employment has declined to a greater extent in those sectors with larger concentrations of younger or lower-skilled workers as well as in sectors FOREWORD more  vulnerable to automation. Because the crisis has accelerated the transformative forces of digitalization and automation, many of the jobs lost are unlikely to return, requiring worker reallocation across sec- tors which itself often comes with severe earnings penalties. A high degree of uncertainty surrounds these projections, with many possible downside and upside risks. Much still depends on the race between the virus and vaccines. Greater progress with vaccinations can uplift the forecast, while new virus variants that evade vaccines can lead to a sharp downgrade. Large divergences in recovery speeds also raise the prospect of divergent policy stances. In recent months, we have seen sharp increases in long-term interest rates, partly reflecting revised market expectations of the pace at which the US Federal Reserve will normalize policy as the growth outlook for the US economy improves. As discussed in Chapter 4 (and in the April 2021 Global Financial Stability Report), if such increases are orderly and reflect stronger growth expectations, then they need not pose difficulties for other countries. But if increases instead reflect a sense that advanced economy monetary policy stances will need to tighten abruptly as the recovery gathers momentum, then there could be adverse spillovers to emerging market and developing economies, particularly among those with high debt and large financing needs. This could set those economies back even further relative to advanced economies. Averting divergent outcomes will require, above all, resolving the health crisis everywhere. At the same time, economic policies will need to limit persistent damage, secure the recovery, and prepare for the post-COVID world, while being mindful of available policy space. Already, unprecedented economic policy actions have prevented far worse outcomes our estimates suggest last year s severe collapse could have been about at least three times as large had it not been for the swift policy support worldwide. Many countries are now left with more limited policy space and higher debt levels than prior to the pandemic. Policies, therefore, will have to become better targeted to maintain the ability to support economic activity through this uncertain period as the race between the virus and vaccines unfolds. A tailored approach will be necessary, with policies well calibrated to the stage of the pandemic, strength of the economic recovery, and social and economic circumstances of individual countries. As discussed in this report, while the pandemic continues, policies should prioritize health care spending on vaccine production and distribution, treatments, health care infrastructure together with well-targeted fiscal sup- port to affected households and firms. As the recovery progresses and labor market conditions normalize, tar- geted support should be gradually scaled back to avoid sudden cliffs. More emphasis should at that point be placed on retraining and reskilling workers, together with income support as needed to help them through the transition, while in parallel expanding hiring subsidies to incentivize job creation. Expedited and streamlined bankruptcy procedures can further facili- tate reallocation. Resources will need to be devoted to reverse learning losses among children who lost instructional time during the pandemic, for instance, through increased spending on education. Once the health crisis is over, policy efforts can focus more on building resilient, inclusive, and greener economies, both to bolster the recovery and to raise potential output. The priorities should include investing in green infrastructure to help mitigate cli- mate change, strengthening social assistance and social insurance to arrest rising inequality, introducing initia- tives to boost productive capacity and adapt to a more digitalized economy, and resolving debt overhangs. Financing these endeavors will be easier for some countries than for others. For those with limited fis- cal space, improved revenue administration, greater progressivity in taxation, and reorientation of expen- ditures toward critical health, social, and infrastruc- tural spending will be essential. Anchoring policies in credible medium-term frameworks and adhering to the highest standards of debt transparency would help in this regard, by containing borrowing costs and reducing fiscal risks. On the international stage, first and foremost, countries need to work together to ensure widespread vaccinations across the world. The vaccine industry is attempting to produce three times the level of  vaccines produced in a normal year. Not  surprisingly, they are facing major challenges, including input supply bottlenecks. Vaccine access is also deeply iniquitous with high-income countries, with 16 percent of the world s population, having pre-purchased 50 percent of the doses. Countries will need to work together to resolve production bottlenecks, ramp up production, ensure universal access, including through funding the COVAX facility on which many low-income countries rely heavily for doses, and avoid export controls. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES xiv International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Policymakers should also continue to ensure ade- quate access to international liquidity. Major central banks should provide clear guidance on future actions with ample time to prepare to avoid taper-tantrum kinds of episodes as occurred in 2013. Low-income countries will benefit from further extending the temporary pause on debt repayments under the Debt Service Suspension Initiative and operationalizing the G20 Common Framework for orderly debt restruc- turing. Emerging markets and low-income countries will benefit from a new allocation of the IMF s special drawing rights and through pre-emptively availing themselves of the IMF s precautionary financing lines, such as the Flexible Credit Line and the Short-Term Liquidity Line. Even while all eyes are on the pandemic, it is essential that progress be made on resolving trade and technology tensions. Countries should also cooperate on climate change mitigation, digitalization, mod- ernization of international corporate taxation, and on measures to limit cross-border profit shifting, tax avoidance, and evasion. Over the past year, we have seen significant innova- tions in economic policy and massively scaled-up  support at the national level, particularly among advanced economies that have been able to afford these initiatives. A similarly ambitious effort is now needed at the multilateral level, on top of the consider- able support provided thus far by the IMF to 85 coun- tries during this pandemic. Without additional efforts to give all people a fair shot, cross-country gaps in living standards could widen significantly, and decades- long trends of global poverty reduction could reverse. Gita Gopinath Economic Counsellor and Director of Research FOREWORD International Monetary Fund | April 2021 xv WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES xvi International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY EXECUTIVE SUMMARY One year into the COVID-19 pandemic, the accumulating human toll continues to raise concerns, even as growing vaccine coverage lifts sentiment. High uncertainty surrounds the global economic outlook, primarily related to the path of the pandemic. The contraction of activity in 2020 was unprecedented in living memory in its speed and synchronized nature. But it could have been a lot worse. Although difficult to pin down precisely, IMF staff estimates suggest that the contraction could have been three times as large if not for extraordinary policy support. Much remains to be done to beat back the pandemic and avoid divergence in income per capita across economies and persistent increases in inequality within countries. Improved outlook: After an estimated contraction of  3.3 percent in 2020, the global economy is projected to grow at 6 percent in 2021, moderating to 4.4 percent in 2022. The contraction for 2020 is 1.1 percentage points smaller than projected in the October 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO), reflect- ing the higher-than-expected growth outturns in the second half of the year for most regions after lock- downs were eased and as economies adapted to new ways of working. The projections for 2021 and 2022 are 0.8 percentage point and 0.2 percentage point stronger than in the October 2020 WEO, reflecting additional fiscal support in a few large economies and the anticipated vaccine-powered recovery in the second half of the year. Global growth is expected to moder- ate to 3.3 percent over the medium term reflecting projected damage to supply potential and forces that predate the pandemic, including aging-related slower labor force growth in advanced economies and some emerging market economies. Thanks to unprecedented policy response, the COVID-19 recession is likely to leave smaller scars than the 2008 global financial crisis. However, emerging market economies and low-income developing countries have been hit harder and are expected to suffer more significant medium-term losses. Divergent impacts: Output losses have been par- ticularly large for countries that rely on tourism and commodity exports and for those with limited policy space to respond. Many of these countries entered the crisis in a precarious fiscal situation and with less capacity to mount major health care policy responses or support livelihoods. The projected recovery follows a severe contraction that has had particularly adverse employment and earnings impacts on certain groups. Youth, women, workers with relatively lower educa- tional attainment, and the informally employed have generally been hit hardest. Income inequality is likely to increase significantly because of the pandemic. Close to 95 million more people are estimated to have fallen below the threshold of extreme poverty in 2020 compared with pre-pandemic projections. Moreover, learning losses have been more severe in low-income and developing countries, which have found it harder to cope with school closures, and especially for girls and students from low-income households. Unequal setbacks to schooling could further amplify income inequality. High uncertainty surrounds the global outlook. Future developments will depend on the path of the health crisis, including whether the new COVID-19 strains prove susceptible to vaccines or they prolong the pandemic; the effectiveness of policy actions to limit persistent economic damage (scarring); the evolution of financial conditions and commodity prices; and the adjustment capacity of the economy. The ebb and flow of these drivers and their interaction with country-specific characteristics will determine the pace of the recovery and the extent of medium-term scarring across countries (Chapter 2). In many aspects, this crisis is unique. In certain countries, policy sup- port and lack of spending opportunities have led to large increases in savings that could be unleashed very quickly should uncertainty dissipate. At the same time, it is unclear how much of these savings will be spent, given the deterioration of many firms  and households  balance sheets (particularly among those with a high propensity to consume out of income) and the expiration of loan repayment moratoria. In sum, risks are assessed as balanced in the short term, but tilted to the upside later on. Considering the large uncertainty surrounding the outlook, policymakers should prioritize policies that would be prudent, regardless of the state of the world that prevails for instance, strengthening social protection with wider eligibility for unemployment insurance to cover the self-employed and informally employed (see Chapter 2 of the April 2020 WEO); ensuring adequate resources for health care, early child- hood development programs, education, and voca- tional training; and investing in green infrastructure to hasten the transition to lower carbon dependence. Moreover, as discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, they should be prepared to flexibly adjust policy support, for example, by shifting from lifelines to reallocation as the pandemic evolves, and linked to improvements in activity, while they safeguard social spending and avoid locking in inefficient spending outlays. It is important to anchor short-term support in credible medium-term frameworks (see the April 2021 Fiscal Monitor). Where elevated debt levels limit scope for action, effort should also be directed at creating space through increased revenue collection (fewer breaks, better coverage of registries, and switching to well-designed value-added taxes), greater tax progressivity, and by reducing waste- ful subsidies. Policy priorities: The factors shaping the appropriate stance of policy vary by country, especially progress toward normalization. Hence, countries will need to tailor their policy responses to the stage of the pan- demic, strength of the recovery, and structural char- acteristics of the economy. Once vaccination becomes widespread and spare capacity in health care systems is generally restored to pre-COVID-19 levels, restric- tions can begin to be lifted. While the pandemic continues, policies should first focus on escaping the crisis, prioritizing health care spending, providing well-targeted fiscal support, and maintaining accom- modative monetary policy while monitoring financial stability risks. Then, as the recovery progresses, policy- makers will need to limit long-term economic scarring with an eye toward boosting productive capacity (for example, public investment) and increasing incentives for an efficient allocation of productive resources. It is a delicate balance, especially given the prevailing uncer- tainty. Therefore, when support is eventually scaled back, it should be done in ways that avoid sudden cliffs (for instance, gradually reducing the government s share of wages covered under furlough and short-time work programs while increasing hiring subsidies to enable reallocation as needed). All the while, long-term challenges boosting productivity, improving policy frameworks, and addressing climate change cannot be ignored. Differential recovery speeds across coun- tries may give rise to divergent policy stances, particu- larly if advanced economies benefit sooner than others from wide vaccine coverage. Clear forward guidance and communication from advanced economy central banks is particularly crucial, and not just for calibrating the appropriate domestic monetary accommodation. It also vitally bears on external financial conditions in emerging markets and the impact that divergent policy stances have on capital flows (Chapter 4). Strong international cooperation is vital for achieving these objectives and ensuring that emerging market economies and low-income developing countries con- tinue to narrow the gap between their living standards and those of high-income countries. On the health care front, this means ensuring adequate worldwide vaccine production and universal distribution at affordable prices including through sufficient fund- ing for the COVAX facility so that all countries can quickly and decisively beat back the pandemic. The international community also needs to work together to ensure that financially constrained economies have adequate access to international liquidity so that they can continue needed health care, other social, and infrastructure spending required for development and convergence to higher levels of income per capita. Countries should also work closely to redouble climate change mitigation efforts. Moreover, strong coopera- tion is needed to resolve economic issues underlying trade and technology tensions (as well as gaps in the rules-based multilateral trading system). Building on recent advances in international tax policy, efforts should continue to focus on limiting cross-border profit shifting, tax avoidance, and tax evasion. Executive Summary International Monetary Fund | April 2021 xvii 1 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Divergent Recoveries amid High Uncertainty Global prospects remain highly uncertain one year into the pandemic. New virus mutations and the accu- mulating human toll raise concerns, even as growing vaccine coverage lifts sentiment. Economic recoveries are diverging across countries and sectors, reflecting varia- tion in pandemic-induced disruptions and the extent of policy support. The outlook depends not just on the outcome of the battle between the virus and vaccines (Figure 1.1) it also hinges on how effectively economic policies deployed under high uncertainty can limit last- ing damage from this unprecedented crisis. Pandemic Continues to Exact a Severe Human Toll Social distancing, vaccinations, and treatments have helped slow the progress of the virus and saved lives. At the same time, the crisis has laid bare large differ- ences in countries  capacity to support their popula- tion, especially the most vulnerable. The measured pandemic death toll (more than 2  million people worldwide), excess mortality from other causes on account of delayed care, and elevated unemployment have imposed extreme social strains worldwide. Vacci- nation has begun in most countries, holding promise of eventual reductions in the severity and frequency of infections. Coverage varies considerably so far, and countries are expected to achieve widespread inocula- tion at different times (Figure 1.2). A multispeed, incomplete recovery: Second and third infection waves have necessitated renewed restrictions in many countries since the October 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecast. This stop-go rhythm means that recovery is uneven and far from complete. Although GDP, in general, recovered stronger than expected in the second half of 2020, it remains significantly below pre-pandemic trends in most countries. More- over, high-frequency indicators suggest a softening of  momentum in some sectors in early 2021 (Figure 1.3).   Differences across countries: Across countries, the recovery has been shaped by the path of the pan- demic, curbs to mobility imposed to contain its progress, and policy actions. Output losses have been particularly large for countries that rely on tourism and commodity exports and for those with limited policy space to respond. Many of these countries entered the crisis in a precarious fiscal sit- uation and with less capacity to mount major health care policy responses, forcing stricter lockdowns to contain the spread of the virus. Factors such as the proportion of  teleworkable  jobs, share of employ- ment in small and medium enterprises, depth of capital markets, size of the informal sector, and qual- ity of and access to digital infrastructure also played roles in both the downturn and the speed of the recovery (Figure 1.4). Such differences may, in turn, lead to lasting divergences across countries if the pandemic is not beaten back universally. Close to 95 million more people are estimated to have fallen below the threshold of extreme poverty in 2020 compared with pre-pandemic projections, reversing a two-decade-long trend of global poverty reduction.   Differences across sectors: Strong demand for prod- ucts that support working from home and the release of pent-up demand for durable goods more generally (especially automobiles) have been key factors behind the global recovery since the second half of 2020 (Box 1.1). Following a short-lived and synchronized collapse, industrial production has returned to pre-pandemic levels. Consumption of contact-intensive services has remained depressed, however, as the reopening of many economies in May June which led to a surprise rebound in the third quarter of 2020 also triggered a second wave of infections and further curbs to mobility in the closing months of 2020 (Figure 1.5). Travel, the arts, entertainment, sports, hospitality, and brick-and-mortar retail have operated at a fraction of their capacity since the beginning of the pan- demic and will not see a substantial rebound before the pandemic is brought under control.   International trade in goods has shown similar pat- terns (Figure 1.6). Merchandise trade volumes have returned to pre-pandemic levels. Cross-border trade in services remains subdued. GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 1 CHAPTER WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 2 International Monetary Fund | April 2021   Labor market vulnerabilities: The labor market recovery is also incomplete, with still-elevated unemployment and underemployment (Figure 1.7). Despite extraordinary policy support (including job retention programs and wage subsidies), unem- ployment rates have risen by about 1  percentage points above their pre-pandemic averages in both advanced and emerging market and developing economies. Labor force participation has also dropped. Moreover, the true amount of slack may be even larger than these indicators suggest as many countries have introduced or expanded jobs retention programs (for example, Kurzarbeit in Germany; see Chapter 3). Divergence between asset markets and the rest of the economy: In contrast with the labor and prod- uct markets, notwithstanding recent volatility, asset markets have powered ahead, lifted by policy stimu- lus and expectations of a vaccine-driven normaliza- tion later this year (Figure 1.8). The disconnect is a double-edged sword: supportive financial conditions are vital for the recovery, but wide divergences between valuations and broader economic prospects raise finan- cial stability risks (see the April 2021 Global Financial Stability Report (GFSR)). Divergences within countries give rise to higher inequality: Given the asymmetric nature of the COVID-19 shock, the employment and earnings impact of the pandemic has been highly unequal across groups of workers. Youth, women, and the relatively lower-skilled have been hit the hardest (see Chapter 3). These demographic groups have suffered the most in this recession, in part because their jobs are concentrated in contact-intensive services and the informal sector (see the October 2020 Regional Economic Outlooks). Income inequality is likely to have increased significantly in both advanced economies and emerging markets (see Box 1.2 of the October 2020 WEO). Moreover, learning losses have been more severe in low-income developing countries, which have had more difficulty coping with school closures, and especially for girls and students from low-income households (Figure 1.9). Unequal setbacks to schooling could further amplify income inequality (see Chapter 2 and April 2021 Fiscal Monitor). March 22 February 2 Figure 1.1. A Race between Virus and Vaccines (Per thousand, seven-day moving average; latest observation: March 22, 2021) The race between the virus and vaccines has begun. Sources: Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 statistics; and national government reports via Our World in Data. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 New people fully vaccinated New cases By the end of June 2021 By the end of December 2021 Unknown People vaccinated (at least one shot), latest observation: March 22, 2021 (right scale) Procurement data suggest that most of the population in emerging market economies will not be vaccinated before 2022. Sources: Duke Global Health Innovation Center; Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 statistics; and national government reports via Our World in Data. Note: Vaccines are Gamaleya, Janssen (Johnson & Johnson), Moderna, Oxford/AstraZeneca, P zer/BioNTech, Sinopharm, and Sinovac. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market economies; G20 = Group of Twenty; LIDCs = low-income developing countries. 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 G20 AEs G20 EMs Non-G20 EMs LIDC Figure 1.2. Con rmed Vaccine Procurement (Percent of population) CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 3 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Unprecedented Policy Actions Prevented Far Worse Outcomes A forceful, swift, global policy response: A year ago, with the world economy seemingly staring into the abyss, central banks swiftly provided liquidity and supported credit extension to a vast array of borrowers. At the same time, fiscal authorities channeled relief to households and firms through transfers, wage subsidies, and liquidity support (see the Fiscal Monitor Data- base of Country Fiscal Measures in Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic). These actions supplemented other aspects of the safety net, such as unemployment insurance and nutrition assistance. Financial regulators in many countries facilitated continued credit provision with a range of measures.1 Financial conditions have been broadly supportive (Figure 1.10). Exchange rate 1These included easing classification guidelines for nonperforming loans, relaxing provisioning requirements for banks, reducing risk weights on loans backed by public guarantees, introducing moratori- ums on bankruptcy proceedings (see the  Policy Priorities  section), and flexibility regarding bank capital requirements (reducing macro- prudential buffers, clarifying how breaches of capital buffers would be treated). Industrial production Manufacturing PMI: New orders Services PMI: New business Monthly world trade volumes (seasonally adjusted, 2018 = 100, right scale) Figure 1.3. Global Activity Indicators (Three-month moving average, annualized percent change; deviations from 50 for PMI, unless noted otherwise) High-frequency indicators suggest that manufacturing and trade are back to pre-pandemic levels, but there is still some way to go in the services sector. Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics; Markit Economics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: PMI = purchasing managers  index.  30  25  20  15  10  5 0 5 10 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 2017 18 19 20 Feb. 21 AEs EMs EMs excluding China LIDCs World Figure 1.4. Hardest-Hit Groups (Revisions to cumulative per capita GDP growth from 2019 between the January 2020 and April 2021 WEO forecasts, percentage points) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Per capita real GDP (2017 purchasing-power-parity dollars) is used in the calculations. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market economies; LIDCs = low-income developing countries; WEO = World Economic Outlook.  10  8  6  4  2 0 2020 21 22 Figure 1.5. Growth Surprise and Rebound in COVID-19 Cases (Percentage points; quarter over quarter seasonally adjusted annual rate) Part of the positive growth surprise in 2020:Q3 resulted from reopening, leading to an infection surge and renewed lockdowns at the end of the year. Sources: Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Sample is G20 countries. Growth revisions are the difference between 2020:Q3 forecasts as of June 2020 and  rst estimates published by January 2021. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. G20 = Group of Twenty.  20  10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 2020:Q3 growth revisions New cases between July 15 and December 15, 2020 (per thousand population) USA GBR TUR SAU RUS MEX KOR JPN ITA IDN IND DEU FRA CHN CAN BRA AUS ARG WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 4 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 movements have reflected these shifts in risk sentiment; most emerging market currencies and those of com- modity exporters have appreciated, while the US dollar has depreciated since last April (Figure 1.11). All these developments helped limit amplification of the shock. Mission not accomplished (yet): IMF staff estimates suggest that policy actions including automatic stabilizers, discretionary measures, and financial sector measures contributed about 6 percentage points to global growth in 2020. While difficult to pin down precisely, absent these actions, the global growth contraction last year could have been three times worse than it was. Even after this expansive support, and with a recovery under way since mid-2020, unem- ployment and underemployment remain elevated. Although estimating output gaps during this cri- sis has been tricky (social distancing and curbs on contact-intensive activities mean that both supply and demand have contracted), these developments imply notable slack in the economy (Figure 1.12). Much work remains to achieve a complete recovery. This is a particularly complicated task for policymakers, con- sidering the high uncertainty surrounding the outlook and, for many, the prospect of cushioning the impact on incomes through further periods of stop-go activity with far less policy space than was available at the start of the crisis. Outlook: Emerging Divergences and Challenges for Policy High uncertainty  surrounds the global out- look. Beyond the usual set of  idiosyncratic shocks that normally beset all forecasting exercises, future Cars, AEs Cars, EMs Consumer goods, AEs Consumer goods, EMs Capital goods, AEs Capital goods, EMs Industrial supplies, AEs Industrial supplies, EMs Other goods Total excluding petroleum Figure 1.6. Global Imports: Contributions, by Types of Goods and Regions (Contribution to year-over-year percent change, percentage points; based on value in US dollars) Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Advanced economies (AEs) comprise Australia, Canada, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong SAR, Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Sweden, Taiwan Province of China, United Kingdom, and United States. Emerging market economies (EMs) comprise Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Hungary, India, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey.  21  18  15  12  9  6  3 0 3 6 9 12 Jan. 2020 Mar. 20 May 20 Jul. 20 Sep. 20 Nov. 20 Jan. 21 The sharp rebound in international trade in the second half of 2020 re ects pent-up demand for consumer durables (cars) from advanced economies and resumption of supply chains in emerging markets. Non-EU AEs EU EMDEs Non-EU AEs EU EMDEs Figure 1.7. Employment and Labor Force Participation (Index, 2019:Q4 = 100) There is still a long way to go to close the employment gap. 85 90 95 100 105 2019: Q4 20: Q1 20: Q2 20: Q3 20: Q4 2019: Q4 20: Q1 20: Q2 20: Q3 20: Q4 1. Total Employment Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Based on 68 countries for panel 1 and 48 countries for panel 2 using seasonally adjusted quarterly series. Labor force participation rates are based on 15 64 years and indices are weight-averaged using the population from the latest WEO database. When 2020:Q4 data are not yet available, 2020:Q3 values are assumed. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; EU = European Union; WEO = World Economic Outlook. 90 95 100 105 2. Labor Force Participation Rate CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 5 International Monetary Fund | April 2021  developments will depend on (1) the path of the pan- demic, (2) policy actions, (3) the evolution of financial conditions and commodity prices, and (4) the capacity of the economy to adjust to health-related impedi- ments to activity. The ebb and flow of these drivers and their interaction with country-specific character- istics will determine the pace of the recovery and the extent of medium-term scarring. Uneven access to vaccines: Based on procurement data and the most recent progress on inoculation, the baseline assumes staggered and uneven distribution of vaccines across regions. Broad vaccine availability in advanced economies and some emerging market S&P 500 MSCI Emerging Market TOPIX Euro Stoxx United States Euro area United Kingdom United States United Kingdom Japan Germany Italy US high grade US high yield Euro high grade Euro high yield Figure 1.8. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions (Percent, unless noted otherwise) Financial conditions imply a continuing disconnect between  nancial markets and the real economy. Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; Re nitiv Datastream; and IMF staff calculations. Note: MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor s; TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index; WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1Expectations are based on federal funds rate futures for the United States, the sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro interbank offered forward rate for the euro area; updated March 17, 2021. 2Data are through March 17, 2021.  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2020 21 22 23 Mar. 24 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 2017 18 19 Mar. 21  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 2017 18 19 Mar. 21 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 2017 18 19 Mar. 21 1. Policy Rate Expectations1 (Dashed lines are from the October 2020 WEO) 3. Credit Spreads2 (Basis points) 4. Equity Markets2 (Index, 2017 = 100) 2. Ten-Year Government Bond Yields2 Figure 1.9. Global Education Losses Due to the COVID-19 Pandemic (Average missed days of instruction in 2020) Education losses have been more severe in low-income developing countries. Sources: UNESCO-UNICEF-World Bank Survey on National Education Responses to COVID-19 School Closures; and IMF staff calculations. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 All economies Advanced economies Emerging market economies Low-income developing countries March 23, 2020, versus January 1, 2020 Latest versus March 23, 2020 Figure 1.10. Change in EMBI Spreads (Basis points) Emerging market  nancial conditions are almost back to precrisis levels. Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Data are through March 17, 2021. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.  800  400 0 400 800 ARG CHL COL HUN IND MYS PER POL RUS TUN BRA CHN EGY IDN MAR MEX PHL ROU TUR ZAF ARG (2,618) ARG ( 2,723) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 6 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 economies is expected for the summer of 2021 and in most countries by the second half of 2022. Key to the baseline is the assumption that vaccines and various therapies are accessible at affordable prices for all countries. This timetable assumes that effective pro- tection, combined with improved testing and tracing, will reduce local transmissions to low levels every- where by the end of 2022. Within this global picture, vaccine deployment will be staggered across regions, with some countries exiting the crisis much sooner, and with new strains forcing occasional and localized lockdowns before vaccines become widely available. These  restrictions should have less impact on activ- ity than in the previous waves because of their more-targeted nature, adaptation to remote work, and a more subdued starting point for contact-intensive activity than was the case in the first half of 2020 (Figure 1.13). Differentiated fiscal support: Considerable vari- ation is expected in the extent of policy support across countries (Figure 1.14). With regard to advanced economies, the United States and Japan have announced sizable fiscal support for 2021, and the European Union has agreed to start distributing the Next Generation EU funds. At $1.9 trillion, the Biden administration s new fiscal package is expected to deliver a strong boost to growth in the United States in 2021 and provide sizable positive spillovers to trading partners. Debt service costs are expected to remain manageable across advanced economies, thanks Latest versus October 2020 October 2020 versus April 2020 Figure 1.11. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, April 2020 March 2021 (Percent) Movements in major currencies have re ected changes in risk sentiment and differences in monetary policy stances. Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Positive change indicates appreciation. Latest data available are for March 19, 2021. EA = euro area. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.  12  8  4 0 4 8 12 16 AUS CAN CHE EA GBR JPN KOR NOR NZL SGP SWE TWN USA 1. Advanced Economies  16  12  8  4 0 4 8 12 16 20 ARG BRA CHL CHN COL HUN IDN IND MEX MYS PAK PER PHL POL RUS THA TUR ZAF 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies Average, 2020 21 Average, 2022 23 Figure 1.12. Output Gap Projections, 2020 23 (Percent of potential GDP) Considerable slack is expected in advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies. Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 IND MEX IDN ZAF BRA CHN RUS POL TUR  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 ESP ITA FRA GBR AUS DEU CAN JPN USA 1. Advanced Economies 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 7 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 to the relatively large fraction of their debt burden covered by long-term and sometimes negative-yielding bonds. Fiscal support in emerging market and develop- ing economies has been more limited, and deficits are generally expected to decline as revenues improve and crisis-related expenditures unwind with the projected economic recovery. Higher debt service costs are also expected to constrain their ability to address social needs, including rising poverty and growing inequality, or to correct the setback in human capital accumula- tion during the crisis. Broadly supportive financial conditions: The baseline assumes that monetary policy will remain accommo- dative and tighten only gradually as the recovery takes hold (including in some emerging market and devel- oping economies where policy frameworks are well established and inflation expectations well anchored). As discussed in the April 2021 GFSR, financial conditions are expected to remain broadly supportive in advanced and emerging market and developing  economies. Of course, important risks surround this benign scenario (discussed in the next section). Rising commodity prices: Consistent with the pro- jected global recovery, oil prices are projected to grow 30 percent in 2021 from their low base in 2020, in part reflecting the OPEC+ (Organization of the Petro- leum Exporting Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC oil exporters) supply curbs (Figure 1.15). Metal prices are projected to accelerate strongly in 2021, largely reflecting the rebound in China. Food prices are also expected to pick up this year (see the Commodities Special Feature in this chapter). Diverging Paths, GDP below Pre-Pandemic Projections After an estimated contraction of  3.3 percent in 2020, the global economy is projected to grow at 6 percent in 2021, moderating to 4.4 percent in 2022. The contraction for 2020 is 1.1 percentage points smaller than projected in the October 2020 WEO, reflecting the higher-than-expected growth January 1 to April 30, 2020 October 15 to December 31, 2020 Figure 1.13. Effect of Lockdowns on Activity: Beginning versus End, 2020 (Index) Economic activity became less sensitive to mobility curbs toward the end of the year. Sources: Markit PMI database; and Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker. Note: Samples comprise 28 countries where composite PMI values are available. Positive change in stringency index (0 100) denotes stronger measures; positive change in composite PMI denotes relative expansion. PMI = purchasing managers  index. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.  70  60  50  40  30  20  10 0 10 Change in composite PMI Change in stringency index 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  40  20 ZMB ARE SAU RUS FRA AUS UGA ESP SGP QAT NGA MOZ LBN KEN KAZ IRL HKG GHA EGY USA GBR ZAF JPN ITA IND DEU CHN BRA ZMB ARE UGA ESP SGP QAT NGA MOZ LBN KEN KAZ IRL HKG GHA EGY USA GBR ZAF SAU RUS JPN ITA IND DEU FRA CHN BRA AUS October 2020 World Economic Outlook Cyclically adjusted primary balance (percent of potential GDP) Figure 1.14. Fiscal Stance, 2019 21 (Change in structural primary  scal balance, percent of potential GDP) The  scal stance is expected to remain accommodative in advanced economies in 2021. Source: IMF staff estimates.  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 2019 20 21 2019 20 21 Advanced economies Emerging market and developing economies WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 8 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (Percent change, unless noted otherwise) Projections Difference from January 2021 WEO Update1 Difference from October 2020 WEO1 2020 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 World Output  3.3 6.0 4.4 0.5 0.2 0.8 0.2 Advanced Economies  4.7 5.1 3.6 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.7 United States  3.5 6.4 3.5 1.3 1.0 3.3 0.6 Euro Area  6.6 4.4 3.8 0.2 0.2  0.8 0.7 Germany  4.9 3.6 3.4 0.1 0.3  0.6 0.3 France  8.2 5.8 4.2 0.3 0.1  0.2 1.3 Italy  8.9 4.2 3.6 1.2 0.0  1.0 1.0 Spain  11.0 6.4 4.7 0.5 0.0  0.8 0.2 Japan  4.8 3.3 2.5 0.2 0.1 1.0 0.8 United Kingdom  9.9 5.3 5.1 0.8 0.1  0.6 1.9 Canada  5.4 5.0 4.7 1.4 0.6  0.2 1.3 Other Advanced Economies2  2.1 4.4 3.4 0.8 0.3 0.8 0.3 Emerging Market and Developing Economies  2.2 6.7 5.0 0.4 0.0 0.7  0.1 Emerging and Developing Asia  1.0 8.6 6.0 0.3 0.1 0.6  0.3 China 2.3 8.4 5.6 0.3 0.0 0.2  0.2 India3  8.0 12.5 6.9 1.0 0.1 3.7  1.1 ASEAN-54  3.4 4.9 6.1  0.3 0.1  1.3 0.4 Emerging and Developing Europe  2.0 4.4 3.9 0.4 0.0 0.5 0.5 Russia  3.1 3.8 3.8 0.8  0.1 1.0 1.5 Latin America and the Caribbean  7.0 4.6 3.1 0.5 0.2 1.0 0.4 Brazil  4.1 3.7 2.6 0.1 0.0 0.9 0.3 Mexico  8.2 5.0 3.0 0.7 0.5 1.5 0.7 Middle East and Central Asia  2.9 3.7 3.8 0.7  0.4 0.7  0.2 Saudi Arabia  4.1 2.9 4.0 0.3 0.0  0.2 0.6 Sub-Saharan Africa  1.9 3.4 4.0 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.0 Nigeria  1.8 2.5 2.3 1.0  0.2 0.8  0.2 South Africa  7.0 3.1 2.0 0.3 0.6 0.1 0.5 Memorandum World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates  3.6 5.8 4.1 0.7 0.3 1.0 0.3 European Union  6.1 4.4 3.9 0.3 0.2  0.6 0.6 Middle East and North Africa  3.4 4.0 3.7 0.9  0.5 0.8  0.2 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies  2.4 6.9 5.0 0.5 0.0 0.8 0.0 Low-Income Developing Countries 0.0 4.3 5.2  0.8  0.3  0.6  0.3 World Trade Volume (goods and services)  8.5 8.4 6.5 0.3 0.2 0.1 1.1 Imports Advanced Economies  9.1 9.1 6.4 1.1 0.4 1.8 1.3 Emerging Market and Developing Economies  8.6 9.0 7.4  1.1 0.3  2.0 1.4 Exports Advanced Economies  9.5 7.9 6.4 1.0 0.2 0.9 1.3 Emerging Market and Developing Economies  5.7 7.6 6.0  0.7  0.2  1.9 0.3 Commodity Prices (US dollars) Oil5  32.7 41.7  6.3 20.5  3.9 29.7  9.3 Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import weights) 6.7 16.1  1.9 3.3  0.4 11.0  2.4 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies6 0.7 1.6 1.7 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.1 Emerging Market and Developing Economies7 5.1 4.9 4.4 0.7 0.2 0.2 0.1 London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) On US Dollar Deposits (six month) 0.7 0.3 0.4 0.0 0.0  0.1  0.1 On Euro Deposits (three month)  0.4  0.5  0.5 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month) 0.0  0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1  0.1 0.0 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during January 18 February 15, 2021. Economies are listed on the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2021 WEO Update, and October 2020 WEO forecasts. 2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a base year. CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 9 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table 1.1 Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (continued) (Percent change, unless noted otherwise) Year over Year Q4 over Q48 Projections Projections 2019 2020 2021 2022 2019 2020 2021 2022 World Output 2.8  3.3 6.0 4.4 2.5  0.8 4.5 4.0 Advanced Economies 1.6  4.7 5.1 3.6 1.5  3.1 4.9 2.3 United States 2.2  3.5 6.4 3.5 2.3  2.5 6.3 2.3 Euro Area 1.3  6.6 4.4 3.8 1.0  4.9 4.4 2.4 Germany 0.6  4.9 3.6 3.4 0.4  3.6 3.4 2.8 France 1.5  8.2 5.8 4.2 0.8  4.9 4.5 2.6 Italy 0.3  8.9 4.2 3.6  0.2  6.6 4.1 2.1 Spain 2.0  11.0 6.4 4.7 1.7  9.1 7.2 1.5 Japan 0.3  4.8 3.3 2.5  1.0  1.3 2.0 1.8 United Kingdom 1.4  9.9 5.3 5.1 1.2  7.8 6.5 2.0 Canada 1.9  5.4 5.0 4.7 1.7  3.2 4.1 3.8 Other Advanced Economies2 1.8  2.1 4.4 3.4 2.0  0.8 3.7 2.3 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 3.6  2.2 6.7 5.0 3.5 1.2 4.0 5.5 Emerging and Developing Asia 5.3  1.0 8.6 6.0 4.5 3.1 4.6 6.9 China 5.8 2.3 8.4 5.6 5.1 6.3 4.4 6.2 India3 4.0  8.0 12.5 6.9 2.9  0.7 4.2 9.6 ASEAN-54 4.8  3.4 4.9 6.1 4.5  2.8 5.6 5.8 Emerging and Developing Europe 2.4  2.0 4.4 3.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . Russia 2.0  3.1 3.8 3.8 2.9  3.0 4.6 2.6 Latin America and the Caribbean 0.2  7.0 4.6 3.1  0.3  3.5 1.8 2.6 Brazil 1.4  4.1 3.7 2.6 1.6  1.2 0.9 2.6 Mexico  0.1  8.2 5.0 3.0  0.8  4.5 2.6 2.7 Middle East and Central Asia 1.4  2.9 3.7 3.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . Saudi Arabia 0.3  4.1 2.9 4.0  0.3  4.1 4.8 4.0 Sub-Saharan Africa 3.2  1.9 3.4 4.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . Nigeria 2.2  1.8 2.5 2.3 1.9  0.7 3.2 1.6 South Africa 0.2  7.0 3.1 2.0  0.6  4.2 1.1 2.0 Memorandum World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates 2.4  3.6 5.8 4.1 2.2  1.4 4.6 3.4 European Union 1.7  6.1 4.4 3.9 1.4  4.7 4.7 2.4 Middle East and North Africa 0.8  3.4 4.0 3.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 3.5  2.4 6.9 5.0 3.5 1.2 4.0 5.5 Low-Income Developing Countries 5.3 0.0 4.3 5.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . World Trade Volume (goods and services) 0.9  8.5 8.4 6.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . Imports Advanced Economies 1.7  9.1 9.1 6.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . Emerging Market and Developing Economies  1.0  8.6 9.0 7.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . Exports Advanced Economies 1.3  9.5 7.9 6.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . Emerging Market and Developing Economies 0.5  5.7 7.6 6.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . Commodity Prices (US dollars) Oil5  10.2  32.7 41.7  6.3  6.1  27.6 30.9  6.0 Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import weights) 0.8 6.7 16.1  1.9 5.0 15.3 4.8  0.5 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies6 1.4 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.4 0.4 1.9 1.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies7 5.1 5.1 4.9 4.4 5.1 3.2 4.4 3.8 London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) On US Dollar Deposits (six month) 2.3 0.7 0.3 0.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . On Euro Deposits (three month)  0.4  0.4  0.5  0.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month) 0.0 0.0  0.1 0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam. 5Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $41.29 in 2020; the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $58.52 in 2021 and $54.83 in 2022. 6The inflation rates for 2021 and 2022, respectively, are as follows: 1.4 percent and 1.2 percent for the euro area, 0.1 percent and 0.7 percent for Japan, and 2.3 percent and 2.4 percent for the United States. 7Excludes Venezuela. See country-specific note for Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 8For world output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. For emerging market and developing economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market and developing economies  output at purchasing-power-parity weights. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 10 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 outturns in the second half of 2020 for most regions after lockdowns were eased. The projections for 2021 and 2022 are 0.8 percentage point and 0.2 percentage point stronger than in the previous forecast, reflecting additional fiscal support in a few large economies and the anticipated vaccine-powered recovery in the second half of the year. This pace reflects continued adapta- tion of all sectors of the economy to the challenging health situation. The strength of the projected recovery varies across countries, depending on the severity of the health crisis, the extent of domestic disruptions to activity (related to countries  reliance on contact-intensive sectors), the exposure to cross-border spillovers, and  importantly the effectiveness of policy support to limit persistent damage. Beyond 2022 global growth is projected to moder- ate to 3.3 percent into the medium term. Persistent damage to supply potential across both advanced and emerging market economies and slower labor force growth because of population aging (largely in advanced economies, but also in a few emerging mar- ket economies), and necessary rebalancing to a sustain- able growth path in China, are all expected to weigh on the growth outlook for the global economy in the medium term. GDP levels are projected to remain well below the pre-pandemic trend path through 2024 for most countries (Figure 1.16). In advanced economies, occasional regional restric- tions will likely be necessary at times to stem the progression of new strains of the virus. As the vul- nerable population gets vaccinated, contact-intensive activities are expected to resume and drive a significant pickup in growth thanks to pent-up demand funded Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Exchange Rate Weights (Percent change) Projections Difference from January 2021 WEO Update1 Difference from October 2020 WEO1 2020 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 World Output  3.6 5.8 4.1 0.7 0.3 1.0 0.3 Advanced Economies  4.7 5.2 3.6 0.8 0.6 1.4 0.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies  2.0 6.6 4.9 0.3 0.0 0.4  0.1 Emerging and Developing Asia  0.1 8.4 5.8 0.2 0.0 0.4  0.3 Emerging and Developing Europe  2.3 4.3 4.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 0.6 Latin America and the Caribbean  7.0 4.5 3.1 0.4 0.2 0.9 0.4 Middle East and Central Asia  4.1 3.6 3.6 0.4  0.3 0.4  0.1 Sub-Saharan Africa  2.5 3.4 3.8 0.3 0.1 0.3  0.1 Memorandum European Union  6.2 4.3 3.8 0.2 0.2  0.7 0.6 Middle East and North Africa  4.7 3.8 3.5 0.5  0.4 0.5  0.1 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies  2.1 6.8 4.9 0.4 0.0 0.5  0.1 Low-Income Developing Countries  0.3 4.3 5.1  0.6  0.2  0.4  0.3 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, in which a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years is used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, January 2021 WEO Update, and October 2020 WEO forecasts. Average petroleum spot price Food Metals Figure 1.15. Commodity Prices (De ated using US consumer price index; 2014 = 100) The manufacturing rebound has helped lift metal and energy prices. Sources: IMF Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff calculations. 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 2014 15 16 17 18 19 20 Feb. 21 CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 11 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 by accumulated savings in 2020. Recovery paths also vary within the group. The United States is projected to return to end-of-2019 activity levels in the first half of 2021 and Japan in the second half. In the euro area and the United Kingdom, activity is expected to remain below end-of-2019 levels into 2022. The gaps can be traced back to differences in behavioral and public health responses to infections, flexibility and adaptability of economic activity to low mobility, preexisting trends, and structural rigidities predat- ing the crisis. With respect to the October 2020 WEO, projec- tions for 2021 have been revised down in Europe and up in Japan and the United States. The down- ward revision in Europe is more than offset by stronger-than-expected growth in the United States and Japan, reflecting additional fiscal support leg- islated in both countries at the end of 2020. In addition, the Biden administration s $1.9 trillion rescue package is expected to further boost GDP over 2021 22, with significant spillovers to main US trading partners. European countries (for example, Cyprus, Italy, Malta, Portugal, Spain), were able to salvage part of the summer tourist season by reopening in mid-2020. But this was followed by a surge in infections that forced new lockdowns in the last months of 2020, carrying over to 2021. GDP growth for 2022 has been revised up by 0.7 percentage point to 3.8 percent in the euro area and by 1.9 percentage points in the United Kingdom to 5.1 percent. In emerging market and developing economies, vaccine procurement data suggest that effective protection will remain unavailable for most of the population in 2021. Lockdowns and containment measures may be needed more frequently in 2021 and 2022 than in advanced economies, increasing the likelihood of medium-term scarring effects on the potential output of these countries (see Chapter 2). Considerable differentiation is expected between China where effective containment measures, a forceful public investment response, and central bank liquidity support have facilitated a strong recovery and others. Tourism-based economies within this group (such as Fiji, Sey- chelles, Thailand) face particularly difficult prospects considering the expected slow normalization of cross-border travel. Recovery profiles vary, based on regional differences in the severity of the pandemic, economic structure (employment and GDP shares of contact-intensive sectors), exposure to specific shocks (for instance, due to reliance on commodity exports), and the effectiveness of the policy response to combat the fallout. For the Emerging and Developing Asia regional group, projections for 2021 have been revised up by 0.6 percentage point, reflecting a stronger recovery than initially expected after lockdowns were eased in some large countries (for example, India). However, still high COVID-19 caseloads in some large countries in 2020:Q1 (such as Indonesia and Malaysia) put a lid on growth prospects. For the Middle East and Central Asia, projections for 2021 have remained broadly unchanged but reflect significant differences among countries, depending on the path of the pandemic, vaccine rollouts, tour- ism dependence, oil price developments, and policy space and actions. On average, countries that started vaccinations early on (for example, Gulf Cooperation Council countries) face relatively better prospects, while fragile and conflict-affected states, which may have to rely on the more limited supply provided by Figure 1.16. Medium-Term GDP Losses Relative to Pre COVID-19, by Region (Revisions to projected 2024 GDP levels between the January 2020 and April 2021 WEO forecasts, percent) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: AE = advanced economies; EM Asia ex. CHN = emerging and developing Asia excluding China; EM Eur. = emerging and developing Europe; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; ME&CA = Middle East and Central Asia; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 EM Asia ex. CHN LAC SSA ME&CA EMDEs World China EM Eur. AE United States WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 12 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 COVAX, have seen their outlook darken since the October 2020 WEO. Following a sharp drop in 2020, only a mild and multispeed recovery is expected in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2021. Thanks to the global manufacturing rebound in the second half of 2020, growth exceeded expectations in some large export- ing countries in the region (for example, Argentina, Brazil, Peru) bringing the 2021 forecast to 4.6 percent (a 1 percentage point revision). The longer-term out- look continues to depend on the path of the pan- demic, however. With some exceptions (for example, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico), most countries have not secured enough vaccines to cover their populations. Moreover, 2021 projections for the tourism-dependent Caribbean economies have been revised down by 1.5 percentage points to 2.4 percent. The pandemic continues to exact a large toll on sub-Saharan Africa (especially, for example, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa). Following the largest contraction ever for the region ( 1.9 percent in 2020), growth is expected to rebound to 3.4 percent in 2021, significantly lower than the trend anticipated before the pandemic. Tourism-reliant economies will likely be the most affected. Inflation Pressure to Remain Contained in Most Countries As noted, commodity prices (particularly for oil) are expected to firm up further in the months ahead. Given their record-low levels of a year ago, firmer prices should mechanically lift consumer price indices, and headline inflation, in particular, could turn volatile in coming months. The volatility should be short lived. Baseline projections show a return of inflation to its long-term average as the remaining slack subsides only gradually and commodity-driven base effects fade away. The subdued outlook reflects developments in the labor market, where subdued wage growth and weak worker bargaining power have been compounded recently by high unemployment, underemployment, and lower participation rates. Moreover, various measures of underlying inflation remain low. IMF staff analysis on sectoral price developments points to muted price pressure, both in sectors where pricing is typically less sensitive to the business cycle and in sec- tors where prices tend to respond to aggregate demand fluctuations (Figure 1.17). Trimmed-mean inflation rates (which eliminate extreme price changes from the price distribution every month to filter out underlying inflation and provide slow-moving, unbiased estimates of price pressure) point to declining, not increasing, inflation pressure (Figure 1.18). Measuring slack has arguably become more diffi- cult during the pandemic as both supply and demand have shifted. Nevertheless, even if output gaps are less negative than currently estimated, the implications for inflation should be relatively moderate. Phillips curves have become flatter in recent years reflecting various Noncyclical Cyclical Figure 1.17. Headline In ation: Cyclical and Noncyclical Contributions (Percentage points) Price in ation (excluding food and energy) has dropped in sectors usually sensitive to  uctuations in aggregate demand (cyclical) and those that are not. Sources: Eurostat; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure plots the time  xed effects of regressions in which three-month trailing averages of contributions to headline in ation are regressed on country and time  xed effects, with the weights being the GDP in purchasing-power-parity terms. The contribution of a component is de ned as its year-over-year price change multiplied by its weight in the headline consumer price index basket. 1. Advanced Economies 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 Jan. 21 2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 Jan. 21 CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 13 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 factors, including globalization, automation, rising market concentration, and associated higher monop- sony power of firms in labor markets. For the same reason that inflation did not drop much when output gaps were large and negative during the global financial crisis, inflation is unlikely to increase much unless output gaps become positive and very large for an extended period of time and monetary policy does not react to rising inflation expectations. Whether inflation temporarily overshoots or starts trending up in the medium term has very different implications and depends, in the first instance, on the credibility of monetary frameworks and the reaction of monetary authorities to rising inflation pressure. For instance, if monetary policy is used primarily to keep government borrowing costs low (or is widely perceived as doing so) at the expense of ensuring price stability, inflation expectations and inflation could, in principle, increase rapidly. But this appears unlikely for most advanced and many emerging market economies with independent central banks. The adoption of inflation-targeting frameworks in the 1990s has helped anchor inflation expectations around central banks  inflation targets in advanced economies. Moreover, during the pandemic, survey measures of inflation expectations have remained broadly stable, as have market measures even though the latter have recently increased slightly (Figure 1.19). Monetary frameworks have also improved consider- ably in many emerging markets over the past decade. Inflation expectations are much more anchored, inflation has declined and become less persistent, and the risk of runaway inflation has decreased accord- ingly. However, progress has not been uniform. Some countries continue to observe high and volatile inflation and may be limited in the monetary accom- modation they can provide without risking destabi- lizing inflation (see Chapter 3 of the October 2018 WEO). Rapidly rising food prices have already lifted headline inflation rates in some regions, including sub-Saharan Africa and Asia (see the Commodities Special Feature in this chapter). Temporarily high headline inflation could raise inflation expectations in these economies and affect inflation durably. CPI CPI excluding food and energy 15 percent trimmed mean Trimmed-mean in ation points to declining in ation pressure in advanced economies, in line with various measures of slack. Sources: Cleveland Federal Reserve; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: CPI = consumer price index.  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 Dec. 20 1997 2000 03 06 09 12 15 18 Figure 1.18. Trend In ation in Advanced Economies (Percent) United States Euro area Figure 1.19. Five-Year, Five-Year In ation Swaps (Percent; market-implied average in ation rate expected over the  ve-year period starting  ve years from date shown) Market-based measures of long-term in ation expectations have been stable; they have increased slightly in the United States since May, but remain in line with the recently reformulated in ation objective of the Federal Reserve. Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Latest data available are for March 17, 2021. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 Jan. 2020 Mar. 20 May 20 Jul. 20 Sep. 20 Nov. 20 Jan. 21 Mar. 21 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 14 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Cross-Border Services Trade Expected to Remain Subdued As the recovery strengthens in 2021, global trade is projected to accelerate to 8.4 percent, mainly because of the rebound in merchandise volumes. Cross-border services trade (tourism, transportation) is expected to remain subdued until the pandemic is brought under control everywhere. Pandemic-related restrictions on international travel and a more general fear of trav- eling are expected to have lasting effects on income from exported services. At the global level, current account deficits and surpluses narrowed early in the crisis but subsequently widened with rising trade and commodity prices. Current account positions are expected to remain broadly stable into the medium term, with a gradual narrowing of positions in the United States and China. Stocks of international assets and liabilities, how- ever, are expected to remain at historically high levels (Figure 1.20). One Overarching Uncertainty and Many Risks Because the path of the pandemic is so uncer- tain, it is very difficult to quantify the balance of risks around the central outlook; risks abound on both sides. New vaccines that offer a path to recovery are being approved on an ongoing basis. However, uncertainty remains regarding their effectiveness against new strains of the virus. Delays in inoculating all parts of the world could lead to vaccine-resistant virus mutations, new outbreaks could start anywhere and anytime, and renewed restrictions may be required to slow transmission. Uncertainty about the duration of this stop-go rhythm makes other elements difficult to predict: the strength of the private investment response; the extension of policy lifelines (as governments balance the provision of relief with maintaining space for further response down the road); and the extent of scarring. Risks are balanced in the near term, but more to the upside further out. The main downside risk factors include the following:   Pandemic resurgence: Vaccine-resistant strains are potential headwinds for economic activity, as are operational risks, such as vaccine production and distribution delays. Excessive staggering across dif- ferent regions may trigger start-stop patterns in the response to reemerging infection hotspots, extend- ing the period of social distancing and uncertainty facing households, firms, and policymakers. More- over, if mutations outpace the rollout of vaccines, COVID-19 could become an endemic disease of unknown severity.   Tighter financial conditions: A reassessment of market fundamentals (such as in response to adverse Adv. Asia Em. Asia Lat. Am. Afr. and ME Eur. creditors Oil exporters CEE Euro debtors Other adv. China Japan United States Discrepancy Figure 1.20. Current Account and International Investment Positions (Percent of world GDP) Global current account balances widened in 2020 and are projected to widen further in 2021. Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland); Euro debtors = euro area debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom).  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 26  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 26 1. Global Current Account Balance 2. Global International Investment Positions CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 15 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 COVID-19 developments or earlier-than-expected withdrawal of policy support), an increase in core sovereign yields (in response to large fiscal sup- port), or a reevaluation of inflation risks (following inflation surprises in the context of large monetary and fiscal support) could trigger a sharp repricing of financial assets. Risky asset prices could fall sharply, causing volatility and triggering significant losses at major nonbank financial institutions. Higher risk premiums would generate financing difficul- ties for leveraged firms and households. A wave of bankruptcies which have remained contained so far thanks to extensive policy support could erode banks  capital buffers and constrain their ability to provide credit. Amid high and rising debt levels, vul- nerable borrowers could face rollover risks, an issue that would be particularly acute for some emerging markets and low-income countries. Tighter financial conditions would hamper growth prospects. This could lead to further repricing of financial assets in a potentially dangerous feedback loop.   Extended scarring: Although policy actions have so far prevented the grave health and economic crisis from morphing into a systemic financial crisis (possibly limiting the extent of scarring that otherwise might have occurred), the COVID-19 crisis could still lead to substantial and persistent damage to supply potential. This may arise, for example, from diminishing labor force participa- tion, bankruptcies, and associated disruptions of production networks (see Chapter 2). The longer the recession, the more likely it is that such effects will be permanent, especially in emerging market and developing economies, where the prevalence of relatively small firms and shallow capital markets could dampen investment and employment for a long time. Disruption to production networks might durably cripple productivity growth. At the same time, lifeline measures to safeguard firms  cash flow could keep some unviable firms afloat and lead to inefficient allocation of capital and labor that drags down medium-term growth. To the extent that retraining programs are inhibited by reduced in-person interaction, labor reallocation may also be slowed. Extended scarring could also compound inflation risks as supply constraints bind tighter due to the erosion of productive capacity.   Intensified social unrest: While social unrest declined in the first months of the pandemic (due to reduced mobility), recent events suggest that the multiyear trend before the pandemic could rapidly reassert itself particularly in countries where progress on underlying social and political issues has stalled and where the crisis has exposed or exacerbated preexist- ing problems. A longer crisis could intensify social unrest, which could damage sentiment and slow activity further. Necessary reform efforts could also be derailed, with negative impacts on long-term growth and debt sustainability. Recent IMF staff analysis suggests that food price volatility could play a key role in triggering unrest.   Increased frequency of natural disasters: The frequency and severity of natural disasters due to extreme weather related to climate change have increased in recent years, inflicting a large humanitarian toll and loss of essential livelihoods. Some small and susceptible economies could even suffer relatively large economic damage, not least because the pandemic policy response has stretched their fiscal capacities and diminished their ability to cope with disaster-related spikes in health care needs (see Box 1.2). Natural disasters could also contribute to financial stress, particularly in the insurance sector.   Geopolitical, trade, and technology risks: Many pre  COVID-19 risk factors continue to be relevant. Tensions between the United States and China remain elevated on numerous fronts, including international trade, intellectual property, and cybersecurity. Domestic economic disparities arising from the pandemic downturn may also prompt new trade barriers, motivated by the need to protect domestic workers. Amid already-high levels of trade restrictions, such actions would add to inefficiencies and weigh on the recovery. Furthermore, risks of protectionist tendencies surrounding technology are emerging. Protectionist tendencies could extend to medical supplies and COVID-19 related pharma- ceutical advances, which would impede the global supply of vaccines. On the upside, the main risks to the outlook include the following:   Expedited vaccine production and rollout: New vaccines are being approved on an ongoing basis. While operational challenges are large, these may be overcome sooner than anticipated, especially if more vaccines are approved that do not require cold chain low-temperature storage or can be adminis- tered in one jab. Finally, as vulnerable populations are vaccinated and hospitalization rates decline, the WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 16 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 fear of becoming infected could rapidly disappear. Improved consumer sentiment would boost services consumption, lead to more front-loading of invest- ment, and lift growth above the baseline.   Unanticipated larger effects from fiscal support: In contrast to the fiscal response in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, fiscal support as part of policymakers  response to the pandemic has been remarkably strong and could have larger effects than currently projected. Moreover, advanced economies may still have untapped fiscal space that could be used to engineer a much stronger recovery, minimize the extent of scarring, and accelerate the shift to lower carbon dependence.   Coordinated policies: Monetary and fiscal policy easing came in a strong and synchronized fash- ion during the early phase of the pandemic. A better-than-expected recovery could occur if interna- tional coordination on exit policies is maintained in the later phase of the recovery. Moreover, intensi- fied cooperation on vaccination could expedite the production and distribution of vaccines, end the pandemic sooner than expected, and limit the extent of scarring. Some of these risk factors are considered in alterna- tive scenarios discussed in the Scenario Box. Policy Priorities Despite an outlook that is unusually varied across countries, the overarching objectives of policy remain remarkably uniform. Foremost among these is over- coming the immediate health crisis and returning employment to normal levels. Beyond this, countries need to limit the long-term impact of the crisis by limiting scarring, including from zombie firms, and reduce inequality both within and across coun- tries. Further ahead, the threat of climate change is ever-more pressing, demanding bold action to limit emissions, particularly for the largest polluters. Strong international cooperation is vital for achieving these objectives and ensuring that emerging markets and low-income developing countries continue to nar- row the gap between their living standards and those of high-income economies. On the health care front, this means ensuring adequate worldwide vaccine produc- tion and universal distribution at affordable prices so that all countries can quickly and decisively beat back the pandemic. Export restrictions on vaccines, vaccine inputs, and medical goods should be removed. The international community also needs to work closely to ensure that financially constrained economies have ade- quate access to international liquidity so that they can continue health care, other social, and infrastructure spending required for their development and contin- ued convergence to higher income per capita. Beyond addressing issues arising directly from the pandemic, countries should also work closely to redouble climate change mitigation efforts and to resolve economic issues underlying trade and technology tensions as well as close gaps in the rules-based multilateral trading system. Building on recent advances in international tax policy, efforts should continue to focus on lim- iting cross-border profit shifting, tax avoidance, and tax evasion. Tailor Policies to the Stages of the Pandemic and Recovery While the objectives of policy may be similar, the policies needed to achieve them must be tailored to countries  individual circumstances. To impose some structure on this variety, the policy priorities that fol- low are separated into phases of the crisis: immediate actions; initiatives to secure the recovery; and measures for building a more resilient, inclusive, and environ- mentally sustainable economy for the post COVID-19 world. This is, of course, somewhat approximate; in practice, the lines between successive phases are blurred, and countries may need to embark on some policies from later phases before those from earlier ones are complete. And the uneven recovery will mean that different countries may remain in different phases for some time. Nevertheless, the common goal of exiting the crisis means that this ordering can guide global policy priorities and the international cooperation required to deliver them. Considering the large uncertainty surrounding the outlook, policymakers should prioritize policies that would be prudent regardless of the state of the world that prevails for instance, strengthening social protection with wider eligibility for unemployment insurance to cover the self-employed and informally employed (see Chapter 2 of the April 2020 WEO); ensuring adequate resources for health care, early childhood development programs, education, and vocational training; and investing in green infrastruc- ture to hasten the transition to lower carbon depen- dence. Moreover, they should be prepared to flexibly CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 17 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 adjust policy support; for example, from lifelines to reallocation as the pandemic evolves (as discussed in Chapters 2 and 3), while they safeguard social spend- ing and avoid locking in inefficient spending outlays. It is important to anchor near-term support in credible medium-term frameworks. Phase 1: Escaping the Crisis The outlook for health and economic variables remains uncertain and challenging. In this con- text, policymakers still have immediate concerns to deal with. Health care spending should remain a priority. The fastest way to improve economic outcomes is to sup- press the pandemic. As a result, the economic benefits of spending to distribute and administer the vaccine far outweigh any costs. Vaccine production capacity and, in some countries, regulatory restrictions remain bottlenecks that could be overcome with further public investment and alignment of regulations. Cooperation on the global production and distribution of vaccines is essential. Governments should not seek to restrict international dissemination of vaccines. Policies such as limits on exports of vaccines and other medical supplies only promote retaliation that interrupts supply chains and leaves all countries worse off. Additional support for the COVAX project and global distri- bution of excess doses could help guarantee vaccine access for all. Fiscal policy support should be well targeted and cali- brated to the stage of the pandemic. Until the pandemic ends, fiscal policy should remain supportive. Of course, fiscal space is limited in some countries. In such cases, extraordinary spending will need to be balanced with debt sustainability within credible frameworks. But in countries with space, fiscal policy should continue to provide targeted transfers to affected households and businesses through furlough programs, loans to busi- nesses, and direct payments to households. Such pro- grams should be well calibrated, targeted to the stage of the pandemic, and gradually phased out as demand picks up. It is important that support be means-tested in countries that primarily rely on widescale payments to households. When support eventually is scaled back, it should be done in ways that avoid sudden cliffs (for instance, gradually reducing the government s share of wages covered under furlough and short-time work programs while increasing hiring subsidies to enable reallocation as needed). In general, stronger social assistance will not only dampen the impact on house- holds during the current crisis, but will also provide an automatic policy response during an uncertain recov- ery. Some examples include Togo, which has perma- nently adopted the digital infrastructure for emergency cash transfers linked to national IDs, and Indonesia, which has extended unemployment subsidies to the informal sector. Aided by monetary accommodation wherever possi- ble: Given synchronized negative supply and demand shocks, the overall effect on output gaps is somewhat hard to determine. Yet, inflation remains subdued and expectations well anchored in many countries, suggesting that monetary policy can remain accommo- dative in those economies. With interest rates in many countries still at their lower bound, this likely means a combination of continued expansion of central bank balance sheets (including, as needed, in some emerg- ing markets) and communicating future interest rate paths that remain low for the foreseeable future. Clear forward guidance and communication from advanced economy central banks is particularly crucial, and not just for calibrating the appropriate domestic mone- tary accommodation. It also vitally bears on external financial conditions in emerging markets and the impact that divergent policy stances have on capital flows (Chapter 4). In this context, emerging market economies may need to consider the appropriateness of other policies in the toolkit to ensure stability  including exchange rate policies, capital flow manage- ment, and macroprudential policy. In general, flexible exchange rates are best able to absorb international shocks and limit resource misallocation in countries with well-developed financial markets and limited bal- ance sheet mismatches. In contrast, foreign exchange intervention and temporary capital flow management measures may, under some circumstances, be useful for countries with balance sheet vulnerabilities, including by giving monetary policy more autonomy to respond to domestic inflation and output developments. How- ever, such policies should not substitute for needed macroeconomic adjustment. With macroprudential policies appropriately trained on containing financial stability risks: A prolonged period of accommodative monetary policy will likely add to already-elevated financial vulnerabilities as marginal borrowers benefit from investors  search for yield and deteriorating loan origination standards. As noted in the April 2021 GFSR, taking into consideration possible lags between the activation and impact of WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 18 International Monetary Fund | April 2021  macroprudential tools, policymakers should take early action. They should tighten selected macroprudential policy tools to tackle pockets of elevated vulnera- bilities while avoiding a broad tightening of finan- cial conditions. If such tools are not available for example, in some segments of the nonbank financial intermediation sector policymakers should urgently develop them. Given the challenges to designing and operationalizing macroprudential tools within existing frameworks, policymakers should also consider build- ing buffers elsewhere to protect the financial system. Phase 2: Safeguarding the Recovery The transition to a post-pandemic economy may be long and difficult. Along that transition, policymakers will need to balance the benefits of policies that miti- gate scarring against the costs of weakening incentives for efficient allocation of productive resources while being mindful of available policy space. Policies should address persistent economic scarring. Without offsetting policy action, the crisis will have persistent effects over the medium term on firms, labor markets, and human capital accumulation.   Failure of firms during a crisis destroys firm-specific employment and supplier matches. By limiting the failure of viable firms, policymakers prevent persistent economic harm. Policy actions have gener- ally limited corporate failures during the pandemic, but, as the recovery proceeds, governments should switch from broad-based support for firms to poli- cies more targeted toward hard-hit sectors, such as retail, the arts, and other contact-intensive services (Chapter 2).   Labor market policies should be geared toward preventing workers from falling into long-term unemployment, and furlough and short-time work programs should be scaled back as labor market conditions renormalize (see Chapter 3). Support for retraining and reskilling should continue, even as the recovery takes hold. Given that the move to a new sector can take some time, displaced workers also require extended income support to manage their transition to more productive roles.   The interruption of schooling during the pandemic has taken a severe toll on the building of human capital essential for sustained growth. Improvements in educational attainment in low-income coun- tries are at particular risk, given limited capacity to deliver schooling through other means (see Box 2.3). Without remedial policy actions such as increased spending on education and associated infrastructure  disparities in educational attainment risk perpetuating a growing divergence within societies and between rich and poor countries.   Where space permits and the recovery is weak, broader fiscal support can be an effective way to ward off some of the more pernicious long-term impacts of the recession. Programs focused on meeting medium-term growth and equity objectives such as building infrastructure to speed the transi- tion to reduced carbon dependence; increasing research spending; and investing in early childhood development, education, and vocational training programs will also help offset persistent economic scarring. Where elevated debt levels limit scope for action, effort should also be directed at creating space through increased revenue collection (fewer breaks, better coverage of registries, and switching to well-designed value-added taxes), greater tax progres- sivity, and by reducing wasteful subsidies. Without sacrificing efficiency: Although emergency measures were necessary to mitigate suffering during the depths of the crisis, persisting indefinitely with them will hinder growth needed to sustain the recov- ery. Policies that prop up failing firms ultimately crowd out new ventures and hinder aggregate reallocation of capital and labor. Likewise, overly generous unemploy- ment insurance may dampen incentives to work.   One particular efficiency-related risk to the recov- ery is the possibility of zombie firms. Unlike during the global financial crisis and other past reces- sions, corporate bankruptcies have declined across advanced economies (Figure 1.21). This is in part a result of policies that prevent creditors from enforcing claims on struggling firms, such as mor- atoriums on bank loan repayments, which obviate the need to seek similar protections in bankruptcy. Smaller firms, in particular, seem to have benefited from these policies. Firms that are large enough tend to access capital markets by issuing bonds. The number of corporate defaults among firms issu- ing speculative-grade debt has reached its highest level since the global financial crisis (see the April 2021 GFSR). Together, this evidence suggests that, although policy action to support firms has undoubtedly kept many viable firms afloat, it is also keeping alive inefficient firms that would have failed even without the downturn. To prevent such zombie CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 19 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 firms from continuing to take up resources, govern- ments will have to roll back blanket loans and credit guarantees, relying more on dedicated out-of-court restructuring mechanisms and simpler procedures for reorganization of small firms, restructuring loans, and filing for bankruptcy. In addition, lenders should be encouraged to actively identify and man- age distressed borrowers, including while morato- riums and other support measures remain in place. Governments in many countries therefore have an unenviable choice between accepting increased firm failures in the short term and supporting unproduc- tive zombie firms in the long term. The trade-off is likely to be most difficult in the sectors that have been hit the hardest. Moreover, widespread firm fail- ure could spill over to the financial sector, impact- ing banks  capital buffers. As a result, governments should also consider policies that approximate the recapitalizing effects of equity injections, which are hard for all but the largest firms to pursue directly. Such measures include loans whose repayment is conditional on sufficient subsequent profits or underwriting similar private sector loans.   The transition to a post COVID-19 economy will inevitably require sectoral reallocation as resources flow to recovering sectors. This is best achieved by scaling back the overall level of support, both for households and firms, combined with targeted support for the hardest-hit sectors. In particular, the services sector has experienced a much more severe slowdown than other parts of the economy. As a result, continued and targeted support may be best concentrated on firms in services. Early withdrawal of support from the most-affected sectors risks an uneven recovery and sector-specific scarring, hindering necessary reallocation in the long term. Of course, the balance between this withdrawal of support and propping up nonviable firms will be difficult; sector-specific policies will need to be phased out eventually. But by doing so more slowly in the most-affected sectors, governments can hope to limit sectoral scarring.   The crisis hit smaller firms hardest. As a result, policies to promote competition and limit market con- centration should be enhanced to guard against sharp increases in monopoly power during the recovery. Phase 3: Investing in the Future Several issues will pose challenges to policy in the longer term, both pandemic related and legacies inher- ited from preexisting trends. Foremost among these are the ongoing climate crisis, reforms to policy frame- works, and improved international policy cooperation. International policy cooperation remains essential. The pandemic has affected every person on the planet, without concern for nationality. Accordingly, gov- ernments should work together to address the global ramifications of the crisis.   Continued access to liquidity can prevent external funding pressures from spilling over across coun- tries and can expand monetary policy space. To decrease the likelihood that balance of payments needs curtail essential spending on health care and social support, the IMF has expanded its lend- ing toolkit: providing new financing facilities, increasing access limits for emergency finance, and increasing access to debt service relief grants. And, supported by the IMF and World Bank, the Group of 20 (G20) Debt Service Suspension Initiative makes 73 countries eligible for suspension of debt Great Lockdown, 2020 Global  nancial crisis, 2007 08 Other recessions Figure 1.21. Bankruptcies, Current and Past Recessions (Index, last prerecession quarter = 100; recession quarters on x-axis) Unlike during previous crises, bankruptcies declined with respect to pre COVID-19 levels. Sources: CEIC Data Company Limited; national authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Data are from 13 countries with varying coverage during 1990:Q1 2020:Q3. Lines are averages across recession types, with quarter 0 the last prerecession quarter. For the Great Lockdown, quarter 0 is 2019:Q4 for all countries. For the global  nancial crisis, quarter 0 is the country speci c date of peak real GDP during 2007 08. Other recessions are country speci c and identi ed by two consecutive quarters of negative growth during 1990 2006 and 2009 19. 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 20 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 service payments until June 2021. An increase in allocations to special drawing rights (SDRs) for all countries would deepen the buffer against ongoing shocks during an uneven recovery. While temporary liquidity relief can help mitigate the lack of policy space, for some countries it may not be enough in situations where sovereign debt is unsustainable. In such instances, eligible countries should work with creditors to restructure their debt under the new common framework approved by the G20. With- out such action, these economies may be forced to forgo critical health care and capital spending as they divert scarce foreign reserves to meet external payment obligations, setting back their long-term development and convergence to higher income per capita even further.   Relatedly, global disputes over trade more broadly remain unresolved. These include the failure to reconcile a deadlock on appointments to the World Trade Organization Appellate Body and trade tensions between the United States and China. Boosting productivity and growth: Even before the pandemic, productivity growth had been sluggish for several decades. Although the underlying causes are hard to determine, it is possible that growth in efficiency will continue to be anemic and will require corrective policies, such as investment in education, research, and infrastructure. That said, an alternate future could emerge, with innovations in artificial intelligence that lead to rapid advances in productivity as a new wave of automation extends to nonroutine tasks. Clusters of growth in sectors such as logistics and services could prove a tonic after a decade of subpar growth in many countries. Such an outcome would not be without its drawbacks: a hollowing out of lower-skill and routine occupations could amplify inequality, and the digital divide could exacerbate differences between those with and without online opportunities. Policies such as improvement in broadband networks and cheaper access to tele- communications could help offset these costs, while worker retraining and investment in digital literacy more broadly would help widen access to emerging job opportunities. Improved frameworks can generate policy space. The amount of space available for a policy to act depends on the framework in which it operates. Improvements to policy frameworks can relax some of the constraints impeding action.   Countries in distress may need to consider pre- emptive debt restructuring. Although far from ideal, a negotiated restructuring with creditors of highly indebted countries would be preferable to a disorderly default. If bond contracts con- tain collective action clauses and the new offer is seen as reasonable by the qualifying majority of bondholders, restructuring would be easier to administer. Restructuring options could include maturity extensions, interest rate reductions, principal reductions, and other debt swaps. The G20 Common Framework provides a template for some countries and could potentially be extended beyond the current list of Debt Service Suspension Initiative-eligible countries.   Fiscal space, more generally, can be generated through measures that not only raise revenue but also improve progressivity for example, by increasing taxes on affluent individuals and highly profitable corporations relatively less affected by the pandemic, closing domestic corporate tax loopholes, reducing tax expenditures, and improving revenue administration (including through greater reliance on e-filing to improve compliance). National efforts will need to be supplemented with strong inter- national cooperation to limit profit shifting and tax evasion and avoidance. These initiatives can be reinforced on the expenditure side by improving the efficiency and governance of public investment and procurement, reducing poorly targeted subsidies, and rationalizing recurrent spending. Committing to return to compliance with fiscal rules, or preapprov- ing tax reforms now for implementation after the pandemic is durably suppressed, could reinforce the credibility of fiscal frameworks.   Monetary policy frameworks: In countries with interest rates at their effective lower bound (mostly advanced economies, but also some emerging mar- ket economies, such as Chile and Peru), continued unconventional policies, including asset purchases, forward guidance, and even negative interest rates, can provide scope to expand policy space. In emerg- ing markets, asset purchase programs may provide extra policy space, provided objectives are clear and policies are well communicated and form part of a larger and coherent policy framework with an explicit central bank mandate for ensuring price sta- bility. A credible fiscal policy framework can further enhance the scope for temporarily pursuing such unconventional monetary policies as it can send a CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 21 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 strong signal on the limits of sovereign issuance and central bank purchases (see Chapter 4). Without global cooperation, climate change will continue to hamper economic growth and conver- gence. Global emissions were about 4 percent lower in 2020, broadly in line with reductions in output (Figure 1.22). This decline is likely temporary. The global economy must produce similar declines every year of the next 30 to lower emissions 80 percent by 2050. Without immediate and coordinated global policy action, emissions will rise again as the pandemic passes and output rises, and countries with the least capacity to absorb the costs of adaptation small states and low-income countries will suffer most (see Box 1.2). A comprehensive policy package can mit- igate the worst harms of climate change at relatively low transitional output costs (see Chapter 3 of the October 2020 WEO). It should rely on a combination of policies:   Carbon pricing: Higher carbon prices are essential to discourage use of the most socially costly fuels, most notably coal. Because the first dollar of the carbon tax is the most effective, countries without the political will for large taxes should not shy away from moderate, preferably increasing, carbon taxes or should consider carbon trading systems. A carbon price floor arrangement among large emitting countries, designed flexibly to accommodate equity considerations and constraints on national policies, can help coordinate and scale up actions in this regard (see the October 2019 Fiscal Monitor).   Green infrastructure investment: A green infrastruc- ture push, funded in part by a carbon tax, could offset the economic losses from higher energy costs. Such a push could include improved transmis- sion and distribution of electricity from renewable power plants, grants to improve buildings  energy efficiency, and better green transportation infra- structure (public transit, electric vehicle charging, and the like).   Subsidies for green research: Although the effects are uncertain and delayed, subsidies for research in green technologies have the potential to speed the shift to a zero-carbon economy dramatically and  given the small size of the green technology sector  are relatively cheap. Importantly, by lowering the cost of future green energy and negative emission technologies, research subsidies will help meet future decarbonization targets.   Targeted compensatory transfers: Those on lower incomes will be hit hardest by climate change mit- igation policies, as they have more energy-intensive consumption and are more likely to work in energy-intensive sectors. Targeted transfers and feebates funded by carbon taxes can help offset these effects, making climate change mitigation inequality-neutral. Domestic aviation Ground transportation Industry Power Residential Total Figure 1.22. Cumulative Global Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 2020 versus 2019 (Percent difference) Global emissions were 4 percent lower in 2020, re ecting pandemic-driven lower activity. Source: Carbon Monitor (https://carbonmonitor.org/).  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 22 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 At the time of the October 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO), there was significant uncertainty regarding the likely approval and availability of vaccines, and the magnitude of the deviations from baseline in the alternative scenarios that were explored reflected that degree of uncertainty. While some uncer- tainties regarding vaccines have been resolved, others have arisen. Although these uncertainties may not lead to deviations from the baseline that are as large as was the case in October, they are still material. To illustrate this, the G20 Model is used to estimate the potential impact of the increased uncertainty about the path of the pandemic owing to new variants, the efficacy of vaccines, and the pace of vaccine rollout. The upside scenario explores the potential for the recovery to be much stronger than expected in the baseline as the rollout of vaccines allows activity in contact-intensive sectors to rebound quickly and thereby boost confidence. The downside scenario explores the possibility that vaccine rollout does not go as smoothly as in the baseline and that variants are more resistant to vaccines. Consequently, more modifications to existing formulations will be required, leading to significant delays in achieving herd immu- nity and thus recovery in contact-intensive sectors. Upside In the upside scenario (blue lines in Scenario Figure 1), it is assumed that vaccine rollout occurs about 10 percent faster than in the baseline and that vaccines are effective in preventing infections from the growing range of variants as well as containing infectiousness of those vaccinated. Better develop- ments on the vaccine front and quickly receding disease concerns in turn lead to faster-than-expected normalization of mobility, boosting the confidence of both households and firms. This confidence leads to a faster-than-expected drawdown of accumulated savings, quick release of pent-up demand, and a ramp-up in pri- vate investment. Given well-anchored inflation expecta- tions, the resulting demand-driven pickup in inflation does not lead monetary authorities in most countries to tighten policy, and the resultant lower real interest rates further stimulate private demand. Fiscal authorities are assumed to reduce spending on automatic stabiliz- ers as dictated by the recovery, but there is no addi- tional withdrawal of baseline discretionary measures. The authors of this box are Ben Hunt and Susanna Mursula. The faster near-term rebound in demand helps reduce some of the temporary but persistent scarring contained in the baseline as labor demand strengthens, quickly containing the loss in human capital; some bank- ruptcies are avoided, and renewed private investment temporarily spurs productivity growth. With vaccine rollout occurring sooner and with more accumulated savings and pent-up demand in advanced economies, these economies lead the faster recovery; emerging market and developing econo- mies follow, with a slightly less pronounced impact. Upside scenario Downside scenario Scenario Figure 1. Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against the COVID-19 Virus (Deviation from baseline) Source: IMF, G20 Model simulations. Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.  4  2 0 2 4 2020 21 22 23 24 25  2 0 2 4 2020 21 22 23 24 25  2 0 2 4 2020 21 22 23 24 25  4  2 0 2 4 2020 21 22 23 24 25  4  2 0 2 4 2020 21 22 23 24 25  2 0 2 4 2020 21 22 23 24 25 1. Global Real GDP (Percent) 3. AEs Real GDP (Percent) 4. AEs Real GDP Growth (Percentage points) 2. Global Real GDP Growth (Percentage points) 5. EMDEs Real GDP (Percent) 6. EMDEs Real GDP Growth (Percentage points) Scenario Box CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 23 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Global GDP grows faster than baseline by just under   percentage point in 2021, accelerating to almost 1 percentage point in 2022, but moderating sharply in 2023 to something very close to baseline. Advanced economy GDP growth is roughly   percentage point above baseline in 2021, accelerating to more than 1 percentage point above baseline in 2022. Growth in emerging market and developing economy GDP is roughly   percentage point above baseline in 2021, accelerating to   percentage point above baseline in 2022. The faster recovery, combined with the associ- ated unwinding of some of the scarring assumed in the baseline, leaves global output almost 1 percent above baseline by the end of the WEO horizon. Downside In the downside scenario (red lines in Scenario Figure 1), it is assumed that supply bottlenecks in production and other logistical problems with delivering the vaccines that are most effective against growing variants allow existing variants to become well entrenched, and additional mutations occur. This leads to delays in reaching herd immunity of roughly six months in advanced economies and nine months in emerging market and developing economies. Persistently high infection rates and deaths slow the normalization in mobility and the recovery in demand in contact-intensive sectors. This reduces the incomes of firms and households and their  expectations of future income, further damag- ing consumer and firm confidence. Slower recovery increases risk aversion and leads to tighter financial conditions for vulnerable businesses, further under- mining growth. Unconventional monetary policy measures are assumed to prevent significant increases in sovereign rates. The lack of conventional monetary policy space and shrinking fiscal space limit policy- makers  ability to respond further, and no additional discretionary fiscal measures are assumed. The weaker rebound in activity leads to more proportional scar- ring than assumed in the baseline, slowing the speed of bounce-back once vaccine availability and efficacy have improved sufficiently to allow mobility to return to pre-pandemic levels. Global GDP growth slows by roughly 1  percentage points more than in the baseline in 2021 and by a further 1 percentage point below baseline in 2022 before rebounding mildly above baseline in 2023 and thereafter. Growth in advanced and emerging market and developing economies suffers to about the same degree in 2021, but sharper tightening in financial conditions for vulnerable businesses in emerging mar- ket and developing economies means that their growth suffers more than growth in advanced economies in 2022. The much slower recovery leads to additional scarring and, combined with tighter financial con- ditions, results in output roughly 1  percent below baseline by the end of the WEO horizon. Scenario Box (continued) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 24 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Global manufacturing contracted sharply in the spring of 2020. Unlike during the global financial cri- sis, however, the decline was short lived, with synchro- nized V-shaped recoveries across both advanced and emerging market economies in the second half of the year. While the rebound reflects in part the resump- tion of production following the shutdowns, other demand-related factors have also played a role, includ- ing the release of pent-up demand after lockdowns were eased and increased demand for products to facilitate work-from-home and protective equipment. The recovery has been more pronounced in some industries than in others (Figure 1.1.1), reflecting several factors:   Consumer spending on durables has surged in advanced economies, reflecting policy support programs, pent-up demand, and limited spending on services as a result of the pandemic: The share of durables in consumer spending increased to about 12 percent in the third quarter of 2020, up from an average of 10.5 percent in the two years preceding the pandemic. The surge is most visible for such items as cars and electrical appliances. Global car sales, for example, were back to pre-pandemic levels as of December 2020, after falling by more than 40 percent through April. The bounce-back also likely reflected a desire to maintain safe distances and avoid public transportation as well as purchase incentive programs and tax deductions. The car industry has been the largest driver of the manu- facturing recovery, accounting for about 35 percent of the global rebound in the second half of 2020, while electrical equipment accounted for almost 5 percent of the rebound (Figure 1.1.2). The shift toward durables has also supported the sharp rebound in global trade, with advanced economies  imports of consumer goods accounting for almost one-third of the recovery in global trade values (excluding petroleum) in the second half of 2020. The recovery in durables spending was less pro- nounced in emerging markets, excluding China.   The pandemic has increased demand for some prod- ucts: These include electronics to accommodate the shift toward teleworking and virtual learning as well as plastic, rubber, and textiles as the main source of personal protective equipment. These sectors The author of this box is Nadia Mounir, with research assis- tance from Aneta Radzikowski. account for about 10 percent of the rebound in manufacturing.   Lingering uncertainties around the pandemic outlook have hindered the recovery of private investment, par- ticularly in equipment: This has limited the rebound in the production of machinery and other capital goods. Output in these sectors remains about 6 percent below pre-pandemic levels (except for the aerospace sector, which is almost 20 percent below its pre-pandemic level). There are signs of contin- ued improvement in the production of machinery; capital goods imports picked up in late 2020. The near-term outlook for global manufacturing remains positive, as evidenced in the February global manufacturing purchasing managers  index indicators, which point to a continuing expansion, though at a slower pace. While the near-term recovery could be tempered by the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in several major economies, evidence from social distancing measures in late 2020 and early 2021 in Europe and the United Kingdom suggests a relatively limited impact on manufacturing activity. In part, this is because containment measures have not been as All industries Primary metals Machinery Electronics Motor vehicles Aerospace Textiles Figure 1.1.1. Global Manufacturing: Selected Industries (Index, December 2019 = 100; seasonally adjusted) Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Excluding China. 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 Jan. 2020 Mar. 20 May. 20 Jul. 20 Sep. 20 Nov. 20 Jan. 21 Box 1.1. Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 25 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 stringent as in April and May, and disruptions to pro- duction and supply chains have been much less severe. Demand for goods, particularly durables, also appears to have become less sensitive to variations in mobility, as seen in the second half of 2020 (Figure 1.1.3). Beyond the near term, widespread availability of vaccines and normalization of contact-intensive activity, together with continued policy support, should help fuel the manufacturing recovery. Further normalization of global capital expenditures will be an important source of demand for manufacturing. However, several factors specific to the COVID-19  recession could limit the upside of this recovery: (1) global demand will likely shift from durables to services as these have accounted for the bulk of the global GDP decline and remain well below their pre COVID-19 levels, and (2) inventory restocking, an important element in cyclical upturns, is likely to be slower this time, given less destocking during the pandemic recession than in prior recessions and lingering uncertainties around the pandemic outlook (Figure 1.1.4). Primary metals Machinery Electronics Electrical equipment Motor vehicles Other durables Chemicals Petroleum Other nondurables Total Figure 1.1.2. Global Manufacturing, by Industry (Contribution to year-over-year percent change; percentage points) Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Excluding China.  30  25  20  15  10  5 0 5 Jan. 2020 Mar. 20 May. 20 Jul. 20 Sep. 20 Nov. 20 Jan. 21 Figure 1.1.3. Correlation between Lockdowns in Advanced Economies and Durables Consumption Sources: Goldman Sachs; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development database; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Advanced economies comprise Australia, Canada, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong SAR, Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Sweden, Taiwan Province of China, United Kingdom, and United States. This group represents 41.4 percent of global consumption based on purchasing- power-parity weights. Estimated coef cient of the lockdown index was  0.5 in Q2, signi cant at the 5 percent level. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.  10  5 0 5 10 15 0 10 20 30 40 50 2020:Q3 durables consumption (percent deviation from pre-pandemic level) 2020:Q3 Goldman Sachs Effective Lockdown Index (average; higher = more stringent) ISR TWN KOR HKG NZL AUS JPN SWE ESP GBP ITA FRA DEU CAN USA y = 0.1106x R 2 =  0.054 Box 1.1 (continued) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 26 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Figure 1.1.4. Inventory in Advanced Economies and Manufacturing Outlook (Changes in inventory as percent of GDP; aggregated by purchasing-power-parity weights) Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Advanced economies comprise Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, euro area, Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Taiwan Province of China, United Kingdom, and United States. The group represents 42.9 percent of world GDP based on purchasing-power-parity weights.  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 2007 09 11 13 15 17 19 20: Q4 Box 1.1 (continued) CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 27 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Major weather-related disasters lead on impact to siz- able declines in real GDP per capita of 1.2 percentage points, on average, with stronger negative effects in areas where exposure and vulnerability are high, such as in low-income developing countries and small island economies. Climate change and a contin- ued rise in global temperatures are likely to further increase the frequency and intensity of natural disasters. Improvements to structural, financial, and social resilience could accelerate the post-disaster recovery phase and minimize such welfare losses. Ongoing climate change poses a fundamental threat to the global economy. Without successful mitigation policies, increasing temperatures will reduce global living standards by at least 5 10 percent (relative to holding temperatures fixed at current levels) by the end of the century (see Chapter 3 of the October 2020 World Economic Outlook). In the absence of successful mitigation policies, low-income countries are not only the most exposed to the costs of climate change, they are also the most lim- ited in their capacity to adapt, even though they are the smallest contributors to emissions of greenhouse gases. These costs are most likely to be imposed by more frequent and catastrophic natural disasters, as the rise in global temperatures has likely already contributed to more frequent weather-related disasters (IPCC 2012), on top of other natural disasters, such as earthquakes, to which low-income countries are likewise vulnerable. While economies recover well from moderate disasters, extreme disasters tend to lower economic output.1 On impact, major weather-related disasters The author of this box is Evgenia Pugacheva. The box has benefited from comments by St phane Hallegatte. 1See Botzen, Deschenes, and Sanders (2019) for an over- view of the literature on the macroeconomic implications of natural disasters. For major disasters that fall within the top 5th percentile of disasters by severity, Felbermayr and Gr schl (2014) estimates a decline in GDP growth of 0.46 percentage point in the year of the shock. Strobel (2011) finds that the impact of hurricane landfall on coastal counties in the United States reduces the GDP per capita growth rate locally by 0.45 per- centage point but has no effect on national growth rates, as economic activity in the unaffected areas compensates for the losses. Loayza and others (2012) likewise stresses that the impact of a disaster depends on its severity. Cantelmo, Melina, and Papageorgiou (2019) argues that severe repeated natural disasters have persistent negative effects. lower real GDP per capita by 1.2 percentage points, on average, with stronger effects in low-income countries and small island economies with a loss of 1.6 percentage points and 1.8 percentage points, respectively (Figure 1.2.1, panel 1) where exposure and vulnerability are high, as these countries expe- rience more reported disasters per square kilometer Drought Extreme temperature Flood Landslide Storm Wild re Figure 1.2.1. Heterogeneous Effects and Frequency of Weather-Related Natural Disasters  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 World EMs LICs Small states Small islands AEs 0 1 2 3 4 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 World AEs EMs LICs Small states (right scale) Small islands 1. Impact of Extreme Disasters on GDP per Capita (Percentage points) 2. Number of Disasters by Country Group, Adjusted for Land Area (Annual average 1980 2019, per million km2) Sources: EM-DAT (Emergency Events Database); and IMF staff calculations. Note: Error bars in panel 1 represent 90 percent con dence intervals. In panel 2, for each year, the number of disasters is added up and divided by the total land area of the country group, then averaged over years. Small states are de ned as territories with land area under 30,000 square kilometers (for reference, Haiti is 27,750 square kilometers). AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market economies; LICs = low-income countries. Box 1.2. Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 28 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 of land area (Figure 1.2.1, panel 2).2 The impact in advanced economies is more muted as they are often better equipped to deal with natural disasters. Indeed, better and faster reconstruction plus large public relief spending can lead to an increase in output following a disaster, at least in the short term. Medium- to long-term effects of weather-related disasters could be persistent. For instance, tropical cyclones, which have devastating effects on both small island economies and coastal regions of bigger countries, lead to losses that are not recovered even 20 years after the storm strikes (see Chapter 3 of the October 2017 World Economic Outlook). Furthermore, such events disproportionately affect the poorest segment of the population, with intergenerational effects as people s health is damaged, their livelihood is destroyed, and children are pre- vented from attending school (Chapter 2 of the April 2020 Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Economic Outlook). The main mechanism by which disasters reduce output is the destruction of productive capital. 2The econometric specification used to estimate the impact of weather-related natural disasters on real GDP per capita during 1980 2019 is given by   ln ( y  i,t )  =   1   d  i,t  +   2   d  i,t 1  +   1   X  i,t  +   i  +     t  +   i,t , in which i indexes countries, t indexes years;   ln ( y  i,t )  is growth in real GDP per capita;  d  i,t  is the natural disaster indicator variable, which takes a value of 1 when damages to property and capital stock as a percent of the previous year s GDP exceed 10 percent or when the number of people killed or affected exceeds 10 percent of the population (total for all disasters within a country for a given year) and takes a value of 0 otherwise these criteria correspond to very extreme natural disasters;   1  is the coefficient of interest;  X  i,t  is a set of controls that includes two lags of growth and log GDP per capita in purchasing-power-parity terms;   i  and   t  are country and year fixed effects, respectively, with standard errors clustered at the country level. Unlike disasters that destroy only durable consumption goods, such as cars and furniture, capital-destroying disasters tend to reduce GDP (Strulik and Trimborn 2019). And damage to public infrastruc- ture and provision of water, gas, and electricity can halt production activity, with effects that echo along supply chains. Reconstruction efforts are also costly, diverting resources from other production activities and reducing aggregate productivity because of capital misallocation (Hallegatte and Vogt-Schilb 2019). But if done right, better reconstruction can not only minimize the impact of disasters on consumption, production, and overall welfare, it can also reduce vulnerability to future shocks (Hallegatte, Rentschler, and Walsh 2018). Within this broader context, a three-pronged strategy can address the specific challenge of extreme weather events, especially for low-income countries (IMF 2019). The first prong involves building structural resilience by investment in disaster-proof infrastruc- ture, early warning systems, and stricter enforcement of building codes and zoning rules. The second prong calls for building financial resilience by ensuring access to preapproved contingent credit lines, participation in risk pooling insurance facilities, provision in the budget for financial buffers, and better measurement and greater disclosure of exposure and vulnerability to climatic hazards (see Chapter 5 of the April 2020 Global Financial Stability Report). The third prong involves building social resilience through enhanced disaster preparedness and management capacity to limit the disruption of critical public services, strengthening existing social protection systems to limit the impact on the most vulnerable, and improving the timeliness and scope of international assistance. Box 1.2 (continued) 29 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts The IMF s primary commodity price index increased by 29 percent between August 2020 and February 2021, the reference period for the current World Economic Outlook (WEO) (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 1). The broad-based increase, led by energy commodities, fol- lowed announcement of effective COVID-19 vaccines last November and continued until January despite renewed lockdowns that weakened the demand outlook, especially for petroleum products. This special feature also includes an in-depth analysis of food security. The Oil Market Rebalance Continues, while Natural Gas Prices Showed Seasonal Volatility Oil prices increased by 39 percent between August 2020 and February 2021 on positive vaccine news and the rapid economic recovery in Asia. A resurgence of COVID-19 cases and difficulties in vaccine rollout at the beginning of the year weakened the oil demand outlook and led the OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC oil exporters) coalition to review more prudently the relaxation of the 7 million barrels a day production curbs announced in April 2020 (see the October 2020 WEO). Futures markets point to backwardation (a down- ward sloping futures curve), with oil prices at $58.5 a barrel in 2021 42 percent higher than the 2020 average falling to $50.7 in 2025. This is mostly because of a temporary tight demand-supply bal- ance expected this year in line with International Energy Agency projections of a steady decline in oil inventories, with oil demand (supply) projected at 96.4 million barrels a day (95.5 million barrels a day) in 2021. Although oil prices persistently above $60 a barrel may induce a substantial production recovery of higher-cost producers in non-OPEC+ countries, including of US shale oil, most of them seem focused on balance sheet repair. Risks to oil prices are slightly tilted to the upside as upside risks from large cuts in oil and gas upstream investments exceed downside risks from a setback in global oil demand recovery, still elevated inventories, and, in the medium term, a breakdown of the OPEC+ coalition (Figure 1.SF.1, panels 2 and 3, and Figure 1.SF.2). Aluminum Copper Iron ore Nickel All commodities Energy Food Metals Futures 68 percent con dence interval 86 percent con dence interval 95 percent con dence interval October 2019 WEO April 2020 WEO October 2020 WEO April 2021 WEO Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Re nitiv Datastream; and IMF staff estimates. Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and are derived from futures prices. April 2021 WEO prices are based on February 12, 2021, closing. 2Derived from prices of futures options on February 18, 2021. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 2016 17 18 19 20 21 0 40 80 120 160 200 2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Dec. 2019 Dec. 20 Dec. 21 Dec. 22 Dec. 23 50 100 150 200 250 300 2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Feb. 21 1. Commodity Price Indices (Index; 2016 = 100) 2. Brent Futures Curves1 (US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis) 3. Brent Price Prospects2 (US dollars a barrel) 4. Metal Price Indices (Jan. 1, 2016 = 100) Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 30 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Natural gas prices showed strong weather-induced seasonal volatility. Asian liquefied natural gas prices spiked to almost $40 per million British thermal units (MMBTU) in January 2021, spilling over to European prices (for example, the Dutch Title Transfer Facility price rose to $7.3 per MMBTU), while US Henry Hub spot prices reached $17.5 per MMBTU as a cold snap crippled shale gas output in Texas amid strong electricity demand in mid-February. High natural gas price volatility sustained the power sector s demand for thermal coal. South African coal prices were also boosted by strong Indian steel and cement industry demand. Phaseout plans and rising emission costs con- tinue to weigh on the demand outlook for coal over the medium term. Base Metal Prices Rallied on a Stronger Recovery in Industrial Production Base metal prices increased by 30 percent between August 2020 and February 2021. The resurgent indus- trial activity in China and other advanced economies, coupled with optimism about US fiscal stimulus, boosted sentiment toward metals. The prices of copper and iron ore, heavily used in the construction and manufacturing sectors, increased by 30 percent and 35 percent, respectively. The strong demand for electric vehicles also pushed up prices of metals, such as cobalt and nickel, that are used in their batteries. Precious metal prices decreased by 6 percent after reaching highs in August 2020 as demand for safe assets faded. The IMF base metal price index is projected to increase by 32.1 percent in 2021 and decrease by 4.5 percent in 2022. Uncertainty over the speed of the global economic recovery and potential production and trade disruptions due to the pandemic are the main risks to the forecast (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 4). Precious metal prices are expected to increase by 6.0 percent in 2021 and by 0.4 percent in 2022 because monetary policies are expected to continue to be accommodative. Disappointing Crops and Precautionary Stockpiling Sent Food Prices Higher The IMF s food and beverage price index increased by 20 percent, led by vegetable oils and cereals, which rose by 45 percent and 41 percent, respectively. The second half of 2020 saw a surge in prices of many staple crops, including wheat, corn, soybeans, and palm oil, reversing an earlier trend of stable or declining prices over the first months of the pan- demic when large global supplies and weaker demand weighed on prices. Soybean and corn prices surged by more than 50 percent between August 2020 and February 2021. These prices were supported by weaker-than-expected harvests, first in the United States and more recently in South America, and strong demand from China, which is seeking to rebuild its hog population after an outbreak of African swine fever in 2019. Wheat increased by 38 percent, following dry winter wheat conditions across the US Great Plains, a small 2020 crop in the European Union, and strong stockpiling demand. Wheat prices received further support from a looming Russian export tax, scheduled between February 15 and June 30 this year, aimed at combating domestic food price inflation. Food (In)security: Collateral Damage of the Pandemic? Changes in access to and availability of food (food security) have been important across human Inventory (right scale) Capacity utilization (percent) China lockdown OPEC+ production curbs implemented Figure 1.SF.2. Global Oil Inventory Sources: KPLER; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Inventory is expressed in days of 2019 oil consumption. OPEC+ = Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC oil exporters. 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 Jan. 2017 Jul. 17 Jan. 18 Jul. 18 Jan. 19 Jul. 19 Jan. 20 Jul. 20 Jan. 21 31 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts history, not only for their impact on people s health and their ability to thrive, but also by catalyzing political change and triggering conflict. The first world food crisis of modern times, between 1972 and 1975, led to 2 million hunger-related deaths and the violent toppling of incumbent governments. The increase in global food prices in the late 2000s ignited a series of anti-government protests that spread across the Middle East and North Africa. Food (in)security also has significant repercussions on economic development. Undernourishment, espe- cially in childhood, can have negative effects on phys- ical and cognitive development, limiting educational attainment and lifetime earning potential, possibly perpetuating inequality (Atinmo and others 2009). When the phenomenon is widespread across the pop- ulation, it can reduce human capital accumulation and potential growth (Fogel 2004). Despite the progress of the past two decades, undernourishment is still elevated in many countries (Figure 1.SF.3). The quality of institutions and income per capita are major long-term determinants (Timmer 2000); however, economic cycles, such as downturns, tend to exacerbate food security problems, halting prog- ress and even reversing past gains. The ongoing global health crisis, by leading to a dramatic fall in incomes (Figure 1.SF.4), has thus raised serious concerns about access to food in some regions and for some segments of the population. In some cases, disruptions in food supply chains have exacerbated the problem, reducing the availability of food and raising domestic food prices (Figure 1.SF.4). The COVID-19 pandemic thus risks erasing decades of progress in reducing undernour- ishment globally, which jeopardizes United Nations Sustainable Development Goal No. 2 (bringing the number of undernourished people to zero by 2030). Share of energy from cereals (percent) Protein supply (gr/cap/day, right scale) Figure 1.SF.3. Undernourishment, Diet Composition, and Income Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization; World Bank; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The statistics refer to the estimation sample. Data labels use World Bank income group classi cation. Gr/cap/day = grams per capita a day; HIC = high income; LIC = low income; LMC = lower middle income; UMC = upper middle income. 0 10 20 30 40 7 8 9 10 11 Log GDP per capita (international dollars) 30 45 60 75 90 35 65 95 125 7 8 9 10 11 Log GDP per capita (international dollars) 2. Energy from Cereals and Protein Supply 1. Prevalence of Undernourishment (Percent) Full sample UMC LMC LIC HIC Full sample UMC LMC LIC HIC Full sample UMC LMC LIC HIC 2019 2020 Figure 1.SF.4. The Impact of the Pandemic Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: In panel 1, data labels use World Bank income group classi cation. Data are simple averages of each group. In panel 2, the horizontal line is the 95th percentile for the food headline in ation differential since January 2015, which is 5 percent. HIC = high income; LIC = low income; LMC = lower middle income; UMC = upper middle income. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 LIC LMC UMC HIC Lesotho Saudi Arabia Mongolia Korea Turkey Pakistan Chile Georgia Fiji Iceland Greece Colombia Burkina Faso Hong Kong SAR Qatar Costa Rica South Africa Dominican Rep. Russia Mexico 1. GDP Growth, by Income Group (Percent) 2. Highest Food Headline In ation Differential (Year-over-year log ratio, December 2020) 95th percentile WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 32 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 This Special Feature tries to answer the following questions: How is food insecurity affected by fluc- tuations in GDP and food prices? How effective are social transfers in containing increases in undernour- ishment in the short term? What drives domestic food price inflation? What Is Food (In)security? According to the United Nations, there is food and nutrition security if all people at all times have  physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their preferences and dietary needs for an active and healthy life  (CSF 2012). Absent these conditions, food insecurity arises. This Special Feature focuses on the two dimensions of food security that are measurable and economically relevant: (1) caloric intake, proxied by  prevalence of undernourishment,  which is the share of households with a caloric intake below a given threshold; and (2) diet composition (proxied by the cereal contribu- tion to the overall caloric intake and protein supply).1 The next section studies how undernourishment and diet vary with fluctuations in economic activity and food prices and whether they react to countercyclical stabilizers, such as spending on social transfers. The Business Cycle Determinants of Food (In)security Four main candidate factors have been selected to explain changes in the prevalence of undernourish- ment (Timmer 2000): (1) GDP per capita growth (to capture household income), (2) food price inflation (to capture food supply and external factors), (3) initial conditions, and (4) social transfers (government pol- icies aimed at protecting the vulnerable segments of the population). Results indicate that GDP growth is the most important driver of fluctuations in undernourish- ment (Figure 1.SF.5). A 1 percentage point increase in GDP growth drives down undernourishment by 0.95 percent. The elasticity of undernourishment to GDP growth becomes more sizable for poorer coun- tries but vanishes for high-income countries. This hap- pens because a bigger share of the population is closer 1Prevalence of undernourishment is measured by the Food and Agriculture Organization and is defined as the share of the popu- lation whose habitual food consumption is insufficient to provide adequate energy levels. to undernourishment in middle- and low-income countries. Higher inequality reduces the elasticity of undernourishment to GDP growth, suggesting that the same process that during good times makes growth more inclusive reverts when growth declines or the economy contracts. Food price inflation is also relevant: a typical 2 percentage point increase in food price inflation tends to increase undernourishment by 0.24 percent.2 Food inflation remains especially relevant for countries with per capita income between $10,000 and $20,000 (2017 purchasing-power-parity dollars) as these coun- tries usually have a high weight of food in the con- sumer price index (see Online Annex 1.1, available at www .imf .org/ en/ Publications/ WEO). Social protection is a valuable shield against income and food price shocks as it mitigates their effects for a given level of 2Food inflation and changes in social transfer are two and eight times more volatile, respectively, than GDP growth in the econo- metric sample. Inclusiveness Social transfers GDP per capita Elasticity of growth by: Figure 1.SF.5. Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization; and IMF staff calculations. Note: In panel 1, the vertical lines show the 95 percent con dence intervals. Coef cients have been adjusted for the different variability of each regressor. In panel 2, the x-axis includes social transfers (as percent of GDP), inclusiveness (income share to the bottom 20 percent), and GDP per capita (thousands of international dollars). Statistically signi cant effects are shown by darker squares.  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 Convergence Income growth Food in ation Social transfers  1.8  1.6  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 1. Short-Term Drivers of Undernourishment 2. Growth Elasticity Varies with Stages of Development and Inclusiveness Measures (Effects, percent) 33 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts economic development. Moreover, social transfers have a direct positive effect in reducing undernourishment (Figure 1.SF.5).3 Finally, diet composition matters. Before descend- ing into undernourishment when incomes decline, households change their diet by moving to cheaper staple foods. This margin of adjustment is quantita- tively relevant in the econometric results (see Online Annex 1.1). Negative GDP shocks tend to increase cereal consumption and decrease protein consump- tion as cereals are cheaper than animal protein. Changes in diet habits, however, are often perceived by lower-middle-income people as a descent into poverty a major factor in raising social tension. Determinants of Food Inflation To analyze major determinants of domestic food inflation, this section uses a sample of 121 countries between 2001 and 2018, where annual food consumer price index inflation is regressed on world food price inflation, exchange rate appreciation against the US dollar, trend headline inflation (to control for mone- tary factors), and food supply shocks. Econometric results show that the annual pass-through from international food prices to the domestic food consumer price index is about 0.26 for middle- and low- income countries and 0.14 for high-income countries. Not surprisingly, the pass-through is far below 1.0, given that the transmis- sion of international price variations across borders is often limited by taxes, subsidies, price controls, weak market integration, and local distribution costs. Similarly, the exchange rate pass-through is larger for middle- and low-income countries (0.23) than for high-income countries (0.08). Even though external factors are relevant, food production is mostly consumed domestically. In fact, domestic food price shocks are an important driver of food price inflation. Moreover, countries with a small arable area tend to experience relatively larger shocks (Figure 1.SF.6). A typical domestic food production shock increases food inflation by about 0.3 percentage point, and the same shock on a regional scale increases food inflation by 0.7 percentage point (Table 1.SF.1). 3In terms of how countries move together, convergence from high initial shares of undernourished is slow in absence of other improvements, about 0.4 percentage point year for a typical low-income country that starts with a 20 percent share of population undernourished. Even though heavy reliance on food imports can leave a country more affected by external factors, the increase in the pass-through is rather small and not significant in the econometric analysis. However, high dependence on food imports tends to mitigate the impact of domestic food production shocks on food prices (see Online Annex 1.1). Additional evidence that food trade can improve welfare comes from a simple observation: domestic food production shocks have a low correlation with those in other countries and especially with global food production shocks (Table 1.SF.2). Given that a regional Standard deviation of cyclical production (percent) Linear  tted values 95 percent con dence interval Figure 1.SF.6. Small Crop-Area Countries Experience Larger Production Shocks Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization; World Bank; and IMF staff calculations. 4 8 12 16 20 Log total crop area (hectares) 0 20 40 60 80 Table 1.SF.1. Food Supply Shocks  Impact on Food Inflation Domestic Regional World Food Inflation Elasticity  0.02  0.13  0.15 Supply Shock  16.34  5.84  2.06 Impact on Food Inflation 0.28 0.73 0.31 Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The table shows the food inflation effects of negative food supply shocks at different aggregation levels (domestic, regional, and rest of the world). The  impact  is the product of the food inflation elasticity and the supply shock. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 34 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 food supply shock has a larger impact than a domes- tic one, food trade integration should extend beyond the region. Conclusions Income is the most important driver of food (in)security in low-income countries and some emerg- ing markets. The COVID-19 pandemic, therefore, risks delaying the process of bringing the number of undernourished people to zero by 2030. Absent policy interventions, the 2020 decline in income and increase in food prices would lead, respectively, to a 62 million and 4 million increase in the number of hungry people. Governments should thus strengthen safety nets for the most vulnerable and mitigate the risk of food price spikes by guaranteeing the smooth functioning of food supply chains. Smaller food producers should exploit international food markets to smooth the impact of domestic production shocks on local food prices. This is particularly relevant as climate change is increasing the volatility of those shocks. International food markets should be kept open and food exporters should avoid export restrictions that exacerbate the global price impact of food production shocks and undermine con- fidence in international food markets. Finally, given that trade is not a hedge against global food supply shocks, governments must take alternative measures that stimu- late sufficient strategic food reserves at the regional level and encourage the development and adoption of more climate-resilient crops and production methods. Table 1.SF.2. Food Supply Shocks Correlations Domestic Rest of the Region Domestic 1.00 Rest of the Region 0.20 1.00 Rest of the World 0.00 0.02 Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization; US Department of Agriculture; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Food production is the sum of production of maize, rice, soybeans, and wheat (in calorie terms). For each country domestic shocks are calculated as deviations from its Hodrick-Prescott production trend for 1990 2018. Rest-of-the-region shocks represent the population-weighted average of the shocks of other countries in the region. Rest-of-the-world shocks are constructed analogously. Standard World Bank classification is used for the regions. CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 35 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 Europe  5.2 4.5 3.9 2.0 3.1 2.7 1.8 2.2 2.1 . . . . . . . . . Advanced Europe  6.8 4.5 4.0 0.4 1.4 1.3 2.2 2.5 2.4 7.1 8.0 7.8 Euro Area4,5  6.6 4.4 3.8 0.3 1.4 1.2 2.3 2.8 2.7 7.9 8.7 8.5 Germany  4.9 3.6 3.4 0.4 2.2 1.1 7.1 7.6 7.0 4.2 4.4 3.7 France  8.2 5.8 4.2 0.5 1.1 1.2  2.3  2.1  1.8 8.2 9.1 9.2 Italy  8.9 4.2 3.6  0.1 0.8 0.9 3.6 3.5 3.4 9.1 10.3 11.6 Spain  11.0 6.4 4.7  0.3 1.0 1.3 0.7 1.0 1.9 15.5 16.8 15.8 The Netherlands  3.8 3.5 3.0 1.1 1.4 1.5 10.0 9.0 8.9 3.8 4.9 4.7 Belgium  6.4 4.0 3.1 0.4 1.7 1.9  0.7  0.9  1.5 5.6 6.8 6.6 Austria  6.6 3.5 4.0 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.3 2.4 2.5 5.3 5.5 5.3 Ireland 2.5 4.2 4.8  0.5 1.6 1.9 4.6 7.0 6.9 5.6 6.8 5.7 Portugal  7.6 3.9 4.8  0.1 0.9 1.2  1.2  0.6 0.3 6.8 7.7 7.3 Greece  8.2 3.8 5.0  1.3 0.2 0.8  7.4  6.6  3.5 16.4 16.6 15.2 Finland  2.9 2.3 2.5 0.4 1.4 1.5 0.8 1.5 1.4 7.8 8.6 7.9 Slovak Republic  5.2 4.7 4.4 2.0 1.2 1.9  0.4  1.2  2.0 6.7 7.3 6.7 Lithuania  0.8 3.2 3.2 1.1 1.5 1.9 7.9 6.2 4.8 8.9 8.4 7.6 Slovenia  5.5 3.7 4.5  0.1 0.8 1.5 7.3 6.9 6.6 5.1 5.4 5.0 Luxembourg  1.3 4.1 3.6 0.0 0.9 1.8 4.4 4.9 4.9 6.3 6.7 6.4 Latvia  3.6 3.9 5.2 0.1 2.1 2.2 3.0 0.5 0.2 8.2 7.2 6.7 Estonia  2.9 3.4 4.2  0.6 1.8 2.5  1.0 0.4  0.5 6.8 7.1 6.5 Cyprus  5.1 3.0 3.9  1.1 0.5 0.8  10.3  8.5  6.1 7.6 7.5 7.0 Malta  7.0 4.7 5.6 0.8 1.1 1.4  0.6 0.2 1.2 4.3 4.3 4.1 United Kingdom  9.9 5.3 5.1 0.9 1.5 1.9  3.9  3.9  4.0 4.5 6.1 6.1 Switzerland  3.0 3.5 2.8  0.7 0.1 0.3 3.8 6.7 7.5 3.1 3.5 3.4 Sweden  2.8 3.1 3.0 0.7 1.5 1.2 5.2 5.0 4.7 8.3 8.7 8.4 Czech Republic  5.6 4.2 4.3 3.2 2.3 2.0 3.5 0.9 0.1 2.7 3.4 3.2 Norway  0.8 3.9 4.0 1.3 2.2 2.0 2.5 5.4 4.8 4.6 4.3 4.0 Denmark  3.3 2.8 2.9 0.3 1.1 1.4 7.9 8.0 7.8 5.6 5.6 5.5 Iceland  6.6 3.7 3.6 2.9 3.2 2.5 1.0 1.0 1.7 6.4 6.0 5.0 San Marino  9.7 4.5 3.4 0.2 0.8 0.9 1.9 1.1 1.1 7.3 6.6 6.4 Emerging and Developing Europe6  2.0 4.4 3.9 5.4 6.5 5.4 0.0 0.6 0.4 . . . . . . . . . Russia  3.1 3.8 3.8 3.4 4.5 3.4 2.2 3.9 3.3 5.8 5.4 5.0 Turkey7 1.8 6.0 3.5 12.3 13.6 11.8  5.1  3.4  2.2 13.1 12.4 11.0 Poland  2.7 3.5 4.5 3.4 3.2 2.5 3.5 2.0 1.3 3.2 4.9 4.5 Romania  3.9 6.0 4.8 2.6 2.8 2.1  5.1  5.0  4.7 5.0 4.9 4.9 Ukraine7  4.2 4.0 3.4 2.7 7.9 6.8 4.3  2.5  3.6 9.0 8.6 8.4 Hungary  5.0 4.3 5.9 3.3 3.6 3.5  0.2  0.4  0.3 4.1 3.8 3.5 Belarus  0.9  0.4 0.8 5.5 6.9 5.5 0.1  0.3  1.7 4.1 4.5 4.4 Bulgaria5  3.8 4.4 4.4 1.2 1.0 2.0 0.1 1.4 1.2 5.2 4.8 4.4 Serbia  1.0 5.0 4.5 1.7 2.2 2.4  4.3  5.7  5.5 13.3 13.0 12.7 Croatia  9.0 4.7 5.0 0.3 0.7 1.2  3.5  2.3  1.6 9.2 9.4 9.0 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 5Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia. 6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia. 7See country-specific notes for Turkey and Ukraine in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 36 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 Asia  1.5 7.6 5.4 2.5 2.0 2.3 2.6 2.2 1.8 . . . . . . . . . Advanced Asia  3.1 4.1 3.0 0.2 0.7 1.0 4.6 4.6 4.3 3.6 3.7 3.3 Japan  4.8 3.3 2.5 0.0 0.1 0.7 3.3 3.6 3.2 2.8 2.8 2.4 Korea  1.0 3.6 2.8 0.5 1.4 0.9 4.6 4.2 4.0 3.9 4.6 4.1 Australia  2.4 4.5 2.8 0.9 1.7 1.6 2.5 2.4 1.0 6.5 6.0 5.5 Taiwan Province of China 3.1 4.7 3.0  0.2 0.9 1.2 14.1 14.5 14.4 3.9 3.8 3.8 Singapore  5.4 5.2 3.2  0.2 0.2 0.8 17.6 14.6 14.4 3.1 2.8 2.5 Hong Kong SAR  6.1 4.3 3.8 0.3 1.4 1.9 6.5 5.5 5.0 5.9 5.3 4.3 New Zealand  3.0 4.0 3.2 1.7 1.8 1.6  0.8  2.1  2.1 4.6 5.1 4.9 Macao SAR  56.3 61.2 43.0 0.8 1.4 1.9  34.2 7.3 29.5 2.9 2.5 2.1 Emerging and Developing Asia  1.0 8.6 6.0 3.1 2.3 2.7 1.7 1.0 0.7 . . . . . . . . . China 2.3 8.4 5.6 2.4 1.2 1.9 2.0 1.6 1.3 3.8 3.6 3.6 India4  8.0 12.5 6.9 6.2 4.9 4.1 1.0  1.2  1.6 . . . . . . . . . ASEAN-5  3.4 4.9 6.1 1.4 2.3 2.7 1.8 0.3 0.4 . . . . . . . . . Indonesia  2.1 4.3 5.8 2.0 2.0 3.1  0.4  1.3  1.4 7.1 6.5 5.8 Thailand  6.1 2.6 5.6  0.8 1.3 1.0 3.3 0.5 2.6 2.0 1.5 1.0 Vietnam 2.9 6.5 7.2 3.2 3.9 3.9 2.2 2.4 1.9 3.3 2.7 2.4 Philippines  9.5 6.9 6.5 2.6 3.4 3.0 3.2  0.4  2.2 10.4 7.4 6.3 Malaysia  5.6 6.5 6.0  1.1 2.0 2.0 4.4 3.8 3.7 4.5 3.8 3.6 Other Emerging and Developing Asia5  1.1 4.5 5.7 5.2 5.0 5.3  2.0  1.5  2.4 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Emerging Asia6  1.0 8.7 6.0 3.0 2.2 2.5 1.9 1.1 0.8 . . . . . . . . . Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4See country-specific note for India in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. 6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 economies, China, and India. CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 37 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 North America  4.1 6.1 3.5 1.4 2.3 2.4  2.8  3.4  2.7 . . . . . . . . . United States  3.5 6.4 3.5 1.2 2.3 2.4  3.1  3.9  3.1 8.1 5.8 4.2 Mexico  8.2 5.0 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.1 2.5 1.8 1.0 4.4 3.6 3.3 Canada  5.4 5.0 4.7 0.7 1.7 2.0  1.9  0.8  1.3 9.6 8.0 6.5 Puerto Rico4  7.5 2.5 0.7  1.3 2.5 1.5 . . . . . . . . . 8.6 9.6 9.4 South America5  6.6 4.4 2.8 8.1 9.2 8.4  0.6  0.4  0.8 . . . . . . . . . Brazil  4.1 3.7 2.6 3.2 4.6 4.0  0.9  0.6  0.8 13.2 14.5 13.2 Argentina  10.0 5.8 2.5 42.0 . . . . . . 1.0 2.3 1.3 11.4 10.6 9.3 Colombia  6.8 5.1 3.6 2.5 2.1 2.6  3.3  3.8  3.9 16.1 12.8 12.3 Chile  5.8 6.2 3.8 3.0 3.1 3.0 1.4 0.3  0.6 10.8 9.0 8.2 Peru  11.1 8.5 5.2 1.8 2.0 2.0 0.5  0.4  0.7 13.6 9.7 7.6 Ecuador  7.5 2.5 1.3 -0.3 0.5 2.4 0.5 1.9 2.0 5.3 4.5 4.4 Venezuela  30.0  10.0  5.0 2,355 5,500 5,500  3.5  0.8  2.3 55.5 58.4 60.1 Bolivia  7.7 5.5 4.2 0.9 3.9 3.7  2.5  3.7  4.2 8.0 4.0 4.0 Paraguay  0.9 4.0 4.0 1.8 2.7 3.2 1.6 0.7 0.0 6.6 6.1 5.9 Uruguay  5.7 3.0 3.1 9.8 8.3 7.4  1.4  2.2  1.5 10.4 10.3 9.1 Central America6  7.2 5.6 4.1 1.9 3.1 2.8 0.4  1.6  1.8 . . . . . . . . . Caribbean7  4.3 3.3 11.1 7.7 8.4 7.5  4.7  5.6  3.2 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Latin America and the Caribbean8  7.0 4.6 3.1 6.4 7.2 6.6 0.2 0.0  0.4 . . . . . . . . . Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9  16.0  0.2 9.3  0.6 1.6 1.7  15.3  21.6  12.5 . . . . . . . . . Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix. Aggregates exclude Venezuela. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis. 5See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 6Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama. 7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago. 8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as Anguilla and Montserrat, which are not IMF members. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 38 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 Middle East and Central Asia  2.9 3.7 3.8 10.2 11.2 8.1  3.0 0.3 0.1 . . . . . . . . . Oil Exporters4  4.2 4.6 3.4 8.2 10.4 7.8  2.7 2.1 1.7 . . . . . . . . . Saudi Arabia  4.1 2.9 4.0 3.4 2.7 2.0  2.1 2.8 1.9 . . . . . . . . . Iran 1.5 2.5 2.1 36.5 39.0 27.5  0.7 1.2 1.2 10.8 11.2 11.7 United Arab Emirates  5.9 3.1 2.6  2.1 2.9 1.2 3.1 7.1 6.3 . . . . . . . . . Algeria  6.0 2.9 2.7 2.4 4.9 6.0  10.5  7.7  8.7 14.2 14.5 14.9 Kazakhstan  2.6 3.2 4.0 6.8 6.4 5.0  3.6  1.0  1.5 5.5 5.2 5.0 Iraq  10.9 1.1 4.4 0.6 9.4 7.5  14.8 0.0  0.6 . . . . . . . . . Qatar  2.6 2.4 3.6  2.7 2.4 2.9  3.4 7.1 7.9 . . . . . . . . . Kuwait  8.1 0.7 3.2 2.1 2.3 2.5 0.8 8.6 8.2 . . . . . . . . . Azerbaijan  4.3 2.3 1.7 2.8 3.5 3.2  0.9 1.1 0.5 6.5 5.8 5.7 Oman  6.4 1.8 7.4  0.9 3.8 2.4  10.0  6.4  2.7 . . . . . . . . . Turkmenistan 0.8 4.6 3.9 7.6 8.0 6.5  0.5 0.8  0.1 . . . . . . . . . Oil Importers5  0.7 2.4 4.4 13.3 12.5 8.6  3.8  4.4  4.2 . . . . . . . . . Egypt 3.6 2.5 5.7 5.7 4.8 7.2  3.1  4.0  4.0 8.3 9.8 9.4 Pakistan  0.4 1.5 4.0 10.7 8.7 8.0  1.1  1.5  1.8 4.5 5.0 4.8 Morocco  7.0 4.5 3.9 0.6 0.8 1.2  2.2  3.8  4.0 11.9 10.5 9.7 Uzbekistan 1.6 5.0 5.3 12.9 10.3 11.2  5.4  6.4  5.9 . . . . . . . . . Sudan  3.6 0.4 1.1 163.3 197.1 44.5  17.5  11.2  13.5 26.8 28.4 29.7 Tunisia  8.8 3.8 2.4 5.7 5.8 6.3  6.8  9.5  9.4 . . . . . . . . . Jordan  2.0 2.0 2.7 0.4 2.3 2.0  8.1  8.3  4.0 22.7 . . . . . . Lebanon6  25.0 . . . . . . 88.2 . . . . . .  14.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Afghanistan  5.0 4.0 4.5 5.6 5.1 4.5 10.7 10.0 8.3 . . . . . . . . . Georgia  6.1 3.5 5.8 5.2 3.8 2.7  12.3  11.5  8.0 . . . . . . . . . Armenia  7.6 1.0 3.5 1.2 3.9 3.2  4.6  6.7  6.6 24.2 22.8 22.7 Kyrgyz Republic  8.0 6.0 4.6 6.3 8.6 5.4  8.2  8.2  7.0 6.6 6.6 6.6 Tajikistan 4.5 5.0 4.5 8.6 8.0 6.5  2.3  2.2  2.1 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Caucasus and Central Asia  1.9 3.7 4.1 7.4 6.9 6.2  3.6  2.1  2.3 . . . . . . . . . Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan  3.0 3.7 3.8 10.6 11.8 8.4  3.0 0.6 0.3 . . . . . . . . . Middle East and North Africa  3.4 4.0 3.7 10.6 12.4 8.5  3.2 0.7 0.4 . . . . . . . . . Israel7  2.4 5.0 4.3  0.6 0.3 0.6 4.9 4.1 3.8 4.3 5.0 4.6 Maghreb8  8.8 14.7 3.3 3.0 4.9 5.3  7.3  5.9  6.5 . . . . . . . . . Mashreq9 1.4 2.0 5.2 8.4 7.2 7.5  4.3  5.1  4.4 . . . . . . . . . Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A5 and A6 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Includes Bahrain, Libya, and Yemen. 5Includes Djibouti, Mauritania, Somalia, and West Bank and Gaza. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation. See country-specific note for Lebanon in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 6See country-specific note for Lebanon in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 7Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates. 8The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia. 9The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and West Bank and Gaza. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation. CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 39 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 2020 2021 2022 Sub-Saharan Africa  1.9 3.4 4.0 10.8 9.8 7.8  3.7  3.7  3.7 . . . . . . . . . Oil Exporters4  2.3 2.2 2.2 13.9 16.0 12.7  3.6  2.0  1.6 . . . . . . . . . Nigeria  1.8 2.5 2.3 13.2 16.0 13.5  3.7  2.2  1.8 . . . . . . . . . Angola  4.0 0.4 2.4 22.3 22.3 13.1  0.6 0.8 0.5 . . . . . . . . . Gabon  1.8 1.2 2.7 1.3 2.0 2.0  5.1  0.3  0.2 . . . . . . . . . Chad  0.9 1.8 2.6 3.5 3.0 3.0  8.8  6.6  6.3 . . . . . . . . . Equatorial Guinea  5.8 4.0  5.9 4.8 1.5 3.1  8.4  3.6  4.4 . . . . . . . . . Middle-Income Countries5  4.4 3.8 3.5 4.5 4.9 4.7  1.1  2.3  2.9 . . . . . . . . . South Africa  7.0 3.1 2.0 3.3 4.3 4.5 2.2  0.4  1.5 29.2 29.7 30.8 Ghana 0.9 4.6 6.1 9.9 9.0 8.2  3.3  2.8  4.9 . . . . . . . . . C te d Ivoire 2.3 6.0 6.5 2.5 2.0 1.6  3.6  3.6  3.4 . . . . . . . . . Cameroon  2.8 3.4 4.3 2.8 2.2 2.1  5.3  4.4  3.2 . . . . . . . . . Zambia  3.5 0.6 1.1 16.3 17.8 14.8 1.5 6.5 5.6 . . . . . . . . . Senegal 0.8 5.2 6.0 2.5 2.0 1.7  11.0  12.8  11.7 . . . . . . . . . Low-Income Countries6 1.0 4.3 6.1 14.2 8.6 6.0  6.8  7.1  7.1 . . . . . . . . . Ethiopia 6.1 2.0 8.7 20.4 13.1 8.0  4.6  3.6  3.9 . . . . . . . . . Kenya  0.1 7.6 5.7 5.3 5.0 5.0  4.8  5.3  5.4 . . . . . . . . . Tanzania 1.0 2.7 4.6 3.0 3.3 3.6  2.7  4.3  4.0 . . . . . . . . . Uganda  2.1 6.3 5.0 3.8 5.2 5.5  9.1  8.4  5.7 . . . . . . . . . Democratic Republic of the Congo  0.1 3.8 4.9 11.3 10.9 7.5  4.0  3.4  3.4 . . . . . . . . . Mali  2.0 4.0 6.0 0.6 1.7 2.0  2.0  4.1  4.4 . . . . . . . . . Burkina Faso 0.8 4.3 5.2 1.9 2.7 2.6  3.7  4.5  4.8 . . . . . . . . . Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A6 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Includes Republic of Congo and South Sudan. 5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles. 6Includes Benin, Burundi, Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, S o Tom  and Pr ncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 40 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output (Annual percent change; in constant 2017 international dollars at purchasing power parity) Average Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 World 2.5 2.0 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.5 2.4 1.6  4.4 4.9 3.4 Advanced Economies 1.0 0.9 1.6 1.9 1.2 2.0 1.9 1.2  5.1 4.8 3.3 United States 1.0 1.2 1.8 2.3 1.0 1.7 2.4 1.7  4.0 5.8 2.9 Euro Area1 0.5  0.5 1.1 1.7 1.6 2.4 1.7 1.1  6.9 4.3 3.7 Germany 1.3 0.2 1.8 0.6 1.4 2.2 1.0 0.3  5.0 3.4 3.3 France 0.6 0.1 0.4 0.7 0.8 2.0 1.5 1.3  8.4 5.5 3.9 Italy  0.7  2.4  0.5 0.8 1.5 1.8 1.1 0.5  8.7 4.3 3.7 Spain  0.2  1.1 1.7 3.9 2.9 2.8 2.0 1.1  11.0 6.3 4.3 Japan 0.7 2.2 0.5 1.7 0.8 1.8 0.8 0.5  4.5 3.6 2.9 United Kingdom 0.7 1.5 2.1 1.6 0.9 1.1 0.6 0.9  10.3 4.8 4.6 Canada 0.8 1.3 1.8  0.1 0.0 1.8 1.0 0.4  6.5 4.2 3.5 Other Advanced Economies2 2.6 1.8 2.2 1.5 1.7 2.4 2.0 1.2  2.9 3.8 2.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.8 3.5 3.1 2.8 3.0 3.4 3.2 2.3  3.5 5.3 3.8 Emerging and Developing Asia 7.4 5.9 5.9 5.9 5.8 5.7 5.6 4.4  1.9 7.7 5.2 China 10.0 7.2 6.9 6.5 6.2 6.4 6.3 5.5 2.0 8.1 5.3 India3 6.3 5.1 6.2 6.8 7.1 5.7 5.4 2.9  8.7 11.5 5.9 ASEAN-54 4.1 3.7 3.4 3.7 3.9 4.3 4.2 3.7  4.6 4.0 5.1 Emerging and Developing Europe 4.5 2.8 1.5 0.5 1.6 3.9 3.3 2.3  2.2 4.3 3.8 Russia 4.9 1.5  1.1  2.2 0.0 1.8 2.9 2.1  3.1 3.8 3.8 Latin America and the Caribbean 2.6 1.7 0.1  0.8  1.8 0.2 0.2  1.1  8.1 3.7 2.3 Brazil 2.7 2.1  0.3  4.4  4.1 0.5 1.0 0.6  4.6 3.0 1.9 Mexico 0.8 0.1 1.6 2.1 1.5 1.0 1.1  1.0  9.1 4.0 2.1 Middle East and Central Asia 2.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 2.4 0.0  0.2  0.6  5.1 1.2 1.9 Saudi Arabia 2.2 0.0 2.5 1.7  0.6  3.3 0.0  1.6  6.0 0.9 2.0 Sub-Saharan Africa 2.7 2.3 2.5 0.5  1.2 0.4 0.5 0.5  4.5 0.8 1.3 Nigeria 4.9 2.6 3.5 0.0  4.2  1.8  0.7  0.4  4.3 0.0  0.2 South Africa 2.0 0.9 0.3  0.3  1.1  0.1  0.7  1.3  8.3 1.6 0.4 Memorandum European Union 1.0  0.2 1.5 2.1 1.9 2.8 2.1 1.5  6.3 4.2 3.8 Middle East and North Africa 1.7  0.5  0.2 0.2 2.6  1.0  1.0  1.3  5.8 1.3 1.8 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 5.1 3.7 3.3 3.0 3.3 3.6 3.5 2.4  3.4 5.9 4.1 Low-Income Developing Countries 3.6 3.5 3.8 2.1 1.5 2.6 2.7 2.9  2.2 2.0 3.0 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries. 2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 3See country-specific note for India in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam. CHAPTER 1 GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 41 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 References Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David H mous. 2012.  The Environment and Directed Tech- nical Change.  American Economic Review 102 (1): 131 66. Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Douglas Hanley, and William Kerr. 2016.  Transition to Clean Technology.  Journal of Political Economy 124 (1): 52 104. Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011.  Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.  In Handbook of Labor Economics 4: 1043 171. North-Holland: Elsevier. Atinmo, Tola, Parvin Mirmiran, Oyediran E. Oyewole, Rekia Belahsen, and Llu s Serra-Majem. 2009.  Breaking the Poverty/Malnutrition Cycle in Africa and the Middle East.  Nutrition Reviews 67 (Suppl 1): S40 46. Barwick, Panle Jia, Shanjun Li, Deyu Rao, and Nahim Bin Zahur. 2018.  The Morbidity Cost of Air Pollution: Evidence from Consumer Spending in China.  NBER Working Paper 24688, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Botzen, W. J. Wouter, Olivier Deschenes, and Mark Sanders. 2019.  The Economic Impacts of Natural Disasters: A Review of Models and Empirical Studies.  In Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 13 (2). Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. Cantelmo, Alessandro, Giovanni Melina, and Chris Papageor- giou. 2019.  Macroeconomic Outcomes in Disaster-Prone Countries.  IMF Working Paper 19/217, International Mone- tary Fund, Washington, DC. Committee for World Food Security (CFS). 2012.  Coming to Terms with Terminology.  Rome. Felbermayr, Gabriel, and Jasmin Gr schl. 2014.  Naturally Negative: The Growth Effects of Natural Disasters.  Journal of Development Economics 111: 92 106. Fogel, Robert. 2004.  Health, Nutrition, and Economic Growth.  Economic Development and Cultural Change 52 (3): 643 58. Gerlach, Christian. 2015.  Famine Responses in the World Food Crisis 1972 5 and the World Food Conference of 1974.  European Review of History: Revue europ enne d histoire 22 (6): 929 39. Hallegatte, St phane, Jun Rentschler, and Brian Walsh. 2018.  Building Back Better: Achieving Resilience through Stronger, Faster, and More Inclusive Post-Disaster Reconstruction.  World Bank, Washington, DC. Hallegatte, St phane, and Adrien Vogt-Schilb. 2019.  Are Losses from Natural Disasters More than Just Asset Losses?  In Advances in Spatial and Economic Modeling of Disaster Impacts, edited by Y. Okuyama and A. Rose. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nature Switzerland. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2012.  Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disas- ters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation.  Special Report, Geneva. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2019.  Building Resilience in Developing Countries Vulnerable to Large Natural Disasters.  IMF Policy Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Loayza, Norman V., Eduardo Olaberr a, Jamele Rigolini, and Luc Christiaensen. 2012.  Natural Disasters and Growth: Going beyond the Averages.  World Development 40 (7): 1317 36. Pritchett, Lant. 2006.  Does Learning to Add up Add up? The Returns to Schooling in Aggregate Data.  In Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch, 635 95. North-Holland: Elsevier. Reed, William Robert. 2015.  On the Practice of Lagging Vari- ables to Avoid Simultaneity.  Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 77: 897 905. Strobel, Eric. 2011.  The Economic Growth Impact of Hurri- canes: Evidence from US Coastal Counties.  The Review of Economics and Statistics 93: 575 89. Strulik, Holger, and Timo Trimborn. 2019.  Natural Disas- ters and Macroeconomic Performance.  Environmental and Resource Economics 72: 1069 98. Timmer, C. Peter. 2000.  The Macro Dimensions of Food Secu- rity: Economic Growth, Equitable Distribution, and Food Price Stability.  Food Policy 25 (3): 283 95. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organi- zation (UNESCO). 2021.  UNESCO Figures Show Two Thirds of an Academic Year Lost on Average Worldwide Due to COVID-19 School Closures.  https:// en .unesco .org/ news/  unesco -figures -show -two -thirds -academic -year -lost -average  -worldwide -due -covid -19 -school. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza- tion (UNESCO), United Nations International Children s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), and World Bank. 2020. What Have We Learnt? Overview of Findings from a Survey of Minis- tries of Education on National Responses to COVID-19. Paris. International Monetary Fund | April 2021 43 The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a severe global recession with differential impacts within and across countries. A key question facing policymakers is the extent of persistent damage (scarring) that may result from this crisis. This chapter examines the possible persistent effects of the pandemic and the channels through which they may occur. History suggests that deep recessions often leave long-lived scars, particularly to productivity. Importantly, financial instabilities typically associated with worse scarring have been largely avoided in the current crisis so far. The concentration of the pandemic s initial impact on more highly contact-intensive service sectors has generated lower sectoral spillovers than in most previous recessions, but its sheer size means that it still represents a large shock to the broader economy. Expected medium-term output losses from the pandemic are sub- stantial, with output for the world in 2024 expected to be about 3 percent lower than anticipated pre-pandemic. Losses are anticipated to be lower than after the global financial crisis, assuming that the pandemic is brought under control globally by the end of 2022. The degree of expected scarring varies across countries, depending on the structure of economies and the size of the policy response. Emerging market and developing economies are expected to suffer more scarring than advanced economies. To limit scarring, policymakers should continue to provide support to the most-affected sectors and workers while the pandemic is ongoing. Remedial policies for the setback to human capital accumulation, measures to lift invest- ment, and initiatives to support reallocation (retraining, reskilling, and insolvency procedures) will be key to address long-term GDP losses and the rise in inequality. Introduction A crisis like no other. The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a severe global recession that is unique in many ways. The contraction in 2020 was very sudden and The authors of this chapter are Sonali Das (co-lead), Weicheng Lian, Giacomo Magistretti, Evgenia Pugacheva, and Philippe Wingender (co-lead), with support from Srijoni Banerjee and Savannah Newman, and with contributions from Philip Barrett, Mariya Brussevich, Marina Conesa Martinez, Allan Dizioli, Jungjin Lee, and Futoshi Narita. deep compared with previous global crises, even as the policy response in many countries was swift and sizable. Global output declined about three times as much as during the global financial crisis in half the time. The pandemic crisis also stands out for its dif- ferential impacts across sectors and countries, complex channels of transmission, and high uncertainty about the recovery path, given that it depends on the fate of the virus itself. An extraordinary policy response. The policy response has also been unprecedented both in size, particularly in advanced economies, and in the use of novel  lifeline  measures akin to disaster relief, to improve health care systems and lessen the pain for households, workers, and firms.1 About 40 per- cent of the fiscal response in Group of 20 (G20) advanced economies (30 percent in G20 emerg- ing market economies) was directed to firms and initiatives to preserve employment.2 Support in  emerging markets and developing economies has been generally more limited (see the April 2021 Fiscal Monitor). Exceptional uncertainty. Continued uncertainty about the duration of the health crisis affects all aspects of the recovery path. Moreover, questions about the potential permanent effects of the shock become more prominent as the pandemic persists: how much scarring (persistent damage to supply potential) could occur?3 With COVID-19 now continuing for more than one year, some degree of supply-side scarring from decreased productive 1Numerous monetary and financial sector policies were deployed to support credit provision and provide liquidity to firms (see the October 2020 Global Financial Stability Report (GFSR)). Fiscal measures included transfers, expanded unemployment benefits, temporary tax cuts and deferrals, wage subsidies, direct and guaranteed loans, and equity injections (see the October 2020 Fiscal Monitor). 2Including above-the-line measures, such as grants and tax defer- rals and reductions, and below-the-line equity injections and loans, but excluding government credit guarantees. The size and composi- tion of the fiscal response varied across countries. 3Such supply damage could result from the loss of economic ties in production and distribution networks arising from job destruction and firm bankruptcies. AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 2 CHAPTER WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 44 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 capacity and demand-side persistent preference shifts is likely. This will differ across countries, as the extent of the health crisis  interacts with countries  economic structures (such as the importance of  high-contact  sectors, where people are in close proximity) and vary- ing policy responses. What are the main channels of scarring and implica- tions for the medium-term outlook? The atypical features of the crisis its severity, differential impacts, complex transmission, and high uncertainty make assessment of the economic effects of COVID 19 challenging. To shed light on these issues, this chapter investigates the following questions: 1. What can we learn about prospects for scarring from historical experience with recessions? What are the most relevant channels in the current setting (productivity, labor, capital)? 2. How important are sectoral spillovers in propagat- ing shocks to the broader economy? How relevant are such effects in the current crisis? 3. Given (1) and (2), what are the implications for the medium-term outlook? The main findings of the chapter are the following:   The prospects for scarring from COVID-19 are sub- stantial, even if lower than after the global financial crisis. Severe recessions in the past, particularly deep ones, have been associated with persistent output losses. The relative financial stability following the COVID-19 shock so far is encour- aging, however, as the greatest scarring in the past has occurred in recessions associated with financial crises.4 Experience from previous recessions also suggests that the productivity channel could be particularly important, as recessions have typically been followed by persistent losses to total factor productivity (TFP).   Sectoral productivity shocks have persistent effects and sectoral spillovers have been an important amplification mechanism.5 On average, sectors 4While the global financial system has been resilient so far during the pandemic, some stresses are emerging, with asset valuations appearing stretched, financial vulnerabilities intensifying in some sectors, and loan defaults potentially increasing in 2021 as debt ser- vice moratoriums expire. A repricing of risk in markets and resultant tightening in financial conditions could interact with such vulnera- bilities, further affecting confidence and endangering macro-financial stability (see Chapters 1 and 2 of the April 2021 GFSR). 5The analysis considers sector level changes to TFP, which reflects technology changes as well as the efficiency of combining inputs in the production process. have not recovered after productivity shocks in the past, demonstrating the potential for per- manent declines in sectors most affected by the COVID 19 shock. Although the relative size of sectoral spillovers (compared with the effect of shocks within the same sector) is smaller for the COVID-19 shock than in past recessions (given that high-contact sectors are less central to production networks), spillovers are still sizable and are likely to have meaningfully amplified the COVID 19 shock.   Expected medium-term output losses from the pan- demic shock are sizable, but they exhibit significant variation across economies and regions. Despite higher-than-usual growth as the global economy recovers from the COVID-19 shock, world output is still anticipated to be about 3 percent lower in 2024 than pre-pandemic projections suggested. This expected scarring is less than what was seen following the global financial crisis, consistent with financial sector disruptions being contained in the current crisis. Unlike during the global financial crisis, when advanced economies were much more affected, emerging market and devel- oping economies are expected to have deeper scars than advanced economies. This reflects in part their more muted policy responses, as coun- tries with larger pandemic-related fiscal responses are projected to experience smaller losses. After accounting for income differences, economies that are more reliant on tourism, and those with larger service sectors, are projected to experience more persistent losses. After a brief primer on the economic impacts of supply versus demand shocks in the context of the pandemic, this chapter turns to the analysis of previous recessions and channels through which scarring occurred. Then, to better understand how a large and uneven shock, such as that of the COVID 19 pandemic, can transmit through domestic and global supply chains, the section that follows examines historical sectoral shocks and their spillovers to other sectors. The next section examines the implications for the medium-term outlook. The penultimate section draws together the implications for policies to limit scarring from the crisis. The chapter concludes with a summary of the main takeaways. CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 45 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Demand and Supply in a Low-Contact Economy: A Primer on the Pandemic Shock Given the unique nature of the crisis, a brief exploration of the supply and demand shocks at play can help outline the transmission of the pandemic s economic effects and its differential impacts across sectors and countries. Sectors can be grouped into four categories based on their contact intensity and vul- nerability to disruption by the pandemic (Table 2.1). High-contact, affected sectors have been most severely impacted by lockdowns and other pandemic contain- ment measures (Figure 2.1, panel 1), but the decline in activity was also sudden and severe in other sectors.   On the supply side, lockdowns reduced effective pro- ductive capacity. Some businesses also experienced lower productivity because they had to reorganize production to increase the physical distance between workers. These initial sectoral supply shocks spilled over to affect supply in other sectors through links in production networks.6   Demand fell due to reduced mobility and as precau- tionary savings rose amid heightened uncertainty. The initial supply shocks also propagated to a decline in demand.7 This propagation was amplified in many cases by liquidity-constrained households and firms forced to cut back on outlays, leading to more layoffs and further declines in private spending.8 6See Baqaee and Farhi (2020) for an illustration. 7See Guerrieri and others (2020) and Baqaee and Farhi (2021) for models in which supply shocks can transform into Keynesian aggregate demand shocks. 8A large portion of the policy response was focused on mitigating household and firm liquidity constraints, but the number of house- holds and firms in financial distress rose nonetheless in many coun- tries following the COVID-19 outbreak. See Li and others (2020). Overall, the economic contraction in the first half of 2020 is best understood as a combination of a massive initial supply shock and a large decline in demand, with propagation through production networks. The swift action taken by policymakers cushioned house- hold income and firms  cash flow, improved confidence, and prevented a rapid amplification of shocks through the financial sector and further demand channels. Focusing on the case of the United States, for which detailed and timely data are available, a picture emerges of the relative strengths of the supply and GFC COVID-19 Other Figure 2.1. Value Added during Recessions, by Sector Group (Index, last prerecession quarter = 100) COVID-19 led to a sharp contraction. High-contact sectors have been most severely affected, but the contraction was also sudden and severe in other sectors. 2. High-Contact, Less- Affected Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Data are for 1990:Q1 2020:Q4 from 38 countries (the number of countries used for each recession line varies). Time since the shock (in quarters) is on the x-axis. Lines are averages weighted by country s purchasing-power-parity GDP, with quarter 0 as the last prerecession quarter. For the COVID-19 crisis, quarter 0 is 2019:Q4. For the global  nancial crisis (GFC), quarter 0 is the country-speci c date of peak real GDP during 2007 08. Other recessions are country speci c and identi ed by two consecutive quarters of negative growth during 1990 2006 and 2009 19. High-contact, affected sectors are accommodation and food services; arts, entertainment, and other service activities; wholesale and retail trade; and transportation; high-contact, less-affected sectors are construction; and public administration, education, and health care; low-contact services are information and communication;  nancial and insurance activities; real estate activities; and other professional and scienti c activities; other low-contact sectors are agriculture; manufacturing; and mining and utilities. 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 1. High-Contact, Affected 4. Low-Contact, Other 3. Low-Contact Services Table 2.1 Differential Impact across Sectors High-contact, affected sectors Effectively shut down For example, hotels, restaurants, transportation, brick-and-mortal retail Supply and demand collapsed simultaneously. High-contact, less-affected sectors Essential services and outdoor activities For example, health services, grocery stores, construction In some, supply was constrained and demand increased. Low-contact service sectors Shifted quickly to online delivery For example, professional and business services Supply was largely unaffected, but demand decreased. Other low-contact sectors For example, manufacturing Supply was constrained; demand increased or decreased depending on subsector. Source: IMF staff compilation. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 46 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 demand forces at work. While quantities purchased initially fell across the board (Figure 2.2), changes in prices have been relatively muted (Figure 2.3, panel 1). Price movements across four sector groupings point to differential impacts across sectors (Figure 2.3, panel 2). Wider dispersion in price movements is seen, for example, among the more-affected, high-contact sectors and among services more generally. Statisti- cal decompositions of sectoral price variation sug- gest that supply shocks dominated, accounting for about two-thirds of the decrease in employment and output in the United States in the second quarter of 2020 (Bekaert, Engstrom, and Ermolov 2020; Brinca, Duarte, and Faria-e-Castro 2020), but with large demand shocks in the food services, accommo- dation, and tourism sectors (del Rio-Chanona and others 2020). As a result of the differential impact across sectors, countries with a larger share of high-contact sectors have been more exposed to the pandemic recession and had larger contractions. Economic structure has also affected the effectiveness of the policy response; high informality in labor markets, for example, has made containment measures difficult and aggravated the crisis (see the October 2020 Regional Economic Outlook: Western Hemisphere). Countries dependent on tourism have been severely affected and are most vulnerable to the length of the crisis and travel-  related restrictions (see Box 2.1). Within countries, the crisis has had uneven effects on workers and firms. Employment declines have been dispropor- tionately concentrated among lower-skilled workers (see Chapter 3), while exits at small businesses appear to be increasing (Crane and others 2020; see also Figures 2.4 and 2.5). As the pandemic has progressed, and lockdowns have been lifted and reimposed, sometimes for Durable goods Nondurable goods High-contact services Other services Figure 2.2. Consumption Patterns during COVID-19 in the United States (Year-over-year percent change) In the United States, an increase in durable goods consumption partially offset the decrease in consumption of high-contact services. Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: High-contact services are food, accommodation, recreation, and transportation services.  60  55  50  45  40  35  30  25  20  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 Feb. 2020 Apr. 20 Jun. 20 Aug. 20 Oct. 20 January to June 2019 January to June 2020 High-contact, affected High-contact, less-affected Low-contact services Low-contact, other Figure 2.3. Sectoral Price Changes in the United States (Kernel density) Price movements have been muted overall, but there has been more dispersion in service sectors. Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Percent change in industry-level US producer prices on x-axis. Data are for the United States. In panel 2, price changes are from January to June 2020. See Table 2.1 for a description of the sector groups. 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 1. Compared with Previous Period 2. COVID-19 Price Changes, by Sector Group CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 47 International Monetary Fund | April 2021  narrower regions or in a less restrictive manner than in early 2020, the supply shocks have unwound to vary- ing degrees across sectors. The effectiveness of measures taken by businesses to adapt to the lower-contact environment has also varied across sectors, leaving the remaining supply constraints highest in the high-con- tact sectors. Overall, the potential for medium-term scarring from the pandemic in an economy appears related to the interplay of four elements: (1) the future path of the pandemic and associated containment measures, (2) the heavier impact of the pandemic shock on high-contact sectors, (3) the capability of businesses and workers to adapt to a lower-contact working  environment and lower-contact transactions, and (4) the effectiveness of the policy response to limit economic damage. The chapter next examines the historical experience to get a better sense of the persistent effects of downturns (for typical recessions, financial crises, and pandemics), the channels  including propagation across sectors by which they occur, and how the COVID-19 crisis may or may not be different. Analysis of Historical Recessions This section first looks at the aftermath of previ- ous recessions, distinguishing between more typical downturns and those associated with financial crises and pandemics, to get a sense of how long lived their effects have tended to be and the supply-side channels 2020:Q1 2020:Q2 2020:Q3 Figure 2.4. Employment, by Sector Group (Total hours worked, cumulative percent change from 2019:Q4) Employment fell in many economies in the  rst half of 2020 and has recovered less in high-contact sectors. Sources: International Labour Organization; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Data are from 43 economies (27 AEs, 16 EMDEs) for 2019:Q4 20:Q3. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.  30  25  20  15  10  5 0 5 High-contact, affected High-contact, less-affected High-contact, less-affected Low-contact services Low-contact, other Low-contact services Low-contact, other High-contact, affected AEs EMDEs Figure 2.5. Impact on US Small Businesses (Percent of businesses) COVID-19 has affected small businesses in particular, with many more expecting to close or have a permanent decline in business. Sources: US Census Bureau, Small Business Pulse Survey, Phase 3 (Nov 9, 2020 Jan 10, 2021); and IMF staff calculations. Note: The sample includes approximately 885,000 businesses from the United States. A small business is de ned as a single location business with employment between 1 and 499. Low-contact, other Low-contact services High-contact, less-affected High-contact, affected 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Low-contact, other Low-contact services High-contact, less-affected High-contact, affected 1. Small Businesses Expecting to Close Permanently 2. Small Businesses Expecting Not to Return to Normal Level of Operations National average National average WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 48 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 (capital, labor, and productivity) through which they manifest. It then analyzes the sectoral dimension of recessions and their propagation, focusing on how the production structure of an economy can amplify and spread an initial, more-concentrated adverse shock. Prospects for Scarring from COVID-19 Are Substantial Permanent damage to an economy s supply potential following a  typical  recession can occur through a number of channels.9   First, unemployment may remain high even after the recession (Blanchard and Summers 1986) and could result in a smaller labor force as discouraged workers exit. Human capital accumulation and future earnings can be affected by skill deterioration during extended periods of unemployment, delayed labor market entry for young workers, and negative effects on educa- tional achievement in the longer term.10   Weak investment could result in slower physical capital accumulation and affect productivity through slower technology adoption.   Productivity could also be permanently affected by the loss of firm-specific know-how as a result of bankruptcies and their spillovers (Bernstein and others 2019), the effects of a decline in research and development and innovation during the recession, and an increase in resource misallocation (see, for example, Furceri and others 2021). Recoveries from past recessions point to persistent effects on output paths (Figure 2.6, panel 1).11 For typical recessions those that do not coincide with violent conflict, a financial crisis, pandemic, or natural disaster the depressed output path results  primarily from persistently weaker productivity, while the 9See Cerra, Fat s, and Saxena (2020) for a review of the related literature. 10Parental job losses can adversely affect children s schooling and future labor market outcomes (Oreopoulos, Page, and Stevens 2008; Stuart, forthcoming). In the short-term, however, reduced labor mar- ket opportunities during recessions can lead to higher educational attainment for high school- and college-aged students. 11The analysis uses unbalanced panel data for 115 countries from 1957 to 2019. Recessions are divided into those associated with financial crises, previous pandemics, natural disasters, conflicts, and other  typical  recessions. See Online Annex 2.2 (all annexes are available at www .imf .org/ en/ Publications/ WEO) for the local projection model specification. Permanent output loss follow- ing recessions has also been found in the literature (for example, Cerra and Saxena 2008; Ball 2014; and Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers 2015). employment rate declines somewhat in the short term before recovering.12 Previous epidemics and pandemics in the modern era have been followed by output losses of magnitudes larger than those following typical recessions, but smaller than those following financial crises ( Figure 2.6, panel 1).13 The COVID-19  pandemic, however, is even more widespread than past, modern era pandemics, 12Furceri and others (2021), which uses a measure of utilization-  adjusted productivity and focuses on deep recessions in advanced economies, also finds that these recessions lead to permanent losses in TFP because of an increase in resource misallocation across sectors. 13There are six of these in the sample: 1968 flu, SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, and Zika. Typical recession Financial crisis Past modern pandemic or epidemic Figure 2.6. Medium-Term Output Losses and Channels of Impact (Percentage points) For typical recessions, medium-term output losses can be attributed primarily to losses in TFP. For  nancial crisis recessions, TFP, capital-to-worker ratios, and employment losses all play a role. Sources: Penn World Table 10.0; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The solid lines represent the estimated cumulative impulse response functions and shaded areas represent 90 percent con dence intervals. Time since the shock (in years) on the x-axis. Past modern pandemics and epidemics include Hong Kong  u, SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, and Zika. See Online Annex 2.2 for details. TFP = total factor productivity.  10  8  6  4  2 0 2  10  8  6  4  2 0 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  14  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1. Real GDP per Capita 2. Total Factor Productivity  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 3. Capital Stock per Worker 4. Employment-Population Ratio CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 49 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 and more severe, suggesting a greater potential for damage.14 The absence of a  financial crisis following COVID 19 thus far is favorable, however; the greatest scarring has occurred following recessions associated with financial crises (Figure 2.6, panel 1), with perma- nent deteriorations in TFP, the capital-to-worker ratio, and per capita employment.15 Deep recessions, comparable to the 2020 episode, have had different recoveries across country groups. In advanced economies, deep but short-lived reces- sions are associated with V shaped recoveries and no permanent output loss after several years (Figure 2.7, panel 1). Emerging market and developing economies, however, experience protracted downturns and perma- nent losses, on average (Figure 2.7, panel 2).16 Scarring in the labor market may be larger with the COVID-19 shock than in past recessions, as some high-contact sectors may shrink permanently. More- over, widespread school closures have occurred across countries, with disproportionately adverse impacts on schooling in low-income countries and those less pre- pared to switch to virtual learning (Box 2.2). Greater scarring through the physical capital channel could also occur as a persistent shrinkage of high-contact sectors could also result in sector-specific capital being stranded17 and the large corporate debt buildup during 14The Spanish flu of 1918 20 was a global and severe pandemic, comparable to COVID-19 from an epidemiological perspective, but less so from an economic perspective because it broke out in the last year of World War I. US GDP, for example, grew by 9 percent in 1918, even as the pandemic killed an estimated 40 50 million peo- ple worldwide. See Barro, Urs a, and Weng (2020), which attempts to disentangle the effects of the flu and war deaths. Other recent studies of the economic effects of epidemics and pandemics include Jord , Singh, and Taylor (2020) and Ma, Rogers, and Zhou (2020). 15Larger output losses following financial crises have occurred in both advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies (Online Annex 2.2). Chapter 4 of the October 2009 WEO and Chapter 2 of the October 2018 WEO also document larger output losses following banking crises, stemming from lasting declines in capital per worker, TFP, and employment. Adler and oth- ers (2017) analyzes the widespread decline in TFP growth following the global financial crisis. 16Chapter 2 of the October 2012 WEO shows that economic performance in many emerging market and developing economies improved substantially over the preceding two decades, after rela- tively deep and protracted downturns in the 1970s and 1980s. The chapter finds that the improvement is due largely to greater policy space and improved policy frameworks, with inflation targeting and a countercyclical fiscal policy significantly increasing both the length of expansions and speed of recoveries after recessions. 17Chapter 3 of the April 2021 GFSR discusses the implication of structural shifts in the demand for commercial real estate properties after COVID-19. Vacancy rates in the retail segment could increase signifi- cantly, as demand for traditional brick-and-mortar retail erodes further. the crisis (see Chapter 2 of the April 2021 GFSR) could hamstring more-leveraged firms and weaken investment. Productivity-decreasing resource mismatches from the COVID-19 crisis, across sectors and occupations, may be larger than in previous crises, depending on how permanent the asymmetric losses are.18 COVID 19 related disruptions to upstream and downstream suppliers in the production network could also have knock-on effects, hurting productivity in connected firms. Productivity could also be negatively affected by a decline in competition, if the market power of large companies increases due to small busi- ness closures in high-contact sectors and even more 18Productivity could improve, however, if reallocation forces shift resources from unviable businesses in lower-productivity, high-contact sectors toward higher-productivity service sectors and industries. Bloom and others (2020) finds that, in the United Kingdom, this positive between-firm reallocation effect is likely to only partially offset the negative within-firm effects. The study esti- mates private sector TFP to be 5 percent lower at the end of 2020 than it would have been, and likely to remain 1 percent lower in the medium term. Low depth High depth Figure 2.7. Recovery Paths following Deep and Shallow Recessions (Percentage points) A larger bounce-back occurs after deeper recessions, but permanent real GDP losses still result in emerging market and developing economies. Sources: Penn World Table 10.0; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The solid lines represent the estimated cumulative impulse response functions; the shaded areas represent 90 percent con dence intervals. Time since the shock (in years) is on the x-axis. High- and low-depth recessions are split, based on the median per capita output loss. The  gure includes only recessions that last one year and does not include recessions related to  nancial crises, past modern pandemics and epidemics, disasters, or con icts. See Online Annex 2.2 for details.  14  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4  14  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1. Advanced Economies 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 50 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 broadly.19 At the same time, the pandemic has spurred increased digitalization and innovation in production and delivery  processes, likely helping to offset the adverse productivity shock in some countries, as others lack the prerequisite widespread and reliable connectiv- ity (Njoroge and Pazarbasioglu 2020). Taken together, these factors suggest that the prospects for scarring differ across countries, depending on their exposure to the COVID-19 shock. This is partly related to the specific produc- tion structure of the economy and how it transmits the COVID-19 shock, which are considered in the next subsection. Recessions Typically Feature Shock Amplification via Sectoral Spillovers Digging deeper into how shocks transmit, this section draws implications for the COVID-19 crisis on sectoral spillovers from the hard-hit, high-contact sectors. It highlights the importance of productiv- ity shocks in explaining both sectoral and aggregate outcomes through their persistence and amplifica- tion in supply chains, and illustrates an important channel through which productivity losses can lead to medium-term scarring as discussed in the pre- vious section. While the high-contact sectors, such as restau- rants and retail trade, are less central to production networks than, say, the energy sector or financial intermediation, and supply disruptions turned out to be shorter lived than initially feared, the analysis indicates large spillovers by historical standards due to the size of the COVID-19 disruption. These spill- overs considerably amplified the initial shocks to the locked-down sectors and may cause persistent aggre- gate output losses. Specifically, the analysis shows that losses are not limited to the high-contact sectors themselves but can be greatly amplified through pro- duction networks. The sector-level analysis measures the size and persistence of sectoral spillovers in the past and makes use of intercountry input-output tables to map links 19See Bernstein, Townsend, and Xu (2020), for example, which documents this  flight to safety  of consumers and job-seekers toward known brands and large companies in the US labor market. At the same time, new business formation in the United States reached a record high in the third quarter of 2020 (Brown 2020). across sectors.20 For each sector, the exercise estimates the effects of shocks in the same sector (own effect) and from other sectors (spillover effects) on the cumu- lative change in real gross value added.   Spillover sources. Shocks from other sectors are grouped into upstream and downstream, based on their origin: downstream effects are those stemming from shocks traveling downstream from suppliers to the focal sector of interest, while upstream effects are those traveling upstream from customers to the focal sector (Figure 2.8). For example, a productivity shock to the steel industry is likely to affect the downstream automotive industry, while a decrease in government purchases of cars will reverberate upstream to the steel industry. Upstream and downstream shocks are further divided into domestic and foreign sources. Overall, there are four types of shocks examined, based on their position in the production network: upstream domestic, upstream foreign, downstream domestic, and downstream foreign.   Supply and demand shocks. The transmission of two types of sector-level shocks is analyzed: a supply 20Online Annex 2.3 provides additional details on the empirical specification, which builds upon Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2016) and Acemoglu and others (2016). Figure 2.8. Own and Spillover Effects A stylized version of the production network for the automotive sector illustrates own, downstream, and upstream effects. Own effects result from shocks originated in the same sector. Downstream and upstream effects result from shocks originated in supplier and customer sectors, respectively. Source: IMF staff. Note: Solid, black arrows correspond to (net) trade  ows. Dashed, colored arrows correspond to shocks and their resultant effects on the focal sector (automotive). Downstream effects Automobile dealers Steel producers Electricity producers Car rental companies Upstream effects Own effect Automotive CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 51 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 shock, proxied by changes in sectoral TFP; and a demand shock, captured by changes in sectoral government spending.21 Spillover effects are large compared with the  own  effect for both types of shocks. For a productivity shock, total spillover effects are almost two times larger than the own effects, on average (Figure 2.9, panel 1).22 For the government spending shock, spillover effects are broadly the same size as for the supply shock, while own effects are smaller (Figure 2.9, panel 2). As a result, the relative size of the spillover effects, compared with the own effect, is about seven times larger for the government spending shock than for the productivity shock. Spillover effects are persistent for both types of shocks, remaining sizable up to five years after the shock hits, although even more so for productivity shocks.23 This means that the pandemic not only reduced activity in sectors directly exposed to the COVID-19 shock, but was ampli- fied through spillovers to connected sectors. This has important implications, in particular for countries where high-contact sectors are a large part of the total economy, as discussed in the following section and in Box 2.1. Productivity shocks also tend to have much larger estimated downstream effects, consistent with earlier literature, which also finds large downstream effects, as shocks to the productivity of suppliers leads to price changes that in turn affect quantities in the focal sector downstream (Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr 2016).24 Shock amplification through the sectoral structure of production including for negative shocks, as occurs in recessions can be substantial. The importance of negative sectoral productivity shocks to potential scarring is apparent from the next set of findings shown here. On 21For each sector, TFP changes are calculated as the change in real gross value added minus total hours worked, weighted by the sectoral labor share, and the real fixed capital stock, weighted by the capital share. Changes in sectoral government spending are calcu- lated as the share of country-level government spending directed to each sector according to input-output links. 22The standardization of the effects reported in Figure 2.9 implies that the total network effect is different from the sum of the four network effects. Online Annex 2.3 describes the methodology adopted to derive the total network effect. 23Total spillover effects from TFP shocks are statistically significant from horizons one to five years after the shock, while total spillover effects from government spending shocks remain statistically significant up to four years after the shock. See Online Annex Tables 2.3.1 and 2.3.2. 24The result of a dominant role for upstream effects in response to demand shocks found in previous studies focusing on domestic spill- overs in the United States is, however, not confirmed in the broader sample analyzed in this chapter. average, a sector does not recover from a typical adverse productivity shock in its own sector, with the sector s share of total gross value added remaining 5 percent lower up to five years after the shock (Figure 2.10, panel 1). Government spending shocks and shocks originating in other sectors, however, do not statistically significantly affect a sector s share in total gross value added, although there are signs that productivity shocks elsewhere may have longer-lived effects (Figure 2.10, Own Upstream, domestic Upstream, foreign Downstream, domestic Downstream, foreign Figure 2.9. Own and Spillover Effects from Sectoral Shocks (Cumulative change in GVA, percentage points) Supply (TFP) and demand (government spending) shocks have led to large and persistent spillovers in the past. Sources: World Input-Output Database; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Bars and dots represent the estimated coef cients of the cumulative impulse response function for sectoral GVA from a one-standard-deviation increase in each shock type. See Online Annex Tables 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 for the signi cance of each individual coef cient. Total spillover effects (encompassing all four network shocks) from TFP shocks (reported in Online Annex Table 2.3.1, panel B) are statistically signi cant at the 1 percent level at horizons 1 to 5; total spillover effects from government spending shocks (reported in Online Annex Table 2.3.2, panel B) are statistically signi cant at the 5 percent level at horizons 2 to 4. The sample covers up to 31 advanced and 12 emerging market economies over 1995 2014. Own effects result from shocks originated in the same sector. Downstream domestic/foreign and upstream domestic/foreign effects result from shocks originated in domestic/foreign supplier and customer sectors, respectively. See Online Annex 2.3 for further methodological details. GVA = gross value added; TFP = total factor productivity.  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 1. Own and Spillover Effects of a TFP Shock 2. Own and Spillover Effects of a Government Spending Shock WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 52 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 panels 1 and 2). The COVID-19 demand shocks are likely to have larger and more persistent effects than the typical past spending shock, however, as they may induce permanent shifts in consumer preferences. Taken together, these results illustrate the importance of sectoral exposure to the COVID-19 shock and spillovers based on economic structure in shaping medium-term losses. Sectoral Propagation in the COVID-19 Crisis To understand the importance of sectoral spillovers in the current crisis, a back-of-the envelope exercise is considered, which combines the historical coeffi- cients presented in the previous subsection, the sectoral changes to employment and productivity in 2020, and the pre-pandemic network structure from input-output tables. This exercise indicates that sectoral spillovers have also been significant in the current crisis ( Figure 2.11). Downstream effects from suppliers to final demand  are again dominant, which highlights the importance of supply shocks in this crisis and, in particular, of the productivity channel. Foreign spillovers appear to have a more limited role, consistent with recent studies of the transmission of the COVID-19 shock through global value chains (Bonadio and others 2020; Cerdeiro and Komaromi 2020).25 The  own effect  is larger for high-contact sectors while the relative importance of spillovers is larger for low-contact sectors (Figure 2.11). The absolute size of the spillovers in low-contact sectors remains relatively modest, however, as the contraction in gross value added is less severe (see Figure 2.1). Moreover, while still sizable, the relative size of sectoral spillovers compared with own effects in the COVID-19 crisis is smaller than historical spillovers from productiv- ity and government spending shocks. The difference 25Bonadio and others (2020) finds that one-quarter of the average real GDP downturn caused by the COVID-19 shock was due to transmission through global supply chains, while Cerdeiro and Komaromi (2020) shows that lockdowns in early 2020 resulted in strong but short-lived trade spillovers. Government spending TFP Sectors shrink permanently after a TFP shock originating in its own sector, on average. Neither government spending shocks nor network shocks have signi cant effects on sector size. Sources: World Input-Output Database; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The solid lines represent the estimated coef cients of the cumulative impulse response function for the sectoral share in GVA from a one-standard- deviation decrease in own shock (panel 1) and of total network shocks (panel 2). Shaded areas are 95 percent con dence intervals, with standard errors clustered at the country-sector level. Time since the shock (in years) on the x-axis. The sample covers up to 43 economies (31 advanced and 12 emerging market economies) over 1995 2014. See Online Annex 2.3 for further details. GVA = gross value added; TFP = total factor productivity.  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6  1 0 1 2 3 4 5  20  15  10  5 0 5 10  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 1. Recovery Path from Own Shock 2. Recovery Path from Total Network Shock Figure 2.10. Recovery from Negative Sectoral Shocks (Cumulative change of sectoral share in GVA, percentage points) Own Upstream, domestic Upstream, foreign Downstream, domestic Downstream, foreign Figure 2.11. Relative Own and Spillover Effects from the COVID-19 Shock (Percent contribution to the 2020 GVA decline) There were signi cant spillovers from the COVID-19 shock, relatively larger for low-contact sectors. Sources: World Input-Output Database; OECD Quarterly National Accounts; International Labour Organization; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The relative effects can be interpreted as those occurring in the aftermath of the initial shock in 2020. High-contact sectors are wholesale and retail trade, hotels and restaurants, entertainment and personal services, transportation, education, health care, and construction. Low-contact sectors are all the others. Effects are reported with the reverse sign. Sample covers up to 34 countries (24 advanced and 10 emerging markets) over 1995 2014. See Online Annex 2.3 for details. GVA = gross value added.  100  90  80  70  60  50  40  30  20  10 0 10 Average sector High-contact sectors Low-contact sectors CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 53 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 results from the current shock s concentration in sectors that are more peripheral to production net- works (predominantly services), unlike in previous downturn episodes. However, the magnitude of the COVID-19 shock, especially for countries with large sectoral exposure, means that the current crisis could still result in substantial scarring, as shown in the following section. Moreover, the longer the crisis continues and if the number of small business failures climbs the greater the likelihood the shock will spread widely across economies. From closed restaurants and bars, to farms and wineries shutting down, to lower demand for tractors and other agricultural equipment, damage to high-contact sectors will continue to spread to other sectors. Drawing on the transmission and scarring channels identified here, the next section discusses implications of the COVID-19 shock for the medium-term outlook, including the role of sectoral composition of economies. Implications for the Medium Term: How Persistent Are Output Damages from COVID-19 Likely to Be? A Unique Crisis with a Wide Range of Possible Medium-Term Outcomes As discussed in the previous section, the historical record suggests that most recessions leave persistent scars largely through lower productivity growth and (in the case of pandemic recessions and financial crises) slower capital accumulation. Moreover, adverse produc- tivity shocks concentrated in some sectors can propa- gate, spilling over to other sectors and contributing to a broader downturn. Because the sectoral propagation is different from the past with more peripheral sectors (high-contact sectors) worse affected this time the overall scarring for the (average) economy may therefore be less severe than in previous episodes, even if the effects for the hardest-hit sectors end up larger than in the past. Nevertheless, differences in sectoral composition across countries could bring about differences in the magnitude of medium-term output losses. In addition, the unprecedented policy response has helped preserve economic relationships, cushioned household income and firms  cash flow, and prevented amplification of the shock through the financial sector. These actions helped maintain a foundation from which activity has been able to recover quickly (Chapter 1). Moreover, large household savings accumulated during the pandemic (for instance, in advanced economies) point to the possible release of pent-up demand and boost to growth once the health crisis comes to an end and restrictions are durably lifted. These factors suggest that medium-term dam- ages following the extreme contraction of 2020 could be less severe than the depth of that collapse would suggest, based on past patterns. However, as noted in Chapter 1, there is high uncertainty around the outlook, over both the short and medium term. The extent of scarring also depends on fac- tors unique to a pandemic-driven downturn and inher- ently hard to predict: the path of the pandemic (whether transmission of new variants outpaces vaccinations and makes COVID-19 an endemic disease of as yet-unknown severity) and the scale of activity disruptions from restric- tions needed to lower transmission before vaccinations start to deliver society-wide protection. Other factors also remain uncertain, including the effectiveness of the evolving policy response; possible amplification through the financial system; and global spillover channels, such as portfolio flows and remittances. Expected Medium-Term Losses Are Sizable, but Typically Smaller than during the Global Financial Crisis Taking into account this uncertainty, the medium-term (five-year horizon) outlook in the current forecast envisions output losses, relative to pre-pandemic projections, of about 3 percent for the world economy (Figure 2.12). By comparison, the  lasting damages over a comparable period from the global financial crisis were larger, at almost 10 percent for the world as a whole.26 The smaller global losses currently expected from COVID-19, compared with the global financial crisis, reflect less severe impacts on advanced and, to a lesser extent, emerging market economies. In contrast, lower-income countries are expected to do worse, on average, than they did following the global financial crisis. These patterns are consistent with the baseline assumption of a sustained recovery from the current crisis in which financial stability risks remain contained, 26Figure 2.12 shows the expected medium-term output losses from COVID-19 and realized medium-term output losses following the global financial crisis. Forecasts for medium-term output losses one year into the global financial crisis show the same pattern. That is, expected medium-term output losses following the global financial crisis were considerably larger than is now expected for COVID-19, with larger losses expected in advanced and emerging market economies than in low-income countries. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 54 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 unlike what happened with the global financial crisis.27 Moreover, advanced economy losses are expected to be much lower than in emerging market and developing economies, likely reflecting their larger policy support and anticipated faster access to vaccines and therapies.28 Losses are expected to be largest among low-income countries, consistent with their more limited room to provide policy support. These differences in expected losses underscore the importance of universal vaccine access for both health and economic outcomes. 27The protracted period of financial stress in the global economy started with the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States in 2007 and continued through the euro area sovereign debt crisis, which peaked in 2012. 28The pandemic has exacerbated inequalities in both advanced and emerging market and developing economies, however. See Chapter 2 of the April 2021 Fiscal Monitor. Expected Scarring Varies with Economic Structure and Size of Policy Response A simple regression analysis of the correlates of news about expected medium-term output losses (as captured by forecast revisions) aligns with this story, suggesting that the average income level, the sectoral structure of the economy (its precrisis dependence on tourism and its precrisis services share), and the size of the fiscal policy response in 2020 help explain the variation across economies. The exercise exam- ines revisions to output forecasts across economies, focusing on the outer years of the forecast horizon (2022 24).29 The largest impacts of the crisis are on the most tourism-dependent economies, with a one-standard-  deviation increase in tourism and travel share of GDP associated with a 2.5 percent reduction in expected output in 2022 (Figure 2.13, panel 1). The exposure through tourism is expected to fade somewhat over time but remains close to 2 percent in 2024. Econo- mies with larger service sectors are also likely to expe- rience larger output losses, with a   percent reduction in expected output in 2022.30  Policy support also plays an important role. Countries with larger pandem- ic-related above-the-line fiscal measures are projected to experience smaller losses, all else equal (see also Chapter 1 of the April 2021  Fiscal Monitor). Uncertainty High and Dependent on the Pandemic Path The uncertainty surrounding these projections (and the extent to which incoming news affects views on the outlook) can be seen by examining changes in expec- tations of medium-term losses between the October 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO) and the current forecast (Figure 2.13, panel 2). Recent favorable news 29The regressions also include dummy variables for country income groups and regions. For ease of comparison of effects across explanatory variables, each regressor is standardized to mean-zero and a standard deviation of one. Importantly, the current severity of the pandemic affects the forecast revision in the near term but is not a significant explanatory factor further out in the forecast horizon once other variables (most notably, income classification) are considered. These results are robust to including additional variables that capture the severity of the pandemic, health care capacity, and the level of government debt. See Online Annex 2.4. 30The relationship between services share and output losses will depend on the composition of services, as low-contact services, such as information and communication, financial, and professional and busi- ness services, have been less affected (see Figure 2.1) by the pandemic. The results are robust to using a measure of the precrisis high-contact services share of the economy rather than the services share. Global  nancial crisis COVID-19 Scars from the COVID-19 pandemic recession are expected to be less than those from the global  nancial crisis, but with emerging market and developing economies hurt more than advanced economies on average.  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 World AEs EMDEs EMEs LICs Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Bars show the percent difference in real GDP four years after the crisis and anticipated GDP for the same period prior to the crisis for the indicated group. For the COVID-19 crisis, it compares the current WEO vintage forecast for 2024 versus that from the January 2020 vintage (prior to the pandemic). For the global  nancial crisis, it compares the April 2013 vintage for 2012 versus the October 2007 vintage (prior to the start of the US recession at the end of 2007). Economy weights are  xed using April 2013 vintage year 2007 for the global  nancial crisis, and the current vintage year 2019 for the COVID-19 crisis. Sample consists of 178 economies. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; EMEs = emerging market economies; LICs = low-income countries; WEO = World Economic Outlook. Figure 2.12. Medium-Term Output Losses (Percent difference from precrisis forecast) CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 55 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 with regard to vaccines and a stronger-than-expected second half of 2020 had a larger impact on advanced economy projections. The losses currently projected (blue lines) are notably smaller than those foreseen in the October 2020 WEO (red lines) for the advanced economy group, but broadly similar for the other income groups. It is important to remember that the assessment described here is based on the current under- standing of the path of the pandemic. As the changes from the October 2020 WEO demon- strate, the prospects for medium-term scarring and the associated medium-term forecast will evolve, based on incoming news about vaccines, new virus mutations, disruptions to activity, and the pol- icy response. Policies to Limit Persistent Damage Experience from past recessions underscores the importance of avoiding financial distress as the COVID-19 policy response evolves. To pre- vent scarring that could result from future financial instability, measures that support credit provision should be maintained while ensuring balance sheet resilience and adequate buffers (see Chapter 1 and the April 2021 GFSR). As vaccine coverage improves and supply con- straints ease, countries will need to tailor their pol- icy response to the different stages of the pandemic. Targeted fiscal support that addresses the disparate sectoral effects of the crisis may be most effective while supply constraints remain in place, whereas public investment can help boost both supply and demand as these constraints ease. Where fiscal space permits, policymakers should deploy a combined package of better-targeted support for affected households and firms and public investments aimed at the following:   Reversing setbacks to human capital accumulation and encouraging employment. Ensuring adequate resources for health care, early childhood develop- ment programs, and education will help mitigate long-term individual earnings losses and dam- ages to aggregate productivity (see Chapter 1 of the October 2020 WEO and Chapter 2 of the October 2020 Fiscal Monitor). Worker retraining and investment in digital literacy would broaden access to emerging job opportunities and avoid further economic divergence. Expanding social safety nets and support for displaced workers through what could be a long adjustment period will be key in addressing the rise in inequal- ity that is likely to result from the pandemic (see Chapter 3).   Supporting productivity. In addition to allow- ing for the exit of nonviable firms, active labor Latest vs. Jan. 2020 Oct. 2020 vs. Jan. 2020 Latest vs. Jan. 2020 Figure 2.13. Expected Medium-Term Output Losses: Explanatory Factors and Revisions (Percentage points) Economies more exposed to demand for tourism and services have been hit hardest, but pandemic-related  scal measures have mitigated losses. Medium-term losses are larger and more persistent in emerging market economies; prospects for advanced economies have improved in recent months.  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 2022 23 24 2022 23 24 2022 23 24 Above-the-line  scal measures Tourism Service sector  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 2022 23 24 2022 23 24 2022 23 24 AEs EMEs LICs Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators; World Travel and Tourism Council; and IMF staff calculations. Note: X-axis units are different forecast horizons. Above-the-line  scal measures refer to additional spending and forgone revenue in response to COVID-19. Both the tourism and service sectors are in share of GDP. Chart shows point estimate and two standard error ranges for coef cients of a cross-sectional, cross-country regression (unweighted) of forecast revisions on explanatory variables. Panel 2 shows the estimated coef cient on the economy group indicator. Explanatory variables are standardized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation. Units of the y-axis are therefore percent change in output per one-standard-deviation increase across countries. Regression speci cation also includes dummies for region and income group (not shown). Standard errors are clustered by region. AEs = advanced economies; EMEs = emerging market economies; LICs = low-income countries. 2. Revisions, by Income Groups 1. Policy Response and Economic Structure WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 56 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 market policies31 and other policies to facilitate resource reallocation such as structural reforms to improve labor mobility and reduce product market rigidities can help prevent persistent misalloca- tion. Policies to promote competition, innovation, and technology adoption would also lift produc- tivity growth.   Boosting investment. Public investment in infrastruc- ture, particularly a green infrastructure push, can help crowd-in private investment (see the October 2020 WEO and Chapter 2 of the April 2021 Fiscal Monitor). Corporate balance sheet repair would reduce debt overhang and promote investment (see Chapter 1 of the October 2020 WEO). Improved bankruptcy and debt restructuring mechanisms would help reallocate productive capital (see the April 2021 GFSR; and Bauer and others 2021). In countries with a larger share of high-contact, affected sectors, more reallocation will likely be needed. Here, lifeline policies for firms and employment pres- ervation that gradually unwind, coupled with policies to facilitate reallocation, will be particularly important. Supporting growth opportunities related to the acceler- ated shift to e-commerce and increasing digitalization of the economy will have positive spillovers and thus help transition away from shrinking sectors. Last, but not least, multilateral cooperation is critical to prevent further economic divergence, as discussed in Chapter 1. Conclusions Recoveries after past recessions suggest that prospects for scarring are considerable, particularly given the depth of the COVID-19 shock. Analysis of historical sector-level shocks shows that sectoral spillovers from both supply and demand shocks have been large and 31Active labor market policies, which help workers transition between jobs, include worker retraining, public employment services, public work schemes, wage subsidies to support job creation, and support for self-employment/micro-entrepreneurs. persistent. Sectoral productivity shocks, in particular, have persistent effects, leading to long-lasting declines, on average, in the sectors they have struck. Nonethe- less, this crisis is different from past recessions in many ways, and high uncertainty surrounds the outlook. Medium-term output losses following the pandemic are currently expected to be large but exhibit signifi- cant variation across economies and regions. Despite higher-than-usual growth as the global economy recovers from the COVID-19 shock, world output is still anticipated to be about 3 percent lower in 2024 than pre-pandemic projections suggested. These expected losses are lower than what was seen during the global financial crisis, consistent with the swift policy response that supported incomes and helped contain financial sector disruptions. However, emerg- ing market and developing economies, in particular, are expected to have deeper scars than advanced economies, partly reflecting their greater sectoral exposure to the pandemic shock and more muted policy response. The picture of divergent recoveries that is emerg- ing, with a larger likelihood and extent of scarring in many of the same countries that have limited fiscal space, suggests a challenging path ahead. Ensuring effective policy support until the recovery is firmly under way will help limit persistent damage. Avoiding financial distress as the COVID-19 policy response evolves is important, given that the greatest scarring in the past has occurred in recessions associated with financial crises. To maximize the use of limited fiscal space, policymakers should tailor their responses, targeting support to the most-affected sectors and firms. Policies that reverse the setback to human capital accumulation, boost job creation, and facil- itate worker reallocation will be key to addressing long-term GDP losses and the rise in inequality. Finally, multilateral cooperation on vaccines to ensure adequate production and timely universal distribu- tion will be crucial to prevent even worse scarring in developing economies. CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 57 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 The hotel and restaurant sector has suffered large employment and production losses from COVID-19. While international supply-side spillovers from the sector are smaller than from an average sector, the propagation to other sectors within the economy is important. The sector s recovery will depend crit- ically on how quickly the pandemic is contained, with larger scarring the longer it takes for demand to recover. Hotels and restaurants have been particularly hard hit by the COVID-19 crisis. In the United States, for exam- ple, employment in the sector fell by almost 40 percent from February to May 2020, compared with 13 percent overall. Data up to the third quarter of 2020 suggest that countries more reliant on the hotel and restaurant sector suffered considerably from the pandemic (Figure 2.1.1, panel 1), even where lockdowns were less stringent.1 This illustrates the importance of sectoral composition in determining the aggregate impact of COVID-19 as shocks to this and other high-contact sectors propagate to the rest of the economy. One important feature of this sector is that it is more connected to other sectors in the local economy than the median industry. Thus, spillovers to other sectors can be sizable.2 In the medium term, scarring in tourism-dependent economies is expected to be larger than in other coun- tries. GDP is estimated to be 2.2 percent below the pre COVID-19 trend by 2023 from just the shock to the hotel and restaurant sector itself (Figure 2.1.1, panel 2).3 The Pacific Islands are most affected by this The author of this box is Allan Dizioli. 1The size of the shock to the hotel and restaurant sector is inferred using disaggregated data from the United Kingdom, the value-added weights of different sectors in each country s GDP, and other aggregated sectoral data, taking differences in containment measures across countries into account. For countries where no recent disaggregated sectoral information is available, air traffic data are used. The average shock is 25 percent of the pre COVID-19 value added in the sector and is heterogenous across countries at less than 10 percent in Turkey and as high as 60 percent in Samoa. 2Using input-output data for about 170 countries. The data are from the Eora database, which is a set of global harmonized input-output matrices covering 26 sectors and final uses. See Len- zen and others (2013) for a detailed description of the database. 3Two complementary methods partial equilibrium and dynamic stochastic general equilibrium are used to estimate the amplification effects and country spillovers from COVID-19 and assess its possible long-term impacts. The first method, developed by Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2011), uses world input-output table links and assumes no substitutability between sources of inputs and no price changes. The second method uses the IMF s G20 Model, which is a general equilibrium model with substitutability between goods, but is less rich in modeling the sectoral links. Both approaches yield very similar results. shock, with GDP estimated to be about 3 percent below trend in 2023, of which 0.4 percentage point is estimated to be due to additional scarring from the shock. As other sectors were also affected in all econ- omies, the overall negative effect on medium-term output from COVID-19 is likely to be even larger. Spillovers to other sectors External demand Additional scarring Low Medium High Oxford stringency: Figure 2.1.1. COVID-19 Damage to the Hotel and Restaurant Sector 1. Size of the Hotel and Restaurant Sector and the COVID-19 Contraction 2. Output Remains below Pre COVID-19 Trend after Four Years with Additional Scarring (Percentage points) Sources: UNCTAD-Eora Global Value Chain database; and IMF staff calculations and estimates. Note: Shock to the economy is measured as the percent deviation from the pre COVID-19 World Economic Outlook forecast for 2020 GDP growth. The size of the hotel and restaurant sector is measured as its value added as a percentage of total value added. The Oxford stringency index records the strictness of  lockdown-style  policies that primarily restrict people s behavior. GVA = gross value added.  14  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 Shock to economy (percent of GDP) Size of hotel and restaurant sector (percent of total GVA)  5.0  4.5  4.0  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 United States Euro area Tourism-dependent Paci c Islands United States Euro area Tourism-dependent Paci c Islands 2023 2020 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 MLT CHN IND BRA ESP FRA IDN KOR AUT HRV NOR JPN EST Box 2.1. A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 58 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 School closures and other pandemic-related disruptions pose a serious risk to human capital accumulation across the world. Early evidence shows that education losses were larger in economies with preexisting gaps in infrastructure (such as access to electricity and internet), which con- strained their ability to effectively implement remote learn- ing programs. Remedial measures are essential to prevent the scarring effect on human capital stock, which would lead to further economic divergence. This calls for urgent policy action as well as international support for low- income countries and many emerging market economies with lim- ited infrastructure and inadequate educational funding. Global education losses due to the COVID-19 pan- demic pose significant challenges to human capital accu- mulation. School closures affected 1.6 billion students in 180 countries at the peak of the pandemic (World Bank 2020b). In 2020 countries reported an average of 49 missed days of instruction, equivalent to about one-quarter of an academic year.1 Education losses were more severe in low-income developing countries, where students missed an average of 69 days of instruction in 2020, compared with 46 days in emerging market economies and 15 days in advanced economies. Educa- tional disruptions will likely cause losses in learning and impair human capital accumulation.2 In addition, girls The authors of this box are Mariya Brussevich, Marina Conesa Martinez, and Futoshi Narita. This box is part of a research project on macroeconomic policy in low-income countries sup- ported by the United Kingdom s Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO). The views expressed here do not necessarily represent the views of the FCDO. 1We use the second wave of the Survey on National Education Responses to COVID-19 School Closures designed for Ministries of Education and conducted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations Children s Fund, and the World Bank between July and October 2020 (UNESCO, UNICEF, and the World Bank 2020). For each education level (pre-primary, primary, lower secondary, upper secondary), 80 economies (27 low-income developing countries, 41 emerging market economies, 12 advanced economies) answered this question:  How many days of instruction have been missed or projected to be missed (taking into account school breaks, and so on) for the academic year impacted by the COVID-19?  We use the average of missed days of instruction across education levels. 2 Missed days of instruction  are likely to exclude remote learning days. This conjecture is based on the comparison with an indicator of  school closing  under the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (Hale and others 2020). Learning losses are likely to be greater than suggested by missed days of instruction considering the potentially lower effectiveness of remote schooling than in-person schooling. See Chapter 2 of the April 2021 Fiscal Monitor for more discussion and estimates of learning losses using the data from the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker. and students from low-income households face dispro- portionately greater risk of learning losses.3 COVID-19 can exacerbate existing disparities in education across countries. Despite significant global con- vergence in primary school enrollment rates, average years of schooling among adults in low-income developing countries (five years) were less than half that in advanced economies (12 years) in 2018 (UNESCO Institute for Statistics).4 Furthermore, gender parity in enrollment across all education levels is yet to be achieved in many developing economies (World Bank 2018). Pandemic-induced disruptions in educational systems are especially large in countries with limited infrastruc- ture (Figure 2.2.1). The global shift to remote learning 3Refer to CGD (2020) for discussion on gender differences and to Agostinelli and others (2020), Azevedo and others (2020), and Engzell and others (2020) for discussion on household income differences. 4In 2008 the gap in primary school enrollment rates between advanced economies and low-income developing countries was closed (World Bank, World Development Indicators database). No Yes Figure 2.2.1. Where Are Education Losses Larger? (Average number of missed days of instruction) Sources: UNESCO-UNICEF-World Bank Survey on National Education Responses to COVID-19 School Closures; World Bank, World Development Indicators; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Each bar corresponds to the average number of missed days of instruction across countries with a given infrastructure characteristic. The differences are statistically signi cant at the 5 percent level. ICT = information and communication technology. 0 20 40 60 80 Teachers were provided with ICT tools during school closure Internet access above world average Electricity access above world average 68 40 65 33 58 25 Box 2.2. Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 59 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 has limited education losses, but its uptake and effec- tiveness have been uneven across countries. Education losses are 70 percent higher in economies ranking below the world average in access to electricity 90 percent of the population in 2018 compared with those above the world average. In economies where less than half of the population had internet access (world average in 2018), students missed 65 days of instruction double the average in the economies with higher connectivity rates. In addition, governments that did not provide information and communication technology tools or free connectivity to support teachers  transition to remote learning during the pandemic reported almost double the number of missed days compared with the governments that provided such support. Online platforms for remote learning are available only in three-quarters of low-income developing countries. Most of these countries resorted to radio and televi- sion for broadcasting educational content, but almost one-quarter of these countries reported that these tools were not effective for remote learning. Many economies risk significant education losses during the pandemic, with corresponding long-term income loss.5 These call for mitigating policy action. 5While the exact learning and associated income losses are not yet known, the estimates of long-term income drop per lost year of schooling span a range of 9 12 percent (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos 2018; Kattan and others 2021). Azevedo and others Although online learning is likely to play a larger role in the delivery of education in the future, infrastruc- ture gaps and inadequate educational funding in low-income countries and many emerging market economies can pose significant obstacles. To avoid further economic divergence, modernizing educa- tional systems, investing in necessary infrastructure, and ensuring equitable school funding are urgent. Remedial policies also include teacher training to alleviate education losses, financial support to accommodate schooling demands, adjustments to the length of the school year, and complementary tutor- ing programs for those severely affected during the closures (World Bank 2020a). The international com- munity should support such efforts with increased development assistance for education and digital infrastructure, which could be financed by multilat- eral development banks, nontraditional partnerships through philanthropic organizations and corporate social responsibility initiatives, or with resources freed up by the debt relief initiatives (World Bank 2020c). (2020) estimates the lifetime loss in labor earnings for the affected cohort at $10 trillion or 8 percent of global GDP in 2017  without remedial measures. Hanushek and Woessmann (2020) estimates that learning losses equivalent to a half academic year loss translate to 2.2 percent lower annual GDP for the remainder of the century. For the United States, Jang and Yum (2020) and Fernald and others (2021) show milder impacts of 0.25 percent and less than 0.1 percent, respectively. Box 2.2 (continued) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 60 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 References Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr. 2016.  Networks and the Macroeconomy: An Empirical Explora- tion.  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 30 (1): 273 335. Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price. 2016.  Import Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s.  Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1): S141 98. Adler, Gustavo, Romain A. Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kili   elik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2017.  Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.  IMF Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Agostinelli, Francesco, Matthias Doepke, Giuseppe Sorrenti, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2020.  When the Great Equalizer Shuts Down: Schools, Peers, and Parents in Pandemic Times.  NBER Working Paper 28264, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Azevedo, Jo o Pedro, Amer Hasan, Diana Goldemberg, Syedah Aroob Iqbal, and Koen Geven. 2020.  Simulating the Potential Impacts of COVID-19 School Closure on Schooling and Learning Outcomes: A Set of Global Estimates.  Policy Research Working Paper 9284, World Bank, Washington, DC. Ball, Lawrence. 2014.  Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Countries.  European Journal of Econom- ics and Economic Policies: Intervention 11 (2): 149 60. Baqaee, David R., and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020.  Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application to the COVID-19 Crisis.  NBER Working Paper 27281, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Baqaee, David R., and Emmanuel Farhi. 2021.  Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Application to the Covid-19 Crisis.  Unpublished. Barro, Robert J., Jos  F. Urs a, and Joanna Weng. 2020.  The Coronavirus and the Great Influenza Pandemic: Lessons from the  Spanish Flu  for the Coronavirus s Potential Effects on Mortality and Economic Activity.  NBER Working Paper 26866, National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, MA. Bauer, W. Andreas, R. Sean Craig, Jos  Garrido, Kenneth H. Kang, Kashiwase Kenichiro, Sung Jin Kim, Yan Liu, and Sohrab Rafiq. 2021.  Flattening the Insolvency Curve: Promoting Corporate Restructuring in Asia and the Pacific in the Post-C19 Recovery.  IMF Working Paper 2021/016, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov. 2020.  Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply Effects of COVID-19: A Real-Time Analysis.  Finance and Econom- ics Discussion Series 2020 049, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2011.  Vertical Linkages and the Collapse of Global Trade.  American Economic Review 101 (3): 308 12. Bernstein, Shai, Emanuel Colonnelli, Xavier Giroud, and Benjamin Iverson. 2019.  Bankruptcy Spillovers.  Journal of Financial Economics 133 (3): 608 33. Bernstein, Shai, Richard R. Townsend, and Ting Xu. 2020.  Flight to Safety: How Economic Downturns Affect Talent Flows to Startups.  NBER Working Paper 27907, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Blanchard, Olivier J., Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers. 2015.  Inflation and Activity Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications.  NBER Working Paper 21726, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1986.  Hysteresis and the European Unemployment Problem.  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1: 15 78. Bloom, Nicholas, Philip Bunn, Paul Mizen, Pawel Smietanka, and Gregory Thwaites. 2020.  The Impact of Covid-19 on Productivity.  NBER Working Paper 28233, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Bonadio, Barth l my, Zhen Huo, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. 2020.  Global Supply Chains in the Pandemic.  NBER Working Paper 27224, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Brinca, Pedro, Jo o B. Duarte, and Miguel Faria-e-Castro. 2020.  Measuring Sectoral Supply and Demand Shocks during COVID-19.  Covid Economics 20. London: CEPR Press. Brown, Jason P. 2020.  US Business Applications Surge in the Face of COVID-19.  Economic Bulletin (November): 1 4, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. https:// www  .kansascityfed .org/ en/ publications/ research/ eb/ articles/ 2020  /us -business -applications -surge -face -of -covid. Center for Global Development (CGD). 2020.  Gendered Impacts of COVID-19 School Closures: Insights from Front- line Organizations.  Washington, DC. Cerdeiro, Diego, and Andras Komaromi. 2020.  Supply Spill- overs during the Pandemic: Evidence from High-Frequency Shipping Data.  IMF Working Paper 2020/284, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Cerra, Valerie, Antonio Fat s, and Sweta C. Saxena. 2020.  Hysteresis and Business Cycles.  IMF Working Paper 2020/73, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta C. Saxena. 2008.  Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery.  American Economic Review 98 (1): 439 57. Crane, Leland D., Ryan A. Decker, Aaron Flaaen, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher Kurz. 2020.  Business Exit during the COVID-19 Pandemic: Non-Traditional Measures in Historical Context.  Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020 089, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC. del Rio-Chanona, R. Maria, Penny Mealy, Anton Pichler, Fran ois Lafond, and J. Doyne Farmer. 2020.  Supply and Demand Shocks in the COVID-19 Pandemic: An Industry and Occupation Perspective.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy 36 (Supplement): 94 137. CHAPTER 2 AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: PROSPECTS FOR MEDIUM-TERM ECONOMIC DAMAGE 61 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Engzell, Per, Arun Frey, and Mark Verhagen. 2020.  Learning Inequality during the COVID-19 Pandemic.  SocArXiv, October 29. doi: 10 .31235/ osf .io/ ve4z7. Fernald, John, Huiyu Li, and Mitchell Ochse. 2021.  Future Output Loss from COVID-Induced School Closures.  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 04, February 16. Fuchs-Sch ndeln, Nicola, Dirk Krueger, Alexander Ludwig, and Irina Popova. 2020.  The Long-Term Distributional and Wel- fare Effects of COVID-19 School Closures.  CEPR Discussion Paper 15227, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London. Furceri, Davide, Sinem Kilic Celik, Jo o Tovar Jalles, and Ksenia Koloskova. 2021.  Recessions and Total Factor Productiv- ity: Evidence from Sectoral Data.  Economic Modelling 94 (January): 130 38. Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iv n Werning. 2020.  Macroeconomic Implications of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?  NBER Working Paper 26918, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Hale, Thomas, Thomas Boby, Noam Angrist, Emily Cameron-Blake, Laura Hallas, Beatriz Kira, Saptarshi Majumdar, Anna Petherick, Toby Phillips, Helen Tatlow, and Samuel Webster. 2020.  Oxford COVID-19 Govern- ment Response Tracker.  Blavatnik School of Government. www .bsg .ox .ac .uk/ covidtracker. Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2020.  The Eco- nomic Impacts of Learning Losses.  OECD Education Work- ing Paper 225, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris. Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan. 2002.  Dissecting the Cycle: A Methodological Investigation.  Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (2): 365 81. Jang, Youngsoo, and Minchul Yum. 2020.  Aggregate and Inter- generational Implications of School Closures: A Quantitative Assessment.  Covid Economics 57: 46 93. Jord ,  scar. 2005.  Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.  American Economic Review 95 (1): 161 82. Jord ,  scar, Sanjay R. Singh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2020.  Longer-Run Economic Consequences of Pandemics.  NBER Working Paper 26934, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Kattan, Raja Bentaouet, Claudio E. Montenegro, and Harry A. Patrinos. 2021.  Realizing the Returns to Schooling: How COVID-19 and School Closures Are Threatening Women s Economic Future.  Blog, World Bank, February 9. https://  blogs .worldbank .org/ education/ realizing -returns -schooling  -how -covid -19 -and -school -closures -are -threatening -womens. Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2018.  Systemic Banking Crises Revisited.  IMF Working Paper 18/206, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Lenzen, Manfred, Daniel Moran, Keiichiro Kanemoto, and Arne Geschke. 2013.  Building EORA: A Global Multi-Region Input-Output Database at High Country and Sector Resolu- tion.  Economic Systems Research 25(1): 20 49. Li, Jie, Quanyun Song, Changyan Peng, and Yu Wu. 2020.  COVID-19 Pandemic and Household Liquidity Constraints: Evidence from Micro Data.  Emerging Markets Finance and Trade 56 (15): 3626 34. Ma, Chang, John H. Rogers, and Sili Zhou. 2020.  Global Economic and Financial Effects of 21st Century Pandemics and Epidemics.  Unpublished. Njoroge, Patrick, and Ceyla Pazarbasioglu. 2020.  Bridging the Digital Divide to Scale Up the COVID-19 Recovery.  IMF- Blog, International Monetary Fund, November 5. https://  blogs .imf .org/ 2020/ 11/ 05/ bridging -the -digital -divide -to -scale  -up -the -covid -19 -recovery. Novta, Natalija, and Evgenia Pugacheva. 2021.  The Macroeco- nomic Costs of Conflict.  Journal of Marcoeconomics 68. Oreopoulos, Philip, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2008.  The Intergenerational Effects of Worker Displace- ment.  Journal of Labor Economics 26 (3): 455 83. Psacharopoulos, George, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2018.  Returns to Investment in Education: A Decennial Review of the Global Literature.  Education Economics 26 (5): 445 58. Reinhart, Carmen, Ken Rogoff, Christoph Trebesch, and Vincent Reinhart. 2016.  Global Crisis Data.  Harvard Business School, Behavioral Finance and Financial Stability. https:// www .hbs .edu/ behavioral -finance -and -financial  -stability/ data/ Pages/ default .aspx. Shibata, Ippei. 2020.  The Distributional Impact of Recessions: The Global Financial Crisis and the Pandemic Recession.  IMF Working Paper 20/96, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Stuart, Bryan. Forthcoming.  The Long-Run Effects of Reces- sions on Education and Income.  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza- tion (UNESCO), United Nations International Children s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), and the World Bank. 2020. Survey on National Education Responses to COVID-19 School Closures, round 2. UNESCO, UNICEF, World Bank: Paris, New York, Washington, DC. World Bank. 2018. World Development Report 2018: Learning to Realize Education s Promise. Washington, DC. World Bank. 2020a.  The COVID-19 Pandemic: Shocks to Education and Policy Responses.  World Bank Report 148198, Washington, DC. World Bank. 2020b. The Human Capital Index 2020 Update: Human Capital in the Time of COVID-19. Washington, DC. World Bank. 2020c.  The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Education Financing.  Washington, DC. International Monetary Fund | April 2021 63 Despite remarkable adaptation and extraordinary policy support in many economies, economic turmoil and labor market dislocations from the COVID-19 pandemic shock continue, with highly unequal effects across workers. Youth and the lower-skilled are among the most heavily impacted, with sharp rises in unem- ployment rates, which already tend to be at higher levels. Some of these effects reflect the asymmetric, sectoral, and occupational nature of the COVID-19 shock, with less-skill-intensive sectors tending to be hit harder. The shock is also accelerating preexisting employment trends, hastening a shift away from sectors that are more vulnerable to automation. Worker reallocation across sectors and occupations is more likely after an unemployment spell, but it comes at a high cost, as average earnings fall for those who switch. Job retention policies those aimed at maintaining existing employment matches can help reduce job separations, particularly for the lower-skilled, while measures to support worker reallocation can boost job finding prospects. A new, model-based analysis shows how job retention policies are extremely powerful at reducing scarring and mitigating the unequal impacts of a pan- demic shock across workers, while reallocation policies supporting job creation can help ease the adjustment to the more permanent effects of the COVID-19 shock on the labor market. Retention measures are best while the shock is acute and social distancing high to preserve ultimately viable job matches, with support relying more on reallocation measures as the pandemic sub- sides. Careful monitoring of the intensity of the pan- demic (including cases and deaths, the extent of social distancing, and rollout of vaccines) is needed to gauge when the economy can cope with the reduction of job retention support and switch toward greater reliance on reallocation. The authors of this chapter are John Bluedorn (lead), Francesca Caselli, Wenjie Chen, Niels-Jakob Hansen, Jorge Mondragon, Ippei Shibata, and Marina M. Tavares, with support from Youyou Huang, Christopher Johns, and Cynthia Nyakeri. Yi Ji also provided data support. The chapter benefited from discussions with Tito Boeri and from comments by internal seminar participants and reviewers. Introduction Over a year since its onset, the COVID 19 pan- demic continues to generate widespread economic disruptions and worker dislocations. Even with the extraordinary policy support already deployed (out- lined in Chapter 1 of the April 2021 World Economic Outlook (WEO) and of the April 2021 Fiscal Monitor), average unemployment rates are up and labor force participation down compared with their pre-pandemic averages in both advanced and emerging market and developing economies, according to the latest data (Figures 3.1 and 3.2, panels 1 and 2). The employment impacts from the pandemic have been highly unequal across groups of workers (Figures 3.1 and 3.2, panels 3 8). In particular, youth and the lower-skilled have been hit harder in the average advanced and emerging market and developing economies, with larger rises in unemployment rates and declines in labor force participation. Women in emerging market and developing economies have seen a slightly higher rise in unemployment and larger drop in participation than men, on average, while in advanced economies there is little difference in average unem- ployment across genders.1 These movements in unem- ployment and labor force participation rates imply that average employment rates have declined across groups. In the near term, the consequences for these more vulnerable demographic groups are potentially dire, as they face earnings losses and difficult searches for job opportunities after unemployment spells. Even after the pandemic abates, some of the effects on the structure of employment may be persistent, with some sectors and occupations (job types) permanently shrinking and others growing.2 For these persistent effects, the speed 1Early in the crisis, studies indicated that women s employment was impacted more than men s in some advanced economies, unlike most previous downturns (Alon and others 2020). However, with some recovery as the year proceeded, the average differences have diminished. See Bluedorn and others (2021) for a more in-depth exploration of the phenomenon. 2Barrero, Bloom, and Davis (2020) focuses on the experience of the United States and argues that 32 percent to 42 percent of layoffs from the COVID-19 pandemic shock are likely to be permanent. RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 3 CHAPTER WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 64 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Prime Youth Men Women Higher-skilled Lower-skilled Prime Youth Men Women Higher-skilled Lower-skilled Figure 3.1. Labor Market Conditions in Advanced Economies (Percentage points) The COVID-19 pandemic has caused large worker dislocations in advanced economies, with highly unequal impacts across workers, on average, hitting youth and the lower-skilled harder. Sources: International Labour Organization; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note:  Change  is the average change in the indicated variable across countries in the group, calculated relative to its average value over 2018 19. Higher-skilled = tertiary education and above; Lower-skilled = above secondary and nontertiary education and below. Prime age = 25 to 54 years old; Youth = 15 to 24 years old. To account for sample coverage changes, the average within the group over time is calculated from the normalized time  xed effects from a regression of the indicated variable on country and time  xed effects (Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014). See Online Annex 3.1 for further details. 0 5 10 15 20 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 3. By Age Unemployment Rate Labor Force Participation Rate 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 4. By Age 0 2 4 6 8 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 5. By Gender 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 6. By Gender 0 2 4 6 8 10 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 7. By Skill 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  1.2  0.8  0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 8. By Skill 0 2 4 6 8 10 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) 1. Total 0 20 40 60 80 100  0.5  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1 0.0 2. Total Men Women Men Women Higher-skilled Lower-skilled Higher-skilled Lower-skilled Prime Youth Prime Youth Figure 3.2. Labor Market Conditions in Emerging Market and Developing Economies (Percentage points) The COVID-19 shock has led to sharp deteriorations in labor markets in emerging market and developing economies, hurting youth, women, and the lower-skilled worse, on average. Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) Average 2018 19 Change as of 2020 (right scale) 0 10 20 30 0 1 2 3 4 3. By Age 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  4  2 0 2 4. By Age 0 4 8 12 16 0 1 2 5. By Gender 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  3  2  1 0 1 6. By Gender 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 1 2 7. By Skill 0 20 40 60 80 100 120  3  2  1 0 1 2 8. By Skill 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 1 2 1. Total 0 20 40 60 80  4  3  2  1 0 2. Total Unemployment Rate Labor Force Participation Rate Sources: International Labour Organization; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note:  Change  is the average change in the indicated variable across countries in the group, calculated relative to its average value over 2018 19. Higher-skilled = tertiary education and above; Lower-skilled = above secondary and nontertiary education and below. Prime age = 25 to 54 years old; Youth = 15 to 24 years old. To account for sample coverage changes, the average within the group over time is calculated from the normalized time  xed effects from a regression of the indicated variable on country and time  xed effects (Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014). See Online Annex 3.1 for further details. CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 65 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 with which economies can reemploy and reallocate workers across sectors and occupations will determine how long lived the effects on employment are. With an eye to understanding the potential after- math of the COVID-19 shock, this chapter studies unemployment, labor market transitions (job findings, separations, and employment changes across sectors and occupations), and earnings over the business cycle and across demographic groups. It investigates how policies specifically those supporting job retention (preserving and maintaining existing employment matches) and worker reallocation (fostering new matches, assisting job search, and helping workers obtain useful new skills) can mitigate the damage done by the shock. Given that the ultimate effects of the pandemic on the economy s structure remain highly uncertain and may vary across countries, the chapter uses a newly developed labor market model to examine how policies and the shock s persistence inter- act. Drawing on empirical and model-based analyses, the chapter investigates the following key questions:   What is the sectoral character of the COVID 19 pandemic recession so far and how does it compare with past recessions?   How have labor market inflows and outflows across sectors behaved in recessions and recoveries? Do recessions tend to amplify sectoral employment trends (in vulnerability to automation)?   How do individual-level labor market outcomes (including sectoral and occupational employment transitions and associated earnings gains/losses) behave and differ across demographic groups (such as age, gender, and skill) and the business cycle?   How effective are labor market policies encourag- ing job retention versus worker reallocation against the adverse effects from asymmetric shocks across sectors and occupations? Does the persistence of the shock matter? Importantly, the chapter reflects on what the findings imply for the labor market during and after the COVID-19 pandemic recession and the role of policies. Due to data availability constraints, much of the historical empirical analysis is based on a sample of largely advanced economies over the past 30 years. As such, the patterns in labor markets identified and assessments of policy effectiveness and options may be less applicable to economies where large shares of employment are informal (as in some emerging market and developing economies). The main findings of the chapter are:   The COVID-19 pandemic shock is accelerating preex- isting employment trends with uneven impacts across demographic groups. The shock has hit sectors that are more vulnerable to automation harder. Around the world, youth and the lower-skilled are more heavily impacted, on average, partly reflecting differences in workforce composition across sectors. In emerging market and developing economies, women s unem- ployment has risen more than men s, on average, while in advanced economies there is not much difference.   The pandemic recession is likely to inflict sizable costs on unemployed workers, particularly the lower skilled. While it is not uncommon for workers to reallocate across sectors and occupations after spells of unemployment, such reallocation is costly. On average, workers finding reemployment in an occupation different from their previous job experience an average earnings penalty of about 15 percent, pointing to large costs both personal and social from reallocation via unem- ployment.3 Lower-skilled workers experience a triple whammy: they are more likely to be employed in sectors more negatively impacted by the pandemic; are more likely to become unemployed in downturns; and, those who are able to find a new job, are more likely to need to switch occupations and suffer an earnings fall.   Both retention and reallocation policies can help mitigate the impact on workers. The persistence and asymmetry of the pandemic shock are crucial for the choice between retention and reallocation. Job retention policies such as wage subsidies and short-term work schemes are effective in lowering separations, while worker reallocation policies such as hiring incentives, job search-and-matching assis- tance, and retraining programs boost job finding and on-the-job occupational switches by those still in employment. Historically, the lower-skilled have tended to benefit more from job retention policies, while worker reallocation policies have bolstered women s and youth s prospects more. o o For a transitory and asymmetric shock (such as a lockdown or sharp rise in social distancing affect- ing sectors differently), job retention policies are extremely powerful in reducing unemployment and providing near-term income insurance. 3See Helliwell and Huang (2014) and Reichert and Tauchmann (2017) for evidence on the large social costs of unemployment aris- ing from spillovers across individuals to the larger labor market and increasing perceptions of job insecurity. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 66 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 o o For a permanent shock (such as a permanent shift in demand across sectors or drop in productivity in some sectors), worker reallocation policies that foster job creation perform better in the long term and hasten adjustment toward the new equilibrium. o o Where the shock is a mix of transitory and per- manent components, a policy package that favors job retention while social distancing is pervasive, and then reallocation once it lifts, better mitigates unemployment dynamics. Taken together, the findings suggest that countries with fiscal space should maintain support for job retention until the pandemic abates markedly, helping to avoid socially costly unemployment spells and to dampen the effects on more disadvantaged worker groups. In particular, the findings suggest that the use of retention policies could be linked to the duration and intensity of the pandemic. Uncertainties about the pandemic and its path mean that the phaseout of such measures is more complicated in practice; it requires careful monitoring of the pandemic (including rollout of vaccines) and judgment of the economy s ability to weather a reduction in support. Although the model-based analysis is unable to take account of tight fiscal space constraints, the powerful effects of job retention policies in avoiding deeper and more pro- tracted employment deterioration from the pandemic suggest that such measures should be prioritized. Policies could also be designed to target more-  affected worker groups for example, increasing wage subsidies for youth or lower-skilled workers to discourage firms from letting these workers go and reduce the unequal impact of the shock. As a recovery gets under way, a more vigorous deployment of worker reallocation support can hasten labor market adjust- ment. However, it is important to be realistic about how quickly progress in reallocation particularly the long-term shifting of workers from occupations more- to less-vulnerable to automation can be achieved given skill mismatches. Human capital investments to help workers reskill for new occupations will take time.4 4See World Bank (2018, 2019) for how policymakers can adjust policies and improve education and lifetime learning systems to help workers adapt to the changing nature of work as technology advances. See also Edelberg and Shevlin (2021) for a discussion of how policies to boost workforce training may help ease the employ- ment recovery from the pandemic in the United States. There are some important caveats to the findings. First, country and time coverage vary across empirical exercises because of differences in data availability and are typically more representative of advanced econo- mies  experiences. Recent studies of emerging market and developing economies suggest that economies with larger shares of informal employment are suffering initially sharper declines in employment from the pan- demic, but that they may also be poised to experience faster labor market recoveries after the shock passes as informal jobs can be (re)created more quickly.5 The lack of channels to provide job retention support to informally employed workers may also mean that greater reliance on policies such as cash transfers may be needed to provide income insurance.6 Second, given that national policies and individual labor market outcomes may be affected by many different variables for which the analysis is unable to fully account, the estimated effects of national-level job retention and worker reallocation policies on individual-level labor market transition probabilities should be interpreted as associational rather than causal. Third, the model-based analysis should be considered illustrative, highlighting key considerations relevant to the choice between job retention and worker reallocation support. Uncer- tainties about the size and structure of permanent effects from the COVID-19 shock are large, and past recoveries may not be fully representative. Policy- makers may need to be nimble in their responses (see also Chapter 2). This chapter begins with a look at differences in the labor market impact of the COVID 19 pandemic recession across sectors; how past downturns compare; and the relationship between sectoral reallocation and the business cycle through the lens of worker flows, focusing on vulnerability to automation. It then turns to individual-level labor market transitions, earnings changes, and differences across demographic groups. It also estimates how these have varied across past busi- ness cycles and what these patterns may imply for the COVID-19 shock. The penultimate section presents empirical estimates of the associations of job retention 5For in-depth looks at specific emerging market and developing economies and how informality in employment may affect the impact of the COVID-19 shock, see Alfaro, Becerra, and Eslava (2020); Balde, Boly, and Avenyo (2020); Kesar and others (2020); and Levya and Urrutia (2020), among others. Historically, greater informality has been associated with a lower cyclical sensitivity of employment (Ahn and others 2019). 6See D ez and others (2020) for a discussion of delivery modalities for support to informal workers during the pandemic. CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 67 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 and worker reallocation policies with labor market transitions and the findings from a model-based analysis illustrating the effectiveness of these policies in responding to a lockdown or social-distancing shock. The chapter concludes with a summary of the main takeaways and policy implications. Sectoral Shocks, Trends in Reallocation, and the Business Cycle Reflecting the larger direct impact of the pandemic on more contact-intensive work and sectors, the COVID 19 shock has been highly asymmetric in its employment effects across sectors (Figure 3.3, panel 1; see also Chapter 2). The COVID-19 Shock s Impacts Differ across Sectors In advanced economies, the sharpest drops in employment were in the wholesale and retail trade, transportation, accommodation and food service, and arts and entertainment sectors, unlike during previous recessions over the past 50 years, when the manufacturing and construction sectors were typically the most negatively impacted (Figure 3.3, panel 2). Some sectors, such as information and communica- tion and finance and insurance, have even experienced employment growth during the pandemic, further highlighting divergent fortunes. Interestingly, the broad sectoral pattern is similar to that observed in previous recessions, which seem to accelerate preexist- ing structural trends hastening a shift in employment away from sectors more vulnerable to automation (Figure 3.3, panel 3).7 The Shock Hits Workers Unequally, with Youth and the Lower-Skilled More Affected Inequalities in the labor market impacts of the pandemic across demographic groups highlighted in the introduction may in part reflect these asym- metric sectoral impacts of the COVID 19 shock. 7Some recent studies have also classified jobs according to their  teleworkability  (for example, Dingel and Neiman 2020). Most teleworkable jobs are found in sectors that are classified as less vul- nerable to automation, meaning there is also a trend toward greater teleworkability in employment. However, there are some differences. Sectors that are less vulnerable to automation but not teleworkable include utilities and arts and entertainment, while sectors that are teleworkable but more vulnerable to automation include administra- tive services. See Online Annex 3.1 for a tabulation. More vulnerable to automation Less vulnerable to automation COVID-19 has hit sectors unevenly, with the most-impacted different than in past recessions, but still hastening an uptick in automation trends. Sources: Choi and others (2018); EU KLEMS; International Labour Organization; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; Statistics Canada; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; World KLEMS; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Sector groupings in panel 1 are slightly different from those in panels 2 and 3 due to reporting differences in the quarterly sectoral national data. Total economy indicates employment for the economy as a whole. Sectors are classi ed according to ISIC Revision 4. Sectors are classi ed as more (less) vulnerable to automation if more (less) than half their share of employment is in occupations classi ed as highly exposed to routinization (Carrillo-Tudela and others 2016). Underlying data for panel 1 cover 2019:Q1 2020:Q4 and for panels 2 and 3 span 1970 2019, as available. Patterns in average trend growth are similar over the shorter period, 2010 19. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details, including the list of abbreviations.  8  6  4  2 0 2 4  4  2 0 2 4 3. Average Trend Growth (Year-over-year percent change) 2. Average in Past Recessions (Year-over-year percent change)  6  4  2 0 2 4 1. Average in 2020 (Year-over-year percent change) Manuf. Constr. Mining Total economy Agri. Utilities Trade Transport Acc./Food Arts/Serv. Info./Com. Fin./Ins. Real Est. Pro. Serv. Public Ad. Educ. Health Manuf. Constr. Mining Total economy Agri. Utilities Trade Transport Acc./Food Arts/Serv. Info./Com. Fin./Ins. Real Est. Pro. Serv. Public Ad. Educ. Health Total economy Agri. Min./Ener. Manuf. Constr. Trade/Acc. Arts/Serv. Info./Com. Fin./Ins. Real Est. Pro. Serv. Edu./Heal. Figure 3.3. Sectoral Employment Growth and the Business Cycle WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 68 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 When split according to the proportion of these demo- graphic groups represented in a given sector, the latest high-frequency data on trends in online job postings suggest that sectors that tend to have more youth, women, or lower-skilled workers are likely to have underperformed more than other sectors (Figure 3.4). In other words, demographic differences in employ- ment across sectors and occupations such as a con- centration of workers from disadvantaged groups are likely contributing to differences in outcomes across groups in the current crisis.8 Past Recessions Suggest COVID-19 Shock Requires Worker Reallocation Based on past shocks, it seems likely that some of this uneven sectoral impact from the COVID 19 pan- demic shock reflects a longer-lived labor reallocation shock that is contributing to the unemployment rise. As seen in the behavior of gross worker flows, built up to the country level from microdata on workers, recessions are typically characterized by declines in gross hiring rates (hires into new or existing jobs as a share of employment) and rises in gross separations (job terminations, whether voluntary or involuntary, as a share of employment), consistent with a rise in unemployment during downturns (Figure 3.5).9 8See Cajner and others (2020) on how the sectoral nature of the COVID-19 shock may drive much of the disparity in effects across worker groups. Dam and others (2021) and Klein and Smith s (2021) early analysis of the COVID-19 pandemic s impact in the United States indicate that workers from ethnic minorities (African American and Hispanic) have been disproportionately hurt. Previous research has also pointed out the unequal effects of downturns, with historically more disadvantaged groups (youth and ethnic minorities, among others) more likely to experience protracted unemployment and income losses (Altonji and Blank 2004; Raaum and R ed 2006; Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz 2012; among others). Earlier work has also suggested that composition of employment across sectors and occupations, and hence unequal exposure to shocks, may account for some differences (Davis and von Wachter 2011; Peir , Belaire-Franch, and Gonzalo 2012; Albanesi and  ahin 2018). Beyond differences in the sectoral or occupational exposure to the shock, other features that could be associated with sector of employment and occupation may contribute to inequalities across worker groups (for example, the prevalence of temporary versus permanent employment contracts, strength of worker bargaining power). See Kikuchi, Kitao, and Mikoshiba (2020), which finds that more employment on tem- porary contracts may account for the large impact of the COVID-19 shock on women in Japan in the early phase of the pandemic. 9Recessions are years of negative real GDP growth. Recoveries are years after a recession when output remains below its previous histor- ical maximum. See Online Annex 3.1, available at www .imf .org/ en/  Publications/ WEO, for a description of the business cycle dating algorithm used to identify phases. Higher share of youth Lower share of youth Higher share of women Lower share of women Higher share of lower-skilled workers Lower share of lower-skilled workers Figure 3.4. Changes in Sectoral Online Job Posting Trends (Percent; gap in trend from a year ago, indexed to February 1, 2020) Sectoral workforce composition accounts for some of COVID-19 s unequal impact across groups of workers. Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; Indeed; Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Data are as of February 16, 2021. Higher (lower) demographic representation in employment by sector is de ned as whether the share of young or lower-skilled workers is above (below) the economy-wide average or whether the share of women employed is above (below) 50 percent in a sector. The sample includes a mix of advanced and emerging market economies. Vertical line = March 10, 2020 (Italy enters country-wide lockdown). See Online Annex 3.1 for further details, available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO. Feb. 2020 Apr. 20 Jun. 20 Aug. 20 Oct. 20 Dec. 20 Feb. 21 1. By Age  50  40  30  20  10 0 10 Feb. 2020 Apr. 20 Jun. 20 Aug. 20 Oct. 20 Dec. 20 Feb. 21 2. By Gender  50  40  30  20  10 0 10 Feb. 2020 Apr. 20 Jun. 20 Aug. 20 Oct. 20 Dec. 20 Feb. 21 3. By Skill Level  50  40  30  20  10 0 10 CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 69 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 The job-to-job hiring rate (hires from the employed as a share of employment) also tends to drop, suggesting that reallocation through job-to-job changes is inhib- ited during downturns. Within the job-to-job flows, about two-thirds of all flows are within the same sec- tor. All of these mechanisms are likely to be operating during the COVID 19 pandemic recession. Sectors More Vulnerable to Automation Are Harder Hit, Similar to Past Recessions Over time, employment has been shifting away from sectors that are more vulnerable to automation, and the share of employed workers with lower skills has fallen (Figure 3.6, panel 1). The shift reflects in part direct movement of workers from more vul- nerable to less vulnerable sectors, but more often it results from net hiring of workers from unemploy- ment and nonparticipation (Figure 3.6, panel 2). This suggests that sectoral reallocations often happen after a spell of nonemployment. Because reallocation tends to work more through joblessness, its social costs can be high, particularly during recessions when sectors that are more vulnerable to automation exhibit large outflows into unemployment, as is likely with the COVID-19 shock (Figure 3.6, panel 3). Indeed, as remarked above, employment in sectors that are more vulnerable to automation has declined more steeply during the COVID-19 pandemic, simi- larly to earlier recessions. Expansion Recession Recovery Figure 3.5. Labor Market Turnover across Business Cycles (Percent) Hiring falls and separations rise in recessions compared with expansions, reversing somewhat in recoveries. Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Hiring and separation rates and their components are calculated as annual hires/separations divided by average employment over the current and previous years. All rates are statistically signi cantly different, except those for job-to-job hiring rates for recession and recovery and those for separation rates for recovery and expansion. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details about the data and business cycle dating. 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 Gross hiring rate Gross separation rate Gross job-to-job hiring rate Other sector Unemployment Nonparticipation Total More lower-skilled More vulnerable to automation Figure 3.6. Sectoral Employment, by Vulnerability to Automation, Skill Level, and Business Cycle Employment trends favoring higher-skilled sectors that are less vulnerable to automation occur more as a result of joblessness spells than on-the-job sectoral changes, accelerating during recessions. Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Sectors are classi ed as more vulnerable to automation if more than half their share of employment is in occupations classi ed as highly exposed to routinization (Carrillo-Tudela and others 2016). Sectors are classi ed as more lower-skilled if the sectoral share of lower-skilled employment is greater than the economy-wide average. Net hiring rates are calculated as the difference between annual hires and separations, divided by the average employment over the current and previous year. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details. 1To account for sample coverage changes, the average share of employment in working-age population across selected economies over time is calculated according to the normalized time  xed effects from a regression of the indicated variable on country and time  xed effects (Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014). 50 60 70 80 90  1 0 1 2 3 4 5  4  2 0 2 4 6 More vulnerable sectors Less vulnerable sectors More vulnerable sectors Less vulnerable sectors  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 1990 2000 10 20 More vulnerable sectors Less vulnerable sectors 1. Average Employment Share1 (Percent) 2. Average Net Hiring Rates (Percentage points) 3. Average Net Hiring Rates in Recessions (Percentage points) 4. Average Net Hiring Rates in Recoveries (Percentage points) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 70 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 In sum, the COVID-19 pandemic shock has been highly asymmetric in its employment impacts across sectors and demographic groups. Moreover, if the past is any guide, these effects may have a long half-life and entail the need for some reallocation. In partic- ular, the shock is accelerating preexisting automation trends, leading more vulnerable sectors to shrink, and encouraging employment growth in expanding sectors. Differences in workforce composition across sectors imply that some worker groups particularly the lower-skilled face more tenuous job prospects. Labor Market Transitions, Inequality, and Recessions An alternative perspective to aggregate worker flows emerges from an examination of individual-level labor market transitions such as an unemployed person finding a job, an employed person losing or separating from a job, and sectoral and occupational changes in employment (either on the job or after an unemploy- ment spell) which allows for demographic differ- ences in prospects to be identified. As shown here, lower-skilled workers are likely to be particularly hurt by the COVID-19 pandemic recession. Job Finding Is Lower and Job Separation Higher in Recessions than in Expansions The probability of finding a job is lower in recessions and recoveries than in expansions, while the reverse is true for job separations (Figure 3.7, panel 1). The likelihood of switching the sector of employment while on the job also tends to follow the cycle rising in expansions and falling in recessions although the estimated difference across business cycle phases is not statistically significant.10 These average labor market transition likelihoods mask systematic differences across demographic groups. Using a linear probability model augmented with individual-level characteristics, the average effects of these characteristics on labor market transitions are estimated. The results suggest that finding a job is easier for young than prime-age workers while, on average, it is more difficult for women than men and the lower-skilled than the higher-skilled (Figure 3.7, panel 2). Losing a job tends to be more likely for the young or lower-skilled, 10The procyclicality of sectoral switches in employment is also found in the literature (Carrillo-Tudela, Hobijn, and Visschers 2014; Carrillo-  Tudela and Visschers 2014; and Carrillo-Tudela and others 2016). Expansion Recession Recovery Women Lower-skilled Youth Women Lower-skilled Youth Figure 3.7. Labor Market Transition Probabilities across Business Cycles and Demographic Groups Individual labor market transitions exhibit business cycle patterns similar to those of worker  ows, but there is signi cant variation in prospects across demographic groups, with youth and the lower-skilled at particular disadvantage in the labor market. Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Job  nding calculations comprise individuals who were unemployed in the previous year and are employed in the current year. Job separation calculations comprise individuals who were employed in the previous year and are unemployed in the current year. On-the-job sectoral switches comprise individuals who are employed in the previous and current years and changed their sector of occupation. The whiskers indicate the 95 percent con dence band. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details. 1Base group is prime-age and higher-skilled men. 0 10 20 30 40 Job  nding Job separation On-the-job sectoral switch 1. Average Probabilities across Business Cycles (Percent)  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 Job  nding Job separation On-the-job sectoral switch 2. Average Probabilities across Demographic Groups1 (Percentage point deviation from the base group)  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 Job  nding Job separation On-the-job sectoral switch 3. Average Probabilities across Demographic Groups in Recessions1 (Percentage point deviation from the base group in recessions) CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 71 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 while the separation likelihood for women appears about the same as that of men. At the same time, youth are also more likely than prime age individuals to change jobs across sectors while employed. Youth and the Lower-Skilled Were Also Most Affected in Past Recessions Zooming in on transitions during past recessions, systematic differences across groups are also evident (Figure 3.7, panel 3). Youth tend to be particularly disadvantaged in finding a job and more likely to lose one than prime-age workers in a downturn. Histori- cally, women have seen smaller drops in job finding and rises in separations than men during a recession. The story for the lower-skilled is more complex, with both a higher likelihood of finding a job than the higher-skilled, but also of losing it in a recession. How- ever, the separation effect likely dominates, leading the lower-skilled to be more prone to end up unemployed in a recession than the higher-skilled. On-the-job sec- toral switches in employment show no clear pattern. These findings suggest that past recessions showed many similar features to the current crisis, with youth and the lower-skilled particularly disadvantaged in the labor market. The earlier signs that women in advanced economies were also hurt more on average by the COVID-19 shock different from the typical patterns of previous recessions appear to be fading. Switches in Occupations Are More Frequent after Unemployment Spells and Inflict Earnings Penalties Beyond shifts in sectoral employment, labor market adjustment may also reflect workers changing not only jobs, but occupations.11 This dimension has become particularly relevant with the COVID 19 shock, given the premium placed on occupations that allow indi- viduals to work from home.12 However, occupational switches by workers and their associated earnings 11For the analysis here, these are classified into broad categories, such as managers, clerical support workers, craftspeople, and plant and machine operators, as per the International Standard Classifica- tion of Occupations 2008 major groups occupational classification. See Online Annex 3.1 for more details. 12For instance, Hensvik, Le Barbanchon, and Rathelot (2021) finds that job seekers tend to redirect their search toward less severely hit occupations, beyond what is predicted by the drop in vacancies during the COVID-19 pandemic. See also Shibata (forthcoming), which finds that more teleworkable jobs are more insulated from the business cycle, including the pandemic recession, in the United States. changes do not occur in a vacuum; they likely depend on a worker s employment history. Based on a panel data set of individuals from a sample of European economies, the probability of an occupational switch and earnings change reflect this dependence. Among those who are  on the job  (continuously employed over the past two years), occu- pational switch incidence is only about 10 percent; for a worker reemployed after a one-year unemployment spell ( via unemployment ), it is nearly five times higher, at almost 50 percent (Figure 3.8, panel 1).13 In other words, workers appear to generally prefer sticking with their current occupation, unless circumstances such as prolonged unemployment force them to switch. These worker preferences are also evident in the earnings changes associated with occupational switches when comparing those who switched with those who stayed in their original occupations (Figure 3.8, panel 2). Among the employed, those who switched occupations saw an average earnings gain of about 2 percent, suggesting that they changed occupations because it was advantageous. In contrast, among unem- ployed workers who successfully found new employ- ment, those who switched occupations saw an average earnings penalty of about 15 percent, indicating that they may have had to take a less desirable job.14 The state of the business cycle does not appear to significantly impact the occupational switch probabilities and the associated earnings changes.15 Even so, the fact that unemployment rises in a recession and that the inci- dence of occupational switches is larger after unemploy- ment spells, indicates that mechanically there are likely to be more occupational switches and more workers suffering earnings penalties on reemployment after reces- sions, including the COVID 19 pandemic recession. 13The probability of an occupational switch via nonparticipation is similar to the probability via unemployment. 14Although it is not possible to precisely compare the magnitudes of this measure in the literature because of differences in the sample of countries and level of disaggregation of occupation categories, these results are broadly in line with previous studies see Huckfeldt (2018) and Gertler, Huckfeldt, and Trigari (2020). The stylized facts are also consistent with theories of sequential bargaining in which a worker s bargaining position is affected by their recent employment history (see, for example, Postel-Vinay and Robin 2002; Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and Robin 2006; and Jarosch 2015). An earnings pen- alty with an occupational switch after an unemployment spell also arises in a model of selective hiring (Huckfeldt 2018). Furthermore, the earnings change is due mainly to changes in the hourly wage change and not changes in hours worked. 15The one exception is the earnings change associated with an on-the-job occupational switch, which is smaller during a recession. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 72 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 When comparing the incidence and earnings consequences of occupational switches across demo- graphic groups, some notable differences are apparent. Women are less likely than men to switch occupations, either while on the job or after a period of unemploy- ment. However, once women switch occupations, the associated earnings change (whether gain or penalty) tends to be larger than it is for men.16 Youth are much more likely than prime-age individuals to switch occupations, either on the job or via unemployment (although the difference via unemployment is not 16See Montenovo and others (2020) and Shibata (forthcoming) for related evidence on the distributional impacts of COVID-19 in the US labor market. statistically significant). Youth also see larger earnings gains from on-the-job occupational switches. Com- paring the lower-skilled to the higher-skilled, there are no statistically significant differences in occupational switch incidence nor their associated earnings changes, although there are some signs that the lower-skilled may experience a larger earnings penalty after an occu- pational switch via unemployment. These findings on occupational switches and their associated earnings changes across demographic groups do not differ much between expansion and recession periods. However, among lower-skilled workers able to find reemployment, the likelihood of switching occupations via unemployment increases during a recession.17 This is particularly worrisome in light of the COVID 19 pandemic recession, given that it sug- gests that the lower-skilled are likely being hit with a triple whammy: they are more likely to be employed in sectors more negatively impacted by the pandemic; are more likely to become unemployed in downturns; and those who find a new job are also more likely to have had to switch occupations and suffer an associated earnings penalty. Policy Responses to the COVID-19 Shock: Job Retention versus Worker Reallocation As the previous sections have shown, labor market transitions tend to track the business cycle, with the probabilities of job separation rising and job find- ing falling with adverse shocks, and youth and the lower-skilled tending to be hurt even more, on average. Can policies help mitigate these effects while also eas- ing any needed labor market adjustment? The COVID 19 pandemic has prompted extraor- dinary policy support in many countries, devoted largely to preserving employment relationships and providing workers with income insurance (often through expanded eligibility for and generosity of unemployment benefits; Figure 3.9).18 As the pandemic continues, discussion focuses more and 17It is important to emphasize that the results shown here on occupational switch probabilities and associated earnings changes for the lower-skilled already select for lower-skilled workers who found a job after a period of unemployment and exclude lower-skilled workers who could not find a job. 18See the IMF s COVID-19 Policy Tracker for details on specific measures. Importantly, any disincentives for reemployment from extensions to unemployment benefit schemes key insurance for those who have lost jobs appear to be markedly reduced during recessions (Schmieder, von Wachter, and Bender 2012). Women Lower-skilled Youth Figure 3.8. Occupational Switches Occupational switches after periods of unemployment are common but costly in earnings. Sources: EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Occupational switches on-the-job are calculated from individuals who are employed in the current and previous year and switched occupations. Occupational switches via unemployment are calculated from individuals who are employed in the current year and were unemployed last year and switched occupations (based on their occupation of record two years before when last employed). The whiskers indicate the 95 percent con dence band. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details. 1Base group is prime-age and higher-skilled men. 0 20 40 60 80 On-the-job Via unemployment On-the-job Via unemployment 1. Occupational Switch Probability (Percent, conditioned on the same labor market transition)  8  4 0 4 8 12 16 On-the-job Via unemployment On-the-job Via unemployment 3. Occupational Switch Probability1 (Percentage points, deviation from base group)  30  20  10 0 10 20 2. Earnings Change due to Occupational Switch (Percent, deviation of switchers from stayers)  40  20 0 20 40 60 80 4. Earnings Change due to Occupational Switch1 (Percentage points, deviation from base group) CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 73 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 more on the roles of two broad sets of policies and when to use them: those aimed at job retention (maintaining existing matches between workers and employers) and those aimed at worker reallocation (creating new jobs and facilitating workers  shift away from shrinking and toward growing sectors and occupations).19 To make some headway on this question, this section first provides an empirical assessment of the effects of country-level public spending in the broad areas of job retention and worker reallocation pol- icies on individual-level labor market transitions. However, recognizing that these estimates should be interpreted as associational rather than causal, and that the pandemic shock possesses features not seen in recent history, it then presents a newly developed search-and-matching model to study the choice 19Specifically, policy tools to encourage job retention include wage subsidies, short-term work schemes, and partial unemployment benefits, while those that foster worker reallocation include hiring and start-up incentives, job search-and-matching assistance, and retraining programs. between retention and reallocation policies in respond- ing to an adverse lockdown or social-distancing shock. The laboratory of the model enables key features of the pandemic shock such as its asymmetric impacts across occupations and policies to be considered. Empirical Estimates of Labor Market Policy Effectiveness Building on the analysis of individual-level labor market transitions, variables capturing spending as a share of average income per unemployed person on labor market policies aimed at job retention and worker reallocation are included in the linear proba- bility model. Although this model incorporates fixed effects (country and time) and macroeconomic controls (such as the output gap), omitted variables correlated with the labor market policy variables remain a con- cern, such that the results should be interpreted as associational rather than causal.20 Focusing only on relationships that were estimated to be statistically significant, job retention policies are found to lower job separation probabilities, on average, while worker reallocation policies raise the likelihood of job finding and on-the-job occupational switches, consistent with what many models of such policies suggest (Figure 3.10, panel 1).21 At the same time, retention policies also appear to be associated with a higher overall likelihood of on-the-job occupational switches and reallocation policies with a lower separa- tion probability, which are more puzzling. These results may reflect imperfect measurement of job retention and worker reallocation policies as aggregates of spending to improve labor market functioning. These include spending on training programs delivered either on the job in the case of retention, or outside of work where reallocation is the aim. To the extent that such programs increase a worker s productivity, they may also raise their value to their employers 20Although the fixed effects do effectively capture the average impacts of country-specific characteristics (such as the stringency of labor market regulations and the structure of labor market institutions) on the outcomes, the impacts of these characteristics on the effectiveness of the policy interventions explored here cannot be independently assessed. The policy effects shown represent the average policy effect. 21In a canonical Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides search-and-matching model of the labor market, layoff taxes (a kind of job retention policy) reduce job destruction while having an ambiguous effect on job creation (Pissarides 2000). In contrast, hiring subsidies (a kind of worker reallocation policy) in the model increase both job creation and job destruction. Figure 3.9. Public Spending on Retention and Reallocation Policies: Before COVID-19 and Response to COVID-19 (Percent of GDP) Average public spending to preserve employment after the COVID-19 shock is dramatically larger than job retention spending in the past. The rise in health sector spending alone is on par with average spending on reallocation in the past. Sources: IMF, COVID-19 Policy Tracker; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Bars show the average public spending on the indicated area as a share of GDP. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 Retention, pre COVID-19 Reallocation, pre COVID-19 Preserving employment, 2020 Health care sector increase, 2020 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 74 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 (reducing separations) as well as their interest in and capability of switching occupations while on the job. Retention and reallocation policies may also have different impacts across demographic groups, poten- tially reflecting demographic differences in employ- ment in sectors and occupations benefiting from these policies as well as direct targeting of specific groups.22 The empirical results suggest that job retention policies have tended to lower job separation probabilities more for the lower-skilled than the higher-skilled, while worker reallocation policies have tended to boost job finding chances for youth and women more than for prime-age individuals and men (Figure 3.10, panels 2 and 3). The results are consistent with a greater risk of layoff for the lower-skilled after an adverse shock and, thus, their greater benefit from retention policies. In the case of youth, the results may reflect a greater capability to benefit from reallocation spending related to training. Women s typically weaker labor force attachment may also translate into a greater sensitivity to reallocation policies that enhance job finding. Economic Policy Responses to a Pandemic: Model-Based Analysis of Job Retention and Worker Reallocation The preceding empirical analysis suggests that retention and reallocation policies can be effective tools to respond to the labor market deterioration caused by the COVID-19 pandemic recession. As remarked earlier, to address concerns that the empirical estimates are associational and better disentangle the effects of policies, this chapter also presents a newly-developed labor market search-and-matching model to study the roles of job retention versus worker reallocation poli- cies in responding to the COVID-19 shock.23 The model incorporates several features that are essential to a better understanding of labor market support measures at this juncture. There are two occu- pations in the economy, which differ in their contact intensity (and exposure to the pandemic shock). Work- ers in the two occupations differ in their productivities. Firms enter and exit freely in the model, paying a cost to post a vacancy (create a job). Firms also make different employment offers, depending on workers  22These estimated differential effects are likely better identified than those for the overall policy effects, given that they are adjusted for the impact of any omitted variables by country-year that could be confounded with labor market policies. 23The model calibration is partially informed by the empirical results. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details. Women Lower-skilled Youth Job retention Worker reallocation Figure 3.10. Effects of Job Retention and Worker Reallocation Policies Job retention and worker reallocation policies can help mitigate adverse shocks and improve labor market functioning. Sources: EU Labour Force Survey; EU Statistics on Income and Living Conditions; Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Panel 1 shows the percent change in the indicated transition probability (relative to its average value) associated with a 1-percentage-point increase in the indicated policy spending as a share of average income per unemployed person. Panels 2 and 3 show the percentage points of the indicated transition probability as deviations from the base group. Only estimated effects that are statistically signi cant at the 95 percent level are shown. See Online Annex 3.1 for further details, including for the speci c means of the labor market transition probabilities. occ. = occupational; sec. = sectoral. 1Base group is prime-age and higher-skilled men.  6  4  2 0 2 4 Job  nding Job separation On-the-job sec. switch On-the-job occ. switch Job  nding Job separation On-the-job sec. switch On-the-job occ. switch  2  1 0 1 2 3 4  12  8  4 0 4 8 12 16 20 Job  nding Job separation On-the-job occ. switch 2. Differential Effects of Job Retention Policies across Demographic Groups1 (Percentage points) 3. Differential Effects of Job Reallocation Policies across Demographic Groups1 (Percentage points) 1. Overall Effects of Policies on Labor Market Transition Probabilities (Percent) CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 75 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 productivity.24 As in the empirical results, workers in the model who switch occupations while on the job experience a modest earnings gain, whereas workers who switch after an unemployment spell see a marked drop in earnings. An unemployment benefit system operates in the background, offering some insurance to unemployed workers. The COVID-19 shock is modeled as an adverse  lockdown  shock associated with an increase in social distancing that hurts one of the two occupations more than the other. The shock is set to replicate the initial increase in unemployment observed in the United States and is presumed to last for four periods (quarters). Given uncertainties about the persistence of the shock, two cases are considered: (1) a transitory shock, where productivities return to their initial levels after the shock abates; and (2) a more likely hybrid shock, which is largely transitory but with some per- manent component (specifically, half of the shock to the more-impacted occupation is permanent). Three policy scenarios are considered and compared against a no-policy intervention benchmark: (1) job retention support, in which the government provides transfer payments to firms to support a portion of their wage bill when the match between a firm and worker becomes unprofitable; (2) worker reallocation support, in which the government offers a subsidy to firms to reduce their vacancy cost and stimulate job creation; and (3) a package, which first provides job retention support and then worker reallocation support.25 In the first two scenarios, support is coincident with the transitory component of the shock (for four quarters), while in the package, worker reallocation support is offered after the transitory component has passed but the permanent effects are still unfolding. To get a sense of what the persistence of the lock- down shock means for the economy, consider the no-policy intervention benchmarks under the transi- tory and hybrid shocks (Figure 3.11, panels 1 and 2). When the shock hits the economy, it reduces the out- put produced by firms and workers, making some job matches unprofitable and leading to job losses and a sharp rise in unemployment. Given that a firm s profit- ability increases with worker productivity, lower-skilled 24Wages are fixed for the duration of the job match once the firm and the worker agree. 25Government transfers for job retention have an upper limit calibrated to replicate public expenditure on job retention policies observed in the data. Policies are financed using public debt in the short term, which the government pays back over time. Unemployment rate Less-impacted occ. (right scale) More-impacted occ. (right scale) Retention Reallocation Package Transitory shock Hybrid shock Transitory shock Hybrid shock Retention Reallocation Package Figure 3.11. Model Simulations with Lockdown Shocks and Labor Market Policies The unemployment rise is larger for the same-size lockdown shock when part of the shock is permanent. Retention policies are powerful in reducing unemployment over the short term, while reallocation policies work better over the long term and after a permanent shock. Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The x-axis indicates the number of quarters after the shock starts. Package comprises a sequence of retention and reallocation policies. Panels 3 and 4 show responses to the hybrid shock. See Online Annex 3.1 for the de nition of different shocks and policy measures. occ. = occupation.  6  4  2 0 2 0 4 8 12 16  40  20 0 20 40 60 0 4 8 12 16  6  3 0 3 0 4 8 12 0 10 20 30 20 30 40 50 60 70 0 3 6 9 12 0 10 20 30 20 30 40 50 60 70 0 3 6 9 12  0.6  0.3 0.0 0.3 0 4 8 12 Effect and Cost of Labor Market Policies during Different Shocks (Deviation from no-policy scenario) 1. Transitory Shock (Percent) Unemployment Rate and Distribution of Workers, by Occupation (No-policy scenario) 2. Hybrid Shock (Percent) 3. Unemployment Rate (Percentage points) 4. De cit (Percent) 5. Unemployment Rate under Retention (Percentage points) 6. Unemployment Rate under Reallocation (Percentage points) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 76 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 workers are particularly affected and account for a large share of the drop in employment from the more-impacted occupation. In contrast, despite the adverse shock, employment in the less-impacted occu- pation is essentially unchanged because some workers opt to switch occupations. Comparing the two shocks, it is clear that the unemployment path is worse with the hybrid shock, even though the initial size of the shock is the same as in the transitory shock case. This happens because firms anticipate that matches on the more-impacted occupation will become less profitable in the future as a result of the shock s permanent effects and, so, they go ahead and lay off workers. Over the long term, employment in the more-impacted occupation never fully recovers, unlike in the transitory shock case. Focusing on the hybrid shock case, policy support through job retention measures is the most effective option for tamping down the rise in unemploy- ment over the near term from the lockdown shock (Figure 3.11, panel 3). Note that the unemployment rate rises across all of the policy scenarios, but it rises less with policy support: about 4  percentage points less with job retention measures and about   percent- age point less with worker reallocation measures. As the economy recovers over the longer term, worker reallocation support has a slight advantage over job retention measures in reducing unemployment by easing the adjustment to the permanent component of the shock. The policy package, which sequences job retention measures during the lockdown shock and then worker reallocation measures afterward to help address the permanent effects, provides the best of both worlds a lower near-term unemployment rise and a faster decline in unemployment compared with the no-policy benchmark. Moreover, by stemming the rise in unemployment, job retention measures could actually reduce the increase in government deficits compared with the no-policy scenario, largely through savings from lower unemployment benefit payouts (Figure 3.11, panel 4). In contrast, worker reallocation measures lead defi- cits to increase further because they incur some costs with the creation of new jobs and are not as effective at stemming the increase in unemployment. The policy package generates a more volatile deficit path, as spending on worker reallocation measures ramps up after the lockdown is lifted. However, it also does better over the longer term, given that the improve- ment in unemployment from enhanced reallocation ends up lowering spending more than in the other scenarios (by enabling reductions in spending on unemployment benefits). The effectiveness of the labor market measures varies with the persistence of the shock (Figure 3.11, panels 5 and 6). Job retention measures show very little difference between the transitory and hybrid shocks, once the initial lockdown passes. In contrast, worker reallocation measures are more effective than the no-policy benchmark in reducing unemployment durably in response to the hybrid shock. Intuitively, worker reallocation measures are more helpful the more permanent the shock. The choice of policy responses can also have distri- butional consequences for incomes. Job retention sup- port is the most powerful in reducing inequality over the short term, compared with a no-policy benchmark in which inequality rises sharply (Figure 3.12, panel 1). Retention policies work to reduce the inequality impact because they preserve job matches and prevent workers from falling into unemployment, which can be costly and have long-lasting impacts (as the empirical analysis indicates). Focusing on the poorest workers in the bottom quintile of the initial income distribution, it is clear that they benefit most from job retention support, particularly over the short term (Figure 3.12, panel 2). The policy package even does a bit better for them over the medium term, given that unemployment comes down faster when reallocation support is deployed to ameliorate the permanent component of the shock. The model results also indicate that higher-skilled workers are less impacted by the shock initially and see their prospects as a group recover faster. Because they are also more likely to find productive job matches, they tend to benefit more from worker reallocation measures (which generate more new jobs) than from job retention measures. The overall picture from the model results indicates that the better response to the COVID-19 pandemic recession would be a policy package that combines retention and reallocation measures to respond to the mix of transitory and permanent components. The illustrative package shown here uses retention measures to dampen the rise in unemployment during the acute pandemic or lockdown phase, followed by reallocation measures during the recovery to facilitate workers  shift toward less-impacted sectors through faster job creation. The model results suggest that the use of retention policies should be linked to the duration and intensity CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 77 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 of the transitory shock. In practice though, uncertain- ties about the pandemic shock mean that the phaseout of such measures is likely to be more complex and may need to balance fiscal space considerations alongside impacts on output and employment dynamics. Careful monitoring of COVID-19 cases and deaths, the extent of social distancing, and other key measures of the intensity of the pandemic (including the rollout of vac- cines) will be required to gauge whether the economy can withstand the step-down in job retention policies and a switch in emphasis toward easing reallocation. Conclusions The COVID 19 pandemic and its consequences continue to unfold, with profound effects already visible in labor markets around the world, despite extraordinary policy support. The shock has been highly asymmetric in its effects across sectors and occupations, contributing to inequality across work- ers. Large uncertainties about the ultimate persistence of the shock and the potential need for structural transformation in its wake remain. Against this back- drop, this chapter attempts to shed light on the labor market effects of the COVID 19 pandemic recession so far, how it compares with past downturns, and how policies particularly job retention and worker reallocation measures may improve unemployment dynamics after such an adverse and asymmetric shock. There are signs that the COVID-19 shock is accelerating preexisting trends, with employment shifting away from sectors and occupations that are more vulnerable to automation. These broad effects were also visible in movements in worker flows during past recessions, although the specific sectors that are most hurt such as wholesale and retail trade and accommodation and food differ with the pandemic shock. Around the world, youth and the lower-skilled have been more heavily affected, on average, a pat- tern also evident in past downturns. Women s unem- ployment has risen more than men s, on average, in emerging market and developing economies. These unequal effects across demographic groups appear in part to reflect differences in workforce composition across sectors. Historically, sectoral labor reallocation picks up during recessions, which seems to be the case for the COVID-19 pandemic recession. Moreover, worker reallocation across sectors tends to occur more from hiring out of joblessness than from job-to-job hires. Relatedly, at the individual level, a worker s likelihood of switching occupations is greater after an unem- ployment spell than it is while they are still employed. But occupational switches via unemployment are costly, with workers typically incurring a large earn- ings penalty compared with similar workers who find reemployment without having to change occupations. Together, these point to the potential for large and uneven losses across workers from the COVID-19 shock with youth and the lower-skilled hurt most  and a tough climb back as the economy recovers. Measures that support job retention can be pow- erful tools to mitigate the damage from an adverse labor market shock such as the COVID-19 pandemic, according to the model-based analysis. The deploy- ment of such measures while the shock is ongoing has been essential in keeping unemployment from rising even further and helping shield more-affected groups of workers, such as the lower-skilled. Examples of Retention Reallocation Package Retention Reallocation Package Retention policies lower inequality in the short term, while reallocation policies lower inequality in the long term. Lower-skilled workers bene t more from retention policies in the short term while reallocation helps more in the long term. Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The x-axis indicates the number of quarters after the hybrid shock starts. Package comprises a sequence of retention and reallocation policies. See Online Annex 3.1 for the de nition of different shocks and policy measures.  30  20  10 0 10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2. Income Share of Bottom 20 Percent (Percent deviation from initial steady state)  0.9  0.6  0.3 0.0 0.3 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 1. Income Inequality (Gini point deviation from no-policy scenario) Figure 3.12. Impact of Policies on Income Inequality WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 78 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 such measures include the extensive activations of the Kurzarbeit scheme in Germany and the Expediente de Regulaci n Temporal de Empleo program in Spain, revisions to increase eligibility for wage subsidies provided through the Cassa Integrazione Guadagni program in Italy, and the more limited wage subsidy program through the US Paycheck Protection Program and the Employee Retention Tax Credit.26 In general, job retention policies are the best option to address the temporary (but sometimes lengthy) disruption caused by an adverse pandemic shock, helping to maintain job matches and prevent sharper rises in unemploy- ment while the shock is occurring. Worker reallocation policies that boost job creation can then help ease the labor market adjustment to the permanent changes in the economy s structure wrought by the pandemic shock, particularly after the shock passes and the econ- omy enters a more normal recovery. Looking ahead, although there are many uncertain- ties, it seems likely the COVID-19 shock will have some permanent effects, hastening a move away from employment that is more vulnerable to automation and less teleworkable. In this case, a policy package, with strong use of job retention measures during the shock and then support for worker reallocation measures when it lifts, performs better than either job retention or worker reallocation measures alone. The disproportionate, negative impact on lower-skilled workers is also reduced with the policy package: retention support helps to preserve more marginal but ultimately viable job matches, while the reallo- cation support after the acute pandemic shock helps the unemployed find new jobs more quickly over the medium term. Other policy support measures may also be considered. For example, although not incor- porated into the model used here, (re)training and more general human capital investments that boost worker productivity could be deployed. These have the potential to make existing job matches more profit- able (and hence more resilient) and also help workers become more able to switch occupations. However, as with most investments, these may take time for their 26See OECD (2020) for further details on these and other job- retention policies implemented across countries to respond to the COVID-19 shock. Program design specifics can differ markedly across countries, depending on their country-specific circumstances and previous experience with such policies. Countries with preex- isting short-term work schemes (such as Germany, Italy, and Spain) have expanded eligibility, while those without broad availability of such measures have had to resort to more ad hoc approaches to provide support (for example, the United States). returns to manifest; they are not suited to dealing with the near-term fallout from a negative shock. Beyond the broad contours for the policy choice presented in this chapter, specific design elements of job retention and worker reallocation policies and their interaction with country specific characteristics can matter for their effectiveness.27 For example, the literature suggests that job retention measures, such as wage subsidies and short-term work schemes, can be highly successful in safeguarding employment but must take into account country-specific circumstances and be calibrated to the nature of the shock.28 Similarly, the success of (re)training programs depends heavily on the specific content and program delivery details.29 Finally, there is an opportunity to broaden the response to the COVID-19 pandemic to structurally improve the economy s resilience and growth prospects. For example, reallocation measures could be designed to favor the creation of more green jobs, helping to tackle climate change challenges (see Chapter 3 of the October 2020 WEO for a discussion of some options). In parallel, greater support for workers to successfully acquire the skills needed for these jobs will be essential, including through revamping educational systems and improving learning opportunities more generally.30 27Among others, see Kluve (2010) and Card, Kluve, and Weber (2018) for summaries of the evidence gleaned from program eval- uations for various labor market policies, including wage subsidies, shared work schemes, and training programs, and how they may differ in their effects across different demographic groups. In some cases, policies have been designed to boost employment opportuni- ties for disadvantaged demographic groups. For example, see Ahn and others (2019) for an overview of policies that can be targeted to improve youth s labor market prospects. There has been much more limited experience with sector-specific targeting in the design of labor market policies (OECD 2018). In general, policy support provided to more adversely impacted firms and workers will in effect end up funneled toward firms and workers in more-affected sectors without explicit sectoral targeting. Moreover, sectoral targeting independent of individual firm or worker circumstances raises risks of misalloca- tion, given that less-impacted firms and workers within a recipient sector could receive resources. See OECD (2018) for a fuller discus- sion of considerations in designing more targeted policy support. 28Regarding job retention policies, Boeri and Bruecker (2011) credits European short-term work schemes activated during the Great Recession with helping prevent job losses, but they note that these schemes tend to be most useful in countries with strict employ- ment protections and/or centralized bargaining, which can otherwise limit wage and hours flexibility. In the current context, Basso and others (2020) advocates that these schemes should transform as much as possible into wage insurance schemes, which would allow for worker-initiated job changes, while also providing incentives to maintain existing job matches. 29See Kluve and Schmidt (2002), among others. 30See World Bank (2018, 2019) for a discussion of such options. CHAPTER 3 RECESSIONS AND RECOVERIES IN LABOR MARKETS: PATTERNS, POLICIES, AND RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 SHOCK 79 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 References Ahn, JaeBin, Zidong An, John Bluedorn, Gabriele Ciminelli, Zsoka Koczan, Davide Malacrino, Daniela Muhaj, and Patricia Neidlinger. 2019.  Work in Progress: Improving Youth Labor Market Outcomes in Emerging Market and Developing Economies.  IMF Staff Discussion Note 19/02, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Albanesi, Stefania, and Ay eg l  ahin. 2018.  The Gender Unem- ployment Gap.  Review of Economic Dynamics 30: 47 67. Alfaro, Laura, Oscar Becerra, and Marcela Eslava. 2020.  EMEs and COVID-19: Shutting Down in a World of Informal and Tiny Firms.  NBER Working Paper 27360, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Alon, Titan, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Mich le Tertilt. 2020.  The Impact of COVID-19 on Gender Equality.  NBER Working Paper 26947, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Altonji, Joseph, and Rebecca Blank. 2004.  Race and Gender in the Labor Market.  In Handbook of Labor Economics 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 3143 259. North Holland: Elsevier. Balde, Racky, Mohamed Boly, and Elvis Avenyo. 2020.  Labour Market Effects of COVID-19 in Sub-Saharan Africa: An Informality Lens from Burkina Faso, Mali, and Senegal.  MERIT Working Paper 2020 022, United Nations University Maastricht Economic and Social Research Institute on Innovation and Technology. Barrero, Jose Maria, Nick Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2020.  COVID-19 Is Also a Reallocation Shock.  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity conference draft, June 25. Basso, Gaetano, Tito Boeri, Alessandro Caiumi, and Marco Paccagnella. 2020.  The New Hazardous Jobs and Worker Reallocation.  CEPR Discussion Paper 15100, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London. Bluedorn, John, Francesca Caselli, Niels-Jakob Hansen, Ippei Shibata, and Marina M. Tavares. 2021.  Gender and Employment in the COVID-19 Recession: Evidence on  She-cessions .  IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC. Bluedorn, John, Jorge Mondragon, Ippei Shibata, and Marina M. Tavares. Forthcoming.  Occupational Mobility during Recessions: Patterns and the Role of Policies.  IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC. Boeri, Tito, and Herbert Bruecker. 2011  Short-Time Work Benefits Revisited: Some Lessons from the Great Recession.  Economic Policy 26 (68): 697 765. Braxton, J. Carter, and Bledi Taska. 2020.  Technological Change and the Consequences of Job Loss.  Unpublished. Cahuc, Pierre, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2006.  Wage Bargaining with On the Job Search: Theory and Evidence.  Econometrica 74 (2): 323 64. Cajner, Tomaz, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, John Grigsby, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, Erik Hurst, Christopher Kurz, and Ahu Yildirmaz. 2020.  The US Labor Market during the Beginning of the Pandemic Recession.  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity conference draft, June 25. Card, David, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber. 2018.  What Works? A Meta-Analysis of Recent Active Labor Market Program Evaluations.  Journal of the European Economic Association 16 (3): 894 931. Carrillo-Tudela, Carlos, Bart Hobijn, and Ludo Visschers. 2014.  Career Changes Decline during Recessions.  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letters 2014 09. Carrillo-Tudela, Carlos, Bart Hobijn, Powen She, and Ludo Visschers. 2016.  The Extent and Cyclicality of Career Changes: Evidence for the UK.  European Economic Review 84: 18 41. Carrillo-Tudela, Carlos, and Ludo Visschers. 2014.  Unemploy- ment and Endogenous Reallocations over the Business Cycle.  CESifo Working Papers 4079, Munich. Choi, Sangyup, Davide Furceri, Yi Huang, and Prakash Loun- gani. 2018.  Aggregate Uncertainty and Sectoral Productivity Growth: The Role of Credit Constraints.  Journal of Interna- tional Money and Finance 88 (November): 314 30. Dam, David, Meghana Gaur, Fatih Karahan, Laura Pilossoph, and Will Schirmer. 2021.  Black and White Differences in the Labor Market Recovery from COVID-19.  Liberty Street Economics (blog), Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February 9. Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter. 2011.  Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss.  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2): 1 72. D ez, Federico, Romain Duval, Chiara Maggi, Yi Ji, Ippei Shibata, and Marina M. Tavares. 2020.  Options to Support the Incomes of Informal Workers during COVID-19.  IMF Special Series on COVID-19, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Dingel, Jonathan I., and Brent Neiman. 2020.  How Many Jobs Can Be Done at Home?  Journal of Public Economics 189: 1 8. Dvorkin, Maximiliano, and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2019.  Occupation Mobility, Human Capital, and the Aggre- gate Consequences of Task-Biased Innovations.  Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Working Group Paper 2019 064, University of Chicago. Edelberg, Wendy, and Paige Shevlin. 2021.  The Critical Role of Workforce Training in the Labor Market Recovery.  Brookings Up Front (blog), February 4. Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. 2020. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS), Current Population Survey: Version 8.0. Minneapolis, MN. Gertler, Mark, Christopher Huckfeldt, and Antonella Trigari. 2020.  Unemployment Fluctuations, Match Quality, and the Wage Cyclicality of New Hires.  The Review of Economic Studies 87 (4): 1876 914. Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan. 2002.  Dissecting the Cycle: A Methodological Investigation.  Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (2): 365 81. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries 80 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Huang. 2014.  New Measures of the Costs of Unemployment: Evidence from the Subjec- tive Well-Being of 3.3 Million Americans.  Economic Inquiry 52 (4): 1485 502. Hensvik, Lena, Thomas Le Barbanchon, and Roland Rathelot. 2021.  Job Search during the COVID-19 Crisis.  Journal of Public Economics 194 (February): 104349. Huckfeldt, Christopher. 2018.  Understanding the Scarring Effect of Recessions.  Society for Economic Dynamics 2018 Meeting Papers 1207, Minneapolis, MN. Jarosch, Gregor. 2015.  Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss.  Unpublished. Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014.  The Global Decline of the Labor Share.  The Quarterly Journal of Econom- ics 129 (1): 61 103. Kesar, Surbhi, Rosa Abraham, Rahul Lahoti, Paaritosh Nath, and Amit Basole. 2020.  Pandemic, Informality, and Vulnerability: Impact of COVID-19 on Livelihoods in India.  CSE Working Paper 2020 01, Centre for Sustainable Employment, Azim Premji University, Bengaluru, India. Kikuchi, Shinnosuke, Sagiri Kitao, and Minamo Mikoshiba. 2020.  Who Suffers from the COVID-19 Shocks? Labor Market Heterogeneity and Welfare Consequences in Japan.  Center for Advanced Research in Finance Working Paper F-490, University of Tokyo. Klein, Aaron, and Ember Smith. 2021.  Explaining the Economic Impact of COVID-19: Core Industries and the Hispanic Workforce.  Brookings Institution report, Washington, DC. Kluve, Jochen. 2010.  The Effectiveness of European Active Labor Market Programs.  Labour Economics 17 (6): 904 18. Kluve, Jochen, and Christoph M. Schmidt. 2002.  Can Training and Employment Subsidies Combat European Unemploy- ment?  Economic Policy 17 (35): 409 48. Levya, Gustavo, and Carlos Urrutia. 2020.  Informal Labor Markets in Times of Pandemic: Evidence from Latin America and Policy Options.  Unpublished. Montenovo, Laura, Xuan Jiang, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Ian M. Schmutte, Kosali I. Simon, Bruce A. Weinberg, and Coady Wing. 2020.  Determinants of Disparities in COVID-19 Job Losses.  NBER Working Paper 27132, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Nekarda, Christopher J. 2009.  A Longitudinal Analysis of the Current Population Survey: Assessing the Cyclical Bias of Geographic Mobility.  Unpublished. Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012.  The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession.  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (1): 1 29. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2018.  Back to Work: Lessons from Nine Country Case Studies of Policies to Assist Displaced Workers.  In OECD Employment Outlook 2018. Paris. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2020.  Job Retention Schemes during the COVID-19 Lockdown and Beyond.  In Tackling Coronavirus (COVID-19): Contributing to a Global Effort. Paris. Peir , Amado, Jorge Belaire-Franch, and Maria Teresa Gonzalo. 2012.  Unemployment, Cycle, and Gender.  Journal of Macroeconomics 34: 1167 75. Pissarides, Christopher A. 2000. Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, 2nd edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Postel-Vinay, Fabien, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2002.  The Dis- tribution of Earnings in an Equilibrium Search Model with State-Dependent Offers and Counteroffers.  International Economic Review 43 (4): 989 1016. Raaum, Oddbj rn, and Knut R ed. 2006.  Do Business Cycle Conditions at the Time of Labor Market Entry Affect Future Employment Prospects?  The Review of Economics and Statis- tics 88 (2): 193 210. Reichert, Arndt R., and Harald Tauchmann. 2017.  Work- force Reduction, Subjective Job Insecurity, and Mental Health.  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 144: 187 212. Roy, A. D. 1951.  Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.  Oxford Economic Papers 3 (2): 135 46. Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2012.  The Effects of Unemployment Insurance over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression Discontinuity Estimates over 20 Years.  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2): 701 52. Shibata, Ippei. Forthcoming.  The Distributional Impact of Recessions: The Global Financial Crisis and the COVID-19 Pandemic Recession.  Journal of Economics and Business. World Bank. 2018. World Development Report 2018: Learning to Realize Education s Promise. Washington, DC. World Bank. 2019. World Development Report 2019: The Chang- ing Nature of Work. Washington, DC. International Monetary Fund | April 2021 81 Advanced economies are expected to recover from the COVID-19 crisis faster than most emerging market economies, reflecting their earlier access to vaccinations and greater room to maintain supportive macroeconomic policies. Divergent economic recoveries could complicate the task of emerging market central banks should interest rates in advanced economies begin to rise when conditions in emerging market economies continue to warrant a loose monetary policy stance. The findings in this chapter confirm that monetary policy in advanced economies  especially in the United States still has a large impact on financial conditions in emerging market economies. Aggressive policy easing by advanced economy central banks early in the pandemic thus provided much relief to financial markets in emerging market economies. Looking ahead to the recovery, clear guidance from advanced economy central banks on future scenarios for policy will be key to avoiding financial disruption to emerging mar- kets. The analysis of the chapter suggests that, whereas a monetary policy tightening resulting from a stronger-than-  expected US economy tends to be relatively benign for most economies, a surprise tightening, which could reflect a change in the US Federal Reserve s expected reaction function, tends to curb global investor risk appetite and trigger capital outflows from emerging markets. The chap- ter s analysis also suggests that emerging market economies with lower fiscal vulnerability are more insulated from external financial shocks than others, and countries with more transparent and rules-based monetary and fiscal frameworks enjoy greater monetary policy autonomy. Introduction At the end of February 2020, news of the global spread of COVID-19 hit financial markets with dev- astating force. One month later, global risk aversion The authors of this chapter are Philipp Engler, Roberto Piazza (team leader), and Galen Sher, with contributions from Chiara Fratto, Brendan Harnoys Vannier, Borislava Mircheva, David de Padua, and H l ne Poirson, and support from Eric Bang, Ananta Dua, Chanpheng Fizzarotti, Ilse Peirtsegaele, and Daniela Rojas Fernandez. The chapter benefited from insightful com- ments by Christopher Erceg and internal seminar participants. Refet G rkaynak was a consultant for the project. had reached an intensity not observed since the peak of the global financial crisis, while capital flows began to cascade out of emerging market and developing economies (Figure 4.1). Emerging market economies mounted a strongly countercyclical monetary policy response, on the heels of central banks in advanced economies, that cut policy rates wherever possible and introduced an array of asset purchase programs (APPs) to support credit markets (Figures 4.2 and 4.3).1 The set of policy tools employed by central banks in emerging markets was notably broad including not only conventional policy rate cuts, but also APPs in several economies (Figures 4.4 and 4.5).2 Soon after these strong mea- sures, sovereign default risk premiums in emerging markets began to recede. Since the announcement of several successful COVID-19 vaccine trials in late 2020, the global economic outlook has improved, but remains vastly differentiated. Given a more backloaded access to vac- cinations and less policy space to provide lifelines and support economic activity, many emerging market and developing economies are projected to have a more protracted recovery than major advanced economies. This scenario raises the possibility that policymakers in emerging markets might face different challenges than during the recovery from the global financial crisis, when their countries enjoyed relatively strong growth. During a multispeed economic recovery, many emerging markets might struggle to provide sizable fiscal policy support for a prolonged period, given their more constrained policy space (V gh and Vuletin 2012) and even more so following last year s sharp 1This chapter largely focuses on financial conditions in emerging markets, defined as the World Economic Outlook (WEO) emerging market and developing economy group, excluding countries in the low- income and developing economy group. Only a limited number of countries in the latter group displays significant integration with global financial markets. 2Fiscal expansions were also instrumental in containing the fallout from the crisis, but they are not examined here. While focused on monetary policy, this chapter explores various instances where fiscal policy matters for a country s sensitivity to international monetary policy spillovers and for the domestic monetary policy response to the pandemic. SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 4 CHAPTER 82 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries Sub-Saharan Africa Emerging market economies (right scale) Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and EPFR Global. Note: Cumulative EPFR fund  ows for sub-Saharan Africa comprise those for C te d Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, and Zambia.  5  4  3  2  1 0  120  100  80  60  40  20 0 Feb. 2020 Apr. 20 Jun. 20 Aug. 20 Oct. 20 Dec. 20 Jan. 2021 Figure 4.1. Cumulative Portfolio Flows (Billions of dollars) United States (10-year government bond yield change) Germany (10-year government bond yield change) United States (CB assets change, billions of dollars, right scale) ECB (CB assets change, billions of euros, right scale) Figure 4.2. Monetary Policy in Advanced Economies (Percentage points, unless noted otherwise) Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; and Haver Analytics. Note: Ten-year government bond yields are in changes from the Feb. 2020 levels. Central bank assets are in changes from their Jan. 2020 levels. CB = central bank; ECB = European Central Bank.  1 0 1 2 3 4 5  650 0 650 1,300 1,950 2,600 3,250 Jan. 2020 Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. EMBI spread (median, percent) Fed/ECB announcements Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P. Note: ECB = European Central Bank; EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; Fed = Federal Reserve. 0 2 4 6 8 10 Feb. 2020 Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Figure 4.3. Credit Risk Premiums in Emerging Market Economies (Median, percent) Figure 4.4. Policy Rate Cuts in Emerging Market Economies between March and August 2020 (Percent) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 PAK UKR EGY ZAF TUR MEX BRA ARG COL PHL POL SAU ARE CHL IND ROU IDN THA KAZ CHN 83 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 increase in public debt. Constrained fiscal policy, in turn, would heighten the role of monetary policy. This prompts the question of how much autonomy policymakers in emerging markets would have in keeping monetary policy rates low at a time when improved economic conditions may lead central banks in advanced economies to begin increasing interest rates. On this point, a commonly held view is that, even with a flexible exchange rate, emerging markets have little monetary policy autonomy against a power- ful global financial cycle that is strongly influenced by monetary policy in advanced economies (Rey 2015).3 Several arguments temper the concerns about monetary policy in emerging markets during the global economic recovery. First, flexible exchange rates offer imperfect but still significant insulation from the global financial cycle (Obstfeld, Ostry, and Qureshi 2019), 3One consideration that can stop central banks in emerging markets from countering the global financial cycle is a  fear of floating  (Calvo and Reinhart 2002). In addition, financial frictions in emerging markets may limit the pass-through of monetary policy to domestic financial conditions (Kalemli- zcan 2019). whose impact on capital flows may not be so dramatic after all (Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose 2019). Second, the commitment of central banks in advanced econo- mies to maintain ample monetary accommodation until the recovery is well under way reduces the possibility of an early tightening in global financial conditions.4 The commitment is exemplified in the United States by the Federal Reserve Board s new flexible inflation targeting framework. Third, aggressive monetary policy easing by emerging markets during the COVID-19 pandemic may indicate that these countries have gained further autonomy in setting their policies in line with domestic needs. To provide a framework for thinking about the monetary policy challenges confronting emerging markets during the recovery, this chapter addresses the following questions:   How do monetary policy surprises in advanced econo- mies shape financial conditions in emerging markets? How has this influence changed over time, and how does it vary across countries?   How does economic news in advanced economies affect financial conditions in emerging markets?   Which characteristics of emerging markets are associated with greater ability to ease monetary policy at the onset of the pandemic? Are APPs effective in easing financial conditions in emerging markets? The chapter includes two key streams of analysis. The first is a set of event studies that examines how monetary policy shifts in advanced economies affect financial conditions in emerging market and developing economies, leveraging two types of situa- tions: (1) when a monetary policy announcement in advanced economies surprises markets because it does not appear directly attributed to observed changes in economic conditions these surprises include a change in how central banks interpret data or react to it; and (2) when new information on the state of advanced economies changes market expectations of future monetary policy. The second stream of analysis looks at factors that could predict which emerging markets were able to provide greater monetary policy easing during the pandemic, focusing on both conventional 4The main measures of financial conditions in emerging markets presented in the chapter include yields on sovereign bonds denominated in local currency, spreads on dollar-denominated sovereign bonds, nominal exchange rates vis- -vis the dollar, and investment fund inflows. VIX HRV, HUN, JAM, POL, CHL, IND, ROU, EGY, THA, COL ZAF, CPV, BOL, TUR, PHL, AGO, CRI Figure 4.5. Asset Purchase Program Announcement Dates in Emerging Market Economies and the VIX (Index) Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: VIX = Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index. Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. IDN MUS CHN BRA 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Jan. 2020 Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. 84 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries policy rate cuts and APPs. The main findings of the chapter are as follows:   Monetary policy actions by the Federal Reserve have a significant influence on financial condi- tions in emerging markets, whereas spillovers from policies of the European Central Bank (ECB) are smaller and regional. As observed in the 2013  taper tantrum  episode, signals of unexpected policy tightening in the United States raise emerging market yields, cause portfolio outflows, and depre- ciate emerging market currencies. The intensity of these effects is heterogenous over time and across countries: it seems to be stronger now than before the global financial crisis, and stronger for countries that are seen as riskier investments. This suggests that perceptions of risk (risk channel) are important in the transmission of the spillover. Notably, the change in domestic yields comes almost entirely from a change in the term premium, with an only marginal contribution from revised expectations of policy rates in emerging markets. Monetary eas- ing by the Federal Reserve helped reduce yields in emerging markets by more than 100 basis points during the pandemic, and the announcement of central bank US dollar swap lines was effective in calming markets.   The release of good news about the US economy, even as it is accompanied by expectations of tighter US monetary policy, is relatively benign for financial conditions in emerging markets. Following posi- tive news about US employment, capital appears to flow into emerging markets, the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX) and risk premiums on emerging market dollar-denominated bonds fall, while yields on emerging market domes- tic bonds tend to rise. This could be attributed in part to a positive risk channel (greater global risk appetite) and in part to a positive trade channel, where positive growth news in the United States is also associated with improved growth prospects in emerging markets, leading to higher expected monetary policy rates in emerging markets. Surprise increases in US inflation also lead to an increase in US nominal yields, but do not seem to impact financial conditions in emerging markets. Finally, positive news about the development of vaccines against COVID-19 in advanced economies has been particularly beneficial for emerging markets as their domestic yields did not increase, nor did their currencies depreciate.   Domestic monetary and fiscal frameworks help predict the extent to which emerging markets were able to provide more monetary policy accommo- dation during the pandemic. Countries with more flexible exchange rates, more transparent central banks, and rules-based fiscal and monetary policy frameworks cut their policy rates by more and were also more likely to announce an APP controlling for the state of the economy. Countries with the most constrained fiscal position had instead a smaller likelihood of an APP. In general, APPs appear to have been effective in calming domestic financial conditions. Given the uniqueness of the current episode, any attempt to use past experience to extrapolate lessons for the future must be made with caution. With this warning in mind, the findings of the chapter suggest that a multispeed global recovery, with growth picking up earlier in advanced economies, may not on its own lead to a premature tightening of global financial con- ditions in emerging markets. Assuming that inflation does not rise above target in a sustained manner, a quicker-than-expected resolution of the pandemic in advanced economies may drive strong capital inflows to emerging markets and frontier economies, especially if interest rates in advanced economies remain low. In this event, emerging markets could employ a variety of policy tools to curb the buildup of domestic financial risks (IMF 2020). If, with the recovery taking hold, central banks in advanced economies were instead to suddenly signal greater concern for inflation risks, then a surprise tightening of global financial conditions similar to the 2013 taper tantrum might occur. To reduce this risk, central banks in advanced economies need to continue providing markets with clear communication and guidance about their policies, including on new policy frameworks. In emerging markets, actions to improve confidence about the sustainability of medium-term debt can help reduce the sensitivity of domestic finan- cial conditions to spillovers. Strengthening fiscal and monetary frameworks would also help create room for a more forceful countercyclical monetary policy. Spillovers on Emerging Market Financial Conditions This section uses event studies to answer two questions: How do financial conditions in emerging markets change following a surprise monetary policy 85 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 announcement in advanced economies? How do finan- cial conditions in emerging markets change following surprises about the state of the economy in advanced economies?5 The two questions are complementary. The first considers changes in financial conditions that can be entirely traced to the spillover effect of an unex- pected monetary policy announcement by central banks in advanced economies. The second considers changes in financial conditions that instead can be entirely attributed to news about economic conditions in advanced economies and to the attending implications for, among others, the expected reaction of monetary policy in advanced economies. This would be the case, for instance, of positive news about payrolls or the development of COVID-19 vaccines. Regardless of the type of shock considered, spillovers from advanced economies on financial conditions in emerging markets operate through a variety of channels. The chapter gives prominence to two. The first is a  risk channel,  where surprise monetary policy changes in advanced economies affect perceptions of risk and thus financial conditions in emerging markets. The second is a  trade channel,  where economic news in advanced economies changes economic conditions and investment opportunities in emerging markets. Monetary policy in emerging markets reacts to both types of changes, as discussed in the next section. Spillovers from Monetary Policy Surprises in Advanced Economies Analytical Framework Monetary policy surprises in the United States and the euro area are defined as changes in the respective two-year government bond yields in a window of time around each monetary policy announcement. The choice of the two-year maturity follows Gertler and Karadi (2015) and Hanson and Stein (2015) and allows to capture the effects of forward guidance and asset purchases.6 For the euro area, the two-year yield is constructed as a weighted average of the correspond- 5In both exercises, the sample covers 60 emerging market economies, but country coverage is smaller for some indicators. For example, only 21 emerging market economies have data on gov- ernment bond yields. The sample of low-income countries contains exchange rate data for 23 economies, but government bond yields for only five of them. 6For robustness to using yields of different maturity during zero lower bound periods, see Online Annex 4.1. All annexes are available at www .imf .org/ en/ Publications/ WEO. ing yields for Germany, France, Italy, and Spain. In the case of the Federal Reserve, the window covers the full announcement day, while for the ECB, it covers two hours around the ECB Governing Council s press releases and press conferences.7 Spillovers from Federal Reserve or ECB monetary policy announcements on emerging markets are measured as changes in various emerging market asset prices and financial indica- tors during the two-day windows around monetary policy announcements, which allows for differences in time zones. Impact on Emerging Markets US monetary policy spills over strongly to domes- tic government bond yields in emerging markets, at all maturities (Figure 4.6). A surprise tightening of 100 basis points by the Federal Reserve translates into a 47-basis-point increase in two-year government bond yields in emerging markets.8 Euro area monetary policy surprises have smaller effects, which are statisti- cally significant only at intermediate maturities or for emerging markets more economically integrated with the euro area.9 US monetary policy surprises also have significant effects on exchange rates and capital flows to emerg- ing markets, but the evidence does not show sys- tematic effects on emerging market stock prices or benchmark Emerging Market Bond Index spreads (Figure 4.7). Every 100-basis-point tightening of US monetary policy leads to an immediate 1 percentage point depreciation of emerging market currencies vis- -vis the US dollar and portfolio outflows from 7For the United States, dates of official monetary policy state- ments were provided directly by the Federal Reserve Board. For the ECB, the intraday monetary policy surprises were taken from the online data set of Altavilla and others (2019) until April 2020, and merged with daily changes in yields for the remaining announce- ments in 2020. This produces 176 and 217 monetary policy surprises by the Federal Reserve and ECB, respectively, between 2000 and 2020. For more details on the econometric specification, see Online Annex 4.1. 8These estimates are consistent with those of Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2015); Curcuru and others (2018); Albagli and others (2019); Caballero and Kamber (2019); and Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2020). A separate analysis indicates that US surprise monetary policy easings and tightenings have symmetric effects on emerging markets. 9For example, emerging markets with deeper trade links to the euro area experience stronger responses of three-month, six-month, and 10-year yields than other emerging markets. This suggests that financial conditions in central and eastern European economies are more affected by ECB monetary policy. 86 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries emerging markets of 7 basis points of annual GDP.10 While (trade-weighted) emerging market currencies do depreciate after tightening in the euro area, ECB monetary policy surprises do not seem to affect term premiums, expected future short-term interest rates, stock prices, portfolio flows, or bond spreads in the average emerging market. Given the relatively small spillovers from the ECB, the rest of the chapter focuses on spillovers from US monetary policy. Looking over time, monetary policy spillovers from the United States were especially strong during the period that included the global financial crisis, the euro area crisis, and the 2013 taper tantrum (Figure 4.8). Although the sensitivity of emerging market yields 10The chapter focuses on the response of emerging market exchange rates vis- -vis the US dollar. A large literature highlights the outsized role played by the dollar exchange rate in causing finan- cial shocks in emerging markets (for example, because of liability dollarization) and demand shocks (because of dollar invoicing in international trade). See, for instance, Calvo and Reinhart (2002) and Gopinath and others (2020). fell from 2014 onward, it seems to have remained higher than it was before the global financial crisis.11 The  Risk Channel  It is important to bear in mind that, beyond the average effects discussed above, there is significant heterogeneity in the way financial conditions in emerging markets react to monetary policy changes in advanced economies. Focusing on some features of this heterogeneity can provide a partial glimpse into specific 11Although the sensitivity is higher, the difference is not statisti- cally significant. A further exploration based on shocks on 10-year US Treasury securities suggests that this increased sensitivity does not seem to be driven by the adoption of unconventional monetary policy tools by advanced economies. Federal Reserve European Central Bank Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure shows the two-day changes in emerging market local currency government bond yield curves in response to a 100-basis-point surprise tightening of the United States or euro area monetary policy. Solid bars show maturities that are statistically signi cant; hollow bars show those that are not. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 3 6 12 24 60 120 Months to maturity Figure 4.6. Change in Emerging Market Government Bond Yield Curves in Response to Monetary Policy Surprises (Basis points) Figure 4.7. Effects of US Monetary Policy Surprises on Selected Variables (Basis points; * = percentage points; ** = basis points of annual GDP) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The squares show the response of each variable to a 100-basis-point surprise monetary policy tightening in the United States. The whiskers show 90 percent con dence intervals. An increase in the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) for the United States, or in the nominal exchange rate vis- -vis the United States for the emerging market economies, denotes appreciation. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Bond Index; VIX = Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index.  90  60  30 0 30 60 90 120 United States/global Emerging market economies  300  200  100 0 100 200 300 400 Stocks* VIX* Expected policy rate Term premium EMBI Stocks* Portfolio in ows** Portfolio bond in ows** NEER (right scale) Exchange rate (right scale) 87 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 channels of transmission of international monetary pol- icy spillovers. As shown in Figure 4.9, economies with a speculative sovereign debt credit rating experience an extra 27-basis-point increase in their 10-year bond yield following a surprise 100-basis-point US mone- tary policy tightening. Spillovers are also stronger for countries with a higher proportion of debt held exter- nally or with higher currency volatility. For instance, moving from the 25th percentile in the cross-country distribution of external debt (for example, Armenia) to the 75th percentile (Brazil) raises the sensitivity of 10-year yields by 17 basis points. Similarly, going from a currency volatility at the 25th percentile of economies (for example, Romania) to the 75th percentile (Russia) increases the response of yields by 20 basis points. The sensitivities of yields to these three indicators can be used to construct a  vulnerability index,  which is used in the next part of the chapter that looks at the determinants of monetary policy reactions in emerging markets during the pandemic. Moreover, all these indi- cators can be considered proxies for some form of risk. Sovereign default risk, in particular, is influenced by the level and expected path of public debt and therefore provides a mechanism by which fiscal policy directly influences financial conditions in emerging markets and thus, indirectly, the conduct of monetary policy. That countries with higher perceived sovereign risk experience stronger spillovers suggests that US monetary policy is transmitted to emerging markets through a  risk channel,  whereby monetary policy in the United States can change the objective riskiness of emerging market assets (for example, by increasing perceived default probabilities) or affect investors  risk aversion (Chen, Griffoli, and Sahay 2014; IMF 2014; Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza 2015; Ahmed, Coulibaly, and Zlate 2017; Kalemli- zcan 2019).12 12The conclusion on the possible presence of a risk channel is based here only on the observed heterogenous response of bond yields for different classes of sovereign borrowers (Figure 4.9). No evidence of a risk channel is instead found based on the behavior of the VIX (Figure 4.7), which is a measure of global risk aversion that many studies (for example, Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo Duca 2013) but not all (for example, Bekaert, Hoerova, and Xu 2020) find to respond significantly to surprise changes in US monetary policy. Five-year bond Ten-year bond Figure 4.8. Time Variation in the Sensitivity of Emerging Market Yields to US Monetary Policy Surprises (Basis points) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The bars show the effects of a 100-basis-point surprise US monetary policy tightening on  ve- and 10-year emerging market government bond yields during various periods. The 2014 20 bars are not statistically signi cantly higher than the pre-November 2008 bars. 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Before Nov. 2008 Nov. 08 13 14 20 Figure 4.9. Spillover Ampli ers from US Monetary Policy Surprises (Basis points) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure shows how the sensitivity of emerging market 10-year yields to each 100-basis-point US monetary policy surprise depends on economy characteristics.  High  refers to the 75th percentile of the distribution of the economy characteristic in the latest available year. Not shown in the  gure, the values for investment-grade credit rating, low external debt share, low currency volatility, low bond substitutability, and low  nancial openness are 0, 0, 14,  2, and 3, respectively. Solid bars show economic characteristics that are statistically signi cant; hollow bars show those that are not. Speculative- grade credit High external debt share High currency volatility High bond substitutability High  nancial openness  10 0 10 20 30 40 88 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries By contrast, the chapter finds no direct evidence that financial openness or greater correlation between the total return of emerging market sovereign bonds and US Treasury securities (a proxy for bond substitutabil- ity from the point of view of investors) are associated with a stronger response of domestic yields in emerging markets to US monetary policy shocks (Figure 4.9).13 Almost all the change in emerging market domes- tic yields can be accounted for by the change in term premiums, suggesting that the perceived riskiness of holding emerging market bonds rises after a surprise tightening in US monetary policy, consistent with the finding that countries with higher sovereign risk are more sensitive to spillovers. Markets do expect central banks in emerging market economies to follow a surprise Federal Reserve tightening with tightenings of their own, but only slightly. These conclusions are obtained by relying on dynamic factor models (Adrian, Crump, and Moench 2013) to split the changes in yields on five-year sovereign bonds in emerging mar- kets into one component attributed to changes in the expected monetary policy rate in emerging markets and another residual term premium. The term premium represents the extra return required by investors to shoulder the greater risk (such as inflation, liquidity, and credit risks) associated with a fixed long-term rate of return (Figure 4.7). Of course, the yield decomposition into expected monetary policy rates and term premiums must be treated carefully, given that it is sensitive to specific model assumptions. Moreover, market expectations of future monetary policy rates may be an imper- fect indicator of actual future policy rates, especially over long time periods. Still, the results presented here suggest that, whereas overall financial conditions in emerging markets react strongly to changes in US monetary policy, monetary policy in emerging markets does not. 13Higher values for these two measures for an emerging market could imply that foreign investors in that emerging market are more inclined to change their portfolio composition after a US monetary policy announcement, which would indicate the presence of a  portfolio balance channel.  The fact that the two regressors are not significant may then suggest the  portfolio balance channel  has a limited role in transmitting monetary policy spillovers from advanced economies. The degree of substitutability of an economy s government bonds with US Treasury securities is measured as the correlation between the total returns on its 10-year local currency government bonds, converted to US dollars at market exchange rates, and the total returns on 10-year US Treasury securities. Online Annex 4.1 provides more detail. This finding implies a certain degree of monetary policy autonomy in emerging markets, consistent with the findings in Chapter 3 of the April 2017 Global Financial Stability Report. At the same time, the tightening via risk premiums of overall financial conditions following a surprise tightening in US policy can be expected to reduce growth in emerging markets. If central banks in emerging markets had full autonomy to adjust their own interest rate policy, then it could be reasonably argued that future monetary policy rates might be expected to fall to offset the rise in domestic yields. The fact that this does not happen (future policy rates are actually expected to go up slightly) may indi- cate the presence of only partial autonomy. Spillovers from US Monetary Policy during the Pandemic As Figure 4.10 shows, the GDP-weighted average of emerging market yields first increased in February 2020, then fell quickly until the end of April, then slowly crawled back toward 4 percent in late 2020. Although, as already noted, monetary policy spillovers are heterogenous across emerging markets, estimates in this chapter can be used to perform some back-of-the- envelope calculations to suggest that, had the Federal Reserve not eased monetary policy in March, average yields in emerging markets would have been more than 1 percentage point higher. Most of this effect would have come from higher term premiums. Of course, had the Federal Reserve not eased at a time of deep global crisis, the fallout in financial markets would have been severe; as such, the estimate in Figure 4.10 for the spillover effects of the March 2020 actions likely puts a lower bound on the true effect. Some monetary policy actions taken by central banks in advanced economies during the pandemic were aimed at affecting financial conditions in foreign mar- kets, including in emerging markets. One such example is the Federal Reserve s announcement on March 19, 2020, of the establishment of temporary US dollar swap line facilities with nine other central banks.14 Brazil and Mexico were the only emerging markets included, and thus provide an interesting event study to assess the effectiveness of the tool in limiting US dollar fund- ing pressures. Figure 4.11 shows that, following the 14Swap lines can be useful temporary sources of US dollars for the counterparty central banks, which may draw on them to lend US dollars to financial intermediaries while preserving their interna- tional reserves. Swap lines may also support investor confidence in liquidity conditions. 89 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 announcement, spreads on Brazilian and Mexican sov- ereign debt denominated in US dollars narrowed, while spreads continued to widen in other emerging markets. Similarly, the Brazilian real and Mexican peso appre- ciated, while the currencies of other emerging markets continued to depreciate. Therefore, it appears that the swap lines announcement was effective in stabilizing financial conditions in these two countries. Spillovers from Economic News in Advanced Economies Analytical Framework The methodology here closely follows that used for examining spillovers from monetary policy surprises, but the shocks in advanced economies that are now con- sidered include news about (1) economic activity in the United States, (2) inflation in the United States, and (3) the development of vaccines in advanced economies. News about economic activity and inflation in the United States is proxied by surprises about nonfarm payroll employment and core consumer-price infla- tion released from 2000 to 2020.15 News about the development of vaccines in advanced economies is proxied by whether the stock returns of Moderna and Pfizer- BioNTech are within the top or bottom 10th percentiles of their historical distribution, con- trolling for their usual comovement with a portfolio of health care stocks.16 In this case, the analysis covers April 1 through December 15, 2020, which saw positive news about the development of COVID-19 vaccines, though mostly ones that have stringent cold-chain requirements that make it difficult for them to be delivered in many emerging market and developing economies. 15Data were provided by G rkaynak, Kisaciko lu, and Wright (2020). 16Moderna and BioNTech are companies involved in the devel- opment of two vaccines that, during 2021, are expected to provide advanced economies with a relatively wide vaccination coverage, well beyond that of emerging markets. Actual  ve-year yield Higher  ve-year emerging market term premium Higher  ve-year expected policy rate Figure 4.10. Counterfactual: Emerging Market Financial Conditions Absent Federal Reserve Easing (Weighted average, percent a year) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Five-year denotes government bonds with a  ve-year maturity. 3 4 5 6 Jan. 2020 Feb. 20 Mar. 20 Apr. 20 May 20 Jun. 20 Jul. 20 Aug. 20 Sep. 20 Oct. 20 Nov. 20 BRA and MEX: EMBI Other emerging market economies: EMBI BRA and MEX: exchange rate (right scale) Other emerging market economies: exchange rate (right scale) Figure 4.11. Effects of Swap Line Announcements for Brazil and Mexico (Percent; changes after March 19, 2020) Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: BRA and MEX denote Brazil and Mexico, respectively. EMBI spreads are in percentage point deviations from those of March 19; exchange rates are in percent changes from those of that date. Increases denote depreciation. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index.  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 Mar. 18 Mar. 19 Mar. 20 90 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries Impact on Advanced and Emerging Market Economies Good news about US economic activity lifts longer-  term US interest rates (Figure 4.12). The effect is clear at all maturities and, on average, over the 20 years considered, is almost entirely down to expectations of higher monetary policy rates (with almost no change in US term premiums). Good news about the US economy lowers global uncertainty, measured by the VIX, and leads to a nominal effective appreciation of the dollar. Stock prices are not impacted significantly, likely because expectations of higher monetary policy rates counterbalance the effect on stock prices of better economic prospects for firms.17 The effect of good news about US economic activity on financial conditions in the average emerging market tends to be benign, in contrast to the impact of sur- prise monetary policy changes.18 Good US economic news still depreciates emerging market currencies, on average. However, in parallel with a reduction in the VIX, emerging market default premiums on dollar-  denominated debt (Emerging Market Bond Index) now fall and portfolio capital flows into emerging mar- kets (the effect on capital inflows has a moderate level of statistical confidence with a p-value of 13 percent). These findings are consistent with a positive risk chan- nel, where good economic news in the United States reduces the risk aversion of international investors. In addition, domestic bond yields still appear to rise in the average emerging market (although with limited statistical significance), but the increase seems now to entirely reflect expectations of higher monetary policy rates, possibly driven by improved growth expecta- tions. This, for instance, would be consistent with a positive  trade channel,  whose strength should be expected to be heterogeneous across countries, where higher aggregate demand in the advanced economies leads to more demand for tradable goods produced in emerging markets.19 The effect of positive news about COVID-19 vaccines in advanced economies has been positive, thanks in part to the muted response of US interest 17For an explanation of the lack of a clear effect on US stock prices, see G rkaynak, Kisaciko lu, and Wright (2020). 18This is consistent with previous studies, for example, IMF (2014) and Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2020). 19Additional tests reveal that, after an increase in US employ- ment, spreads on dollar-denominated bonds fall more and exchange rates depreciate less in those emerging markets that have stronger trade links with the United States. Online Annex 4.1 provides the details. rates (Figure 4.13). Longer-term US yields have risen on the news, but two-year yields have not reacted, reflecting the Federal Reserve s explicit commitment to maintaining an expansionary monetary policy stance until a firm recovery is under way.20 Positive vaccine news has lifted corporate earnings expectations and the US stock market, in the context of a muted expected response of monetary policy, and the US dollar has not appreciated. Domestic bond yields in the average emerging market have not reacted to vaccine news, and there have even been indications of an expected easing in 20Even at the 10-year maturity, all the increase in US yields is attributed to rising term premiums and not to increases in conven- tional short-term policy rates. Figure 4.12. Effects of Positive News about US Economic Activity (Basis points; * = percentage points; ** = basis points of annual GDP) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The squares show estimates of the effect of a two-standard-deviation surprise in US nonfarm payrolls. The whiskers show 90 percent con dence intervals. Average expected policy rates are calculated at the 10-year maturity for the United States and at the  ve-year maturity for emerging market economies. An increase in the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) for the United States, or in the nominal exchange rate vis- -vis the United States for emerging market economies, denotes appreciation. Portfolio in ows denote bond in ows. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; VIX = Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index.  20  10 0 10 20 30 40 Two-year yield Five-year yield Ten-year yield Expected policy rate Stocks* VIX* NEER One-year yield Five-year yield Ten-year yield Expected policy rate Term premium EMBI Stocks* Exchange rate Portfolio in ows** United States Emerging market economies 91 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 domestic monetary policy. Domestic stock markets have risen, on average. As seen when economic news is positive, the VIX has fallen and, in parallel, benchmark emerging market bond spreads have shrunk, while capital has flowed into emerging markets (and the effect is now statistically signifi- cant). The beneficial effects of positive vaccine news on emerging market financial conditions are likely driven by a combination of the aforementioned risk and trade channels, together with the  low-for-long  expectation for US interest rates and, possibly, with improved prospects for vaccinations globally. Finally, the chapter finds that longer-term nominal US yields also rise when US inflation comes in higher than expected, but such surprises do not seem to impact the US dollar, aggregate US stock prices, or the VIX. The spillovers from surprise US inflation to interest rates in the average emerging market are minimal,21 and there is no evidence of effects on the average emerging mar- ket s exchange rates, aggregate stock prices, or spreads on dollar-denominated debt. The lack of spillovers from US inflation could be consistent with a mixture of US demand and cost-push shocks, which would have oppo- site implications for growth in other countries. Future research could explore whether the specific source of the US inflation shock matters for spillovers. Spillovers to Low-Income Countries Financial conditions in low-income countries generally do not respond as much as conditions in emerging markets do to monetary policy surprises by the Federal Reserve or ECB, or to news about US economic activity or COVID-19 vaccines. There are, however, some exceptions. First, positive vaccine news in 2020 lifted 10-year government bond yields, on average, in the five low-income countries with data series (Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda, Vietnam). Second, positive ECB monetary policy surprises tend to lift six-month government bond yields, on average, in the three low-income countries with data (Nigeria, Rwanda, Zambia). Third, the currencies of low-income countries depreciate by about 1.2 percent, on average, vis- -vis the US dollar for each 100 basis points of surprise tightening by the Federal Reserve, similar to the response of emerging markets. That said, while the impact of monetary policy on financial conditions of low-income countries appears to be smaller than on emerging markets, its effect on commodity prices can still be significant, with overall important repercussions for commodity exporters. Determinants of Emerging Market Monetary Policy Reactions APPs and conventional policy rate cuts were emerg- ing markets  two major monetary policy instruments used to counter financial market turmoil and lessen the depth of the recession during the early months of the pandemic.22 This section uncovers the factors that drove the frequency and intensity of their use. 21Spillovers from US inflation to emerging market interest rates vary slightly by method, as explained in Online Annex 4.1. 22An investigation of the role of macroprudential measures during COVID-19 is beyond the scope of this chapter. For a comprehensive analysis of the effectiveness of macroprudential measures, see Chapter 3 of the April 2020 WEO. Figure 4.13. Effect of Positive News about COVID-19 Vaccines (Basis points; * = percentage points; ** = basis points of annual GDP) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The squares show estimates of the effect of positive vaccine news. The whiskers show 90 percent con dence intervals. Average expected policy rates are calculated at the 10-year maturity for the United States and at the  ve-year maturity for emerging market economies. An increase in the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) for the United States, or in the nominal exchange rate vis- -vis the United States for emerging market economies, denotes appreciations. Con dence bands on the NEER are wide; they are not shown due to space constraints. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; VIX = Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index. Two-year yield Five-year yield Ten-year yield Expected policy rate Stocks* VIX* NEER One-year yield Two-year yield Five-year yield Expected policy rate Term premium EMBI Stocks* Exchange rate Portfolio in ows** United States/global Emerging market economies  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 92 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries The econometric method seeks to ensure that the driv- ers explored are not endogenous to the repercussion of the pandemic shock and that appropriate controls are added to the specifications. Still, the identifica- tion of causal effects is challenging and the results are indicative of associations. A separate analysis of the effectiveness of APPs is also presented. Asset Purchase Programs Overview and Effectiveness The COVID-19 crisis saw an unprecedented use of unconventional monetary policy instruments among emerging market and developing economies. Twenty-seven emerging market and developing econo- mies launched APPs, with most announcing them for the first time starting with Indonesia on March 2, 2020. Most emerging market and developing economy central banks justified APPs as a means to counter mar- ket dysfunction, with only a handful (Ghana, Indonesia, Mauritius) also stating the support of government financing as a motivation for the program.23 The vast majority of countries announced that their purchases were confined to government bonds; only a few also announced purchases of corporate or bank bonds (Brazil, Chile, Hungary, Mauritius) or equities (Egypt). The effectiveness of APPs can be assessed by looking at whether yields on government bonds fell with the launch of the programs. This is an important indicator of success, especially for those APPs whose aim was to reduce interest rate spikes caused by rising liquidity premiums in funding markets. Based on this yardstick, Box 4.1 concludes that APPs by emerging market and developing economies during the pandemic appear to have been effective. Drivers of APPs Countries with greater exchange rate flexibility, an inflation targeting framework, greater central bank transparency, a history of a more rules-based fiscal 23The data on APPs used in this chapter are from Fratto and others (2021), which also includes a detailed description of APPs during the COVID-19 crisis through 2020. The data cover all central bank purchases and sales of private and public securities on primary and secondary markets. They also include twist operations (purchase of long-term and sale of short-term government securi- ties), the establishment of special purpose vehicles or investment funds to purchase equities and other private securities, direct monetary financing of the government, and purchases of loans made to small and medium enterprises. See also Arslan, Drehmann, and Hofmann (2020) and Chapter 2 of the October 2020 Global Financial Stability Report. policy framework, and lower sovereign risk were more likely to announce an APP between March and August 2020. The findings are based on logit regressions relating an indicator of whether a country announced an APP to groups of drivers that are each considered separately.24 Depending on data availability for the different drivers, the sample size varies between 39 and 97 emerging market and developing economies (Online Annex 4.2 provides details).25 Policy frameworks. Overall, the results indicate that the choice of announcing an APP is highly depen- dent on the country s monetary and fiscal policy frameworks. Countries with floating or freely float- ing exchange rate regimes had a 61 percentage point higher probability of launching an APP than countries with other exchange rate regimes (Figure 4.14), reflecting little scope for expanding the money supply when a financially open economy has an exchange rate target. The presence of a numerical inflation target raises the probability by 35 percentage points, while a one-standard-deviation increase in an index of central bank transparency (Din er, Eichengreen, and Geraats 2019) raises the probability by 19 percentage points. One extra rule in the fiscal policy framework is associ- ated with a 10 percentage point higher probability. Fiscal position. Countries with higher sovereign credit ratings (those that were perceived to have less sover- eign default risk) were more likely to announce APPs (Figure 4.15). An investment grade rating increases the probability of an APP by 19 percentage points. The amount of  fiscal space  that the government has seems to matter as well. Intermediate levels of fiscal space ( some  or  at risk ) increased the probability of an APP by 58 percentage points compared with having, at the two extremes,  substantial  or  no fiscal space. 26 On one hand, it is possible that countries with  substantial  fiscal space were unlikely to launch an APP because their sovereign bond markets were not disrupted. On the other hand, countries with  no  fiscal space may have resisted activating an APP, fearing that markets could interpret it negatively as an attempt at debt monetization (fiscal dominance). The unlikely 24For the list of APPs in emerging market and developing econo- mies during the pandemic, see Fratto and others (2021). 25A separate analysis looks at whether the probability that a country announced an APP was associated with the strength of the country s trade links with other emerging market and developing economies that announced APPs during the pandemic. No evidence of such an effect was found. 26The fiscal space variable is constructed by IMF staff for about 70 countries and published regularly in countries  Article IV Reports. 93 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 use of APPs as an indirect means of debt financing is corroborated by the lack of a statistically significant relationship between the activation of an APP and the deterioration in the projected 2020 fiscal balance. Exposure to financial spillovers. Three proxies are used to measure the exposure. The first is a country-specific  vulnerability index  to monetary policy spillovers from Federal Reserve decisions, as derived in the preceding section of the chapter that deals with the spillover amplifiers from US monetary policy shocks. The second is a measure of financial openness man- dated in law, and the third is an indicator of foreign reserves adequacy.27 None of these proxies is significant in predicting an APP. Other instruments. APPs are part of a larger set of policy instruments, which include conventional interest cuts (analyzed in detail in the next section) and foreign exchange interventions. A larger policy rate cut increases 27Financial openness is proxied by the Chinn-Ito index for the year 2018 (see Chinn and Ito 2006 for a description of the index). The reserve adequacy measure is computed by IMF staff and describes reserve holdings relative to the reserve adequacy measure, updated to 2019 (see IMF 2015 for a description). by 10 percentage points the probability that an APP will be announced, while use of a foreign exchange intervention raises that probability by 18 percentage points. The results (Figure 4.16) suggest that emerging market and developing economies use policy rate cuts, APPs, and foreign exchange interventions comple- mentarily. They also use them for different objectives: lowering the domestic risk-free rate, tackling disruptions in the domestic bond market, and resolving disorderly conditions in the market for foreign exchange.28 28The size of the policy rate cut and the foreign exchange inter- vention indicator are added simultaneously to the regression. The foreign exchange intervention dummy is based on a collection of such interventions during the COVID-19 crisis by the IMF staff. It is highly correlated with the indicator for floating or free-floating exchange rates, which is added as a control to each regression. This may appear surprising as one would expect that countries with more flexible exchange rates do not rely much on foreign exchange interventions. However, this correlation reflects only the partic- ular construction of the foreign exchange intervention indicator, which captures those interventions aimed specifically at addressing disorderly market conditions (and, so, have a goal similar to that of APPs). Therefore, the indicator does not include all foreign exchange interventions conducted as part of regular operations to maintain a managed exchange rate regime. For this reason, the regression in Figure 4.16 does not include controls for the exchange rate regime. Figure 4.14. Determinants of Asset Purchase Program Choice during COVID-19: Policy Frameworks (Change in probability, percentage points) Sources: Din er, Eichengreen, and Geraats 2019; IMF 2020; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Flexible exchange rates and in ation targeting represent, respectively,  oating and free  oating exchange rate regimes and in ation-targeting central banks. CB transparency reports the effect of a one-standard-deviation increase in the transparency index. Coef cients are signi cant at the 5 percent level. CB = central bank. Flexible exchange rates In ation targeting CB transparency One additional  scal rule 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Figure 4.15. Determinants of Asset Purchase Program Choice during COVID-19: Fiscal Position (Change in probability, percentage points) Sources: Standard & Poor s; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The  scal space indicator is calculated by the IMF. Investment-grade ratings are from Standard & Poor s. Fiscal balance deterioration is the change in the 2020 projected  scal balance between the January 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update and the April 2020 WEO, relative to 2019 GDP. Bars are signi cant at the 5 percent level; the  scal balance deterioration bar is not signi cant. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Intermediate  scal space Investment grade Fiscal balance deterioration 94 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries Policy Rate Cuts Analysis of the  risk channel  suggests that changes in the expected path of monetary policy rates in emerging markets are only marginally influenced by surprise changes in monetary policy rates in advanced economies. This section seeks to explain the differences between countries in how much the policy rate was reduced from March through August 2020.29 Central banks in countries with greater exchange rate flexibil- ity, an inflation targeting framework, greater central bank transparency, and a more rules-based fiscal policy framework are found to have delivered deeper inter- est rate reductions. Unlike for APPs, sovereign credit ratings are not correlated with the extent of interest rate cuts. The econometric specification relates the change in monetary policy rates, expressed as a ratio to the policy rate before the crisis, to four groups of drivers. The first three are the same as those just explored. The fourth intends to capture how the policy rate cut depended 29For a related analysis on determinants of the policy rate cuts, see Gelos, Rawat, and Ye (2020). on domestic economic conditions, the standard driver of policy interest rates.30 Policy frameworks. The same characteristics of policy frameworks that determine the use of APPs also explain the size of policy rate cuts (Figure 4.17). In countries with flexible exchange rates and inflation-  targeting central banks, the policy rate cut was about 20 percent larger. A one-standard-deviation increase in the central bank transparency index raises the policy rate cut by 6 percent and the use of one additional fiscal rule makes it 5 percent larger. Fiscal position. Neither the sovereign debt rating nor the fiscal space indicator are significant predictors of interest rate cuts. The change in the fiscal balance is also insignificant. Exposure to financial spillovers. Similar to the chap- ter findings about the exposure to monetary policy spillovers, the indicator of financial openness and the reserve adequacy ratio are not significant drivers 30The same domestic economic conditions did not determine decisions to use APPs. Figure 4.16. Determinants of Asset Purchase Program Choice during COVID-19: Other Instruments (Change in probability, percentage points) Sources: National authorities; and IMF staff calculations based on national central bank information. Note: FXI is a dummy for countries that have used foreign exchange interventions to address disorderly market conditions during the COVID-19 crisis. Policy rate cut is based on a one-standard-deviation increase in the policy rate, as a percentage of its pre-pandemic level. Coef cients are signi cant at the 5 percent level. 0 4 8 12 16 20 FXI Policy rate cut Figure 4.17. Determinants of Policy Rate Cuts during COVID-19: Policy Frameworks (Changes, percentage points) Sources: Din er, Eichengreen, and Geraats 2019; IMF 2020; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Flexible exchange rates and in ation targeting represent, respectively,  oating and free  oating exchange rate regimes and in ation-targeting central banks. CB transparency reports the effect of a one-standard-deviation increase in the transparency index. Coef cients are signi cant at the 5 percent level. CB = central bank. 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 In ation targeting One additional  scal rule Flexible exchange rates Increased CB transparency 95 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 of conventional monetary policy cuts. This result is well aligned with the findings about spillovers from monetary policy surprises and appears to confirm that external monetary and financial conditions are not important drivers of domestic monetary policy rates. Domestic economic conditions. Interest rate cuts were proportionally larger where pre-pandemic inflation was lower and where the domestic and foreign demand shocks were more negative (Figure 4.18). The policy rate cut was deeper in countries with a higher number of COVID-19 cases by September 1, 2020 (which proxies for the size of negative domestic demand and supply shocks, especially in the service sector). The country s manufacturing share in GDP captures the effect of falling foreign demand on GDP and is also associated with more conventional easing. Conclusions Prospects for a multispeed recovery, with advanced economies recovering more quickly than most other economies, raise concerns about the effects from an asynchronous withdrawal of monetary policy support that tightens financial conditions for emerging market and developing economies. These concerns have been amplified by the fiscal packages in the United States, which could lead the Federal Reserve s asset purchases to be scaled back and US interest rates to rise at an earlier-than-expected date. This chapter finds that changes to interest rates in the United States tend to have important ramifica- tions for financial conditions in emerging market and developing economies. Yet, these effects depend on the circumstances behind the change and the evolution of global risk premiums:   An unexpected signal of higher future US policy rates that is not driven by changes in economic conditions in the United States unambiguously leads to a tightening of financial conditions in emerg- ing markets. The trigger could arise from markets revising their expectations of how soon or how much the Federal Reserve will react to the evolving information on the economy. This would potentially lead to a shift in global risk appetite, a reversal of capital flows to emerging markets, deleveraging by global banks, and a depreciation in emerging market currencies that exposes foreign exchange-related vulnerabilities.   By contrast, positive news on US economic activity tends to have a relatively benign impact on financial conditions in emerging markets. The VIX and risk premiums on emerging market bonds fall, while capital tends to flow into emerging markets. Positive news from COVID-19 vaccine trials triggered strong effects in the same direction. These findings can be attributed in part to a positive risk channel, where favorable economic developments in advanced economies reduce the risk aversion of international investors, and in part to a trade channel, which reflects the tendency of better economic news in the United States to imply better growth prospects for emerging markets as well.   Upside surprises on US inflation also lift expected US rates, but do not appear to systematically impact financial conditions in emerging markets. Although the source of inflation may matter, on average, the repercussions for emerging markets seem to be limited. The analysis suggests that a gradual and well-  telegraphed normalization of US interest rates driven by a recovering US economy would likely be man- ageable for most emerging market economies, though Figure 4.18. Determinants of Policy Rate Cuts during COVID-19: Domestic Conditions (Changes, percentage points) Sources: Johns Hopkins University; IMF, World Economic Outlook ; and World Bank, World Development Indicators. Note: Manufacturing contribution to GDP and cumulative COVID-19 cases per 1,000 inhabitants report the effects of a one-standard-deviation increase in the indicator. Coef cients are signi cant at the 10 percent level or less. CPI = consumer price index.  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 CPI in ation Manufacturing contribution to GDP Cumulative COVID-19 cases per 1,000 inhabitants 96 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries some would be at risk. In fact, many emerging markets (especially those with substantial exports to advanced economies) could see a period of strong capital inflows as economic conditions in advanced econ- omies improve, monetary policy accommodation is withdrawn gradually, and global risk appetite remains favorable. A stronger-than-expected inflation recovery in advanced economies could temper global financial risk appetite somewhat, but with likely limited reper- cussions if inflation expectations remain well anchored. This is particularly true, given that the Federal Reserve has clearly communicated that it is targeting a tempo- rary overshooting of its medium-term inflation goal and would not raise interest rates until inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. However, some emerging market economies with fiscal and external vulnerabil- ities and a lack of trade ties to advanced economies may find that global financial tightening outweighs the benefits of stronger external demand. Moreover, the current health and economic crises are different from anything seen in recent decades, making evidence from the past an imperfect guide to the future. Today s high debt levels may accentuate any financial spillovers, and efforts to contain the virus may limit the benefits of trade links. It is not assured that the economic recovery and interest rate normalization in advanced economies will be smooth, and central bank communications will be a critical factor as the recovery progresses. The chapter s findings suggest that a rapid upward revision in expected US monetary policy rates for example, if markets were suddenly to revise down their expectations for the inflation level that the Federal Reserve would tolerate before it tightened monetary policy under its flexible average inflation targeting framework could lead to rising risk premiums and significant capital outflows from emerging market and developing economies. As such, it will be important for the Federal Reserve to continue to emphasize its policy approach and how it will implement its new monetary policy strategy to anchor expectations about its policy reaction. In general, it will be important for advanced economy central banks to signal early if they judge that economic conditions are evolving in a way that will warrant scaling back of asset purchases and, eventually, raising policy rates.31 31See Sahay and others (2014) for a stocktaking of lessons from the taper tantrum episode. Even if global financial risk appetite remains buoyant for some time, emerging market policymak- ers need to keep in mind that advanced economy central banks will eventually reduce monetary policy accommodation. Even with central banks providing a high degree of transparency and early communication of changes in their policy stance, markets may still mis- interpret intentions, and financial conditions can shift for reasons that are beyond the control of policymak- ers. Moreover, as the recovery picks up, risk appetite and term premiums may increase, as happened on the back of expected US fiscal stimulus in the second half of February. Combined with a faster expected normalization of US monetary policy, the decompres- sion of term premiums has steepened the US yield curve and has spilled over into higher emerging market bond yields as well, triggering a slowdown in capital flows. This episode foreshadows the bumps that may lie ahead for emerging markets as the global economic recovery progresses and extraordinary policy support is withdrawn. How can emerging market economies insulate themselves from external financial spillovers? The correlations documented in the chapter suggest that monetary policy in emerging markets could probably react countercyclically in downside scenarios. How- ever, the strength of the policy easing could be limited and heterogenous across countries. For instance, higher public debt might discourage some countries from using APPs with the same intensity as in the earlier phases of the pandemic. Moreover, if public debt and other fiscal concerns were to start weighing on the perceived independence of monetary policy and on its rules-based frameworks, the ability of central banks to deploy large conventional rate cuts without raising long-term inflation expectations could also be called into question. Maintaining credible fiscal and monetary frameworks is therefore essential for emerging market and developing economies to be able to support domestic activity amid unexpected negative shocks. In addition, taking steps to lengthen maturities on debt and smooth out concentrations in debt service obligations, manage leverage through macro prudential measures and strong financial supervision, reduce currency mismatches, and ensure an adequate level of international reserves can also help limit the buildup of vulnerabilities (see Chapter 3 of the April 2020 WEO). A strong international financial architecture, including robust mechanisms for liquidity support for countries, would have a key role to play too. 97 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 Most Countries Deployed Asset Purchase Programs while Short-Term Policy Rates Were Still Positive This partly reflected the reported aim to smooth volatility and provide liquidity to the domestic market. In only 9 percent of cases were asset purchase programs (APPs) reported to be aimed at providing monetary stimulus. For 62 percent, market dysfunction and the need to boost confidence was the main concern. Sup- porting fiscal needs was stated as the main objective in 10 percent of cases, with the rest citing the need to alle- viate costs of the COVID-19 pandemic on the popula- tion. The exchange rate was one of the objectives in only one case. Purchases of long-dated government bonds (or private sector securities) were sometimes used in com- bination with policy rate cuts (11 out of 27 cases). The size of APPs, both announced and implemented, was comparable to that in small advanced economies.1 Overall, Such Unconventional Monetary Policy Measures Lowered Local Bond Yields but Had No Salient Effect on Exchange Rates or External Borrowing Costs The results of a multiday event study, using a sample of (only 15, given data limitations) emerging market and developing economies, point to het- erogeneous effects. On average, the estimated effect on domestic bond yields is negative and statistically significant (Figure 4.1.1), slightly stronger than that of conventional monetary policy transmission, and higher in emerging market and developing economies than in advanced economies. The results are broadly consistent with the literature (Arslan, Drehmann, and Hofmann 2020; Hartley and Rebucci 2020; Sever and others 2020).2 The estimated effects on the exchange rate are instead inconclusive. Looking at the second-round effects, the announcements have predominantly an insignificant effect on emerging market benchmark bonds. Panel regressions, controlling for policy and global factors, confirm the results. The authors of this box are Chiara Fratto, Brendan Harnoys Vannier, Borislava Mircheva, David de Padua, and H l ne Poirson. 1This box draws on the analysis in Fratto and others (2021) and is based on a data set of APP announcements and imple- mentation during March through August 2020. 2Results shown exclude the announcements coinciding with policy rate cuts to avoid capturing spillover effects from conven- tional monetary policy. Differences in Implementation and Country Characteristics Can Explain Some of the Heterogeneity in the Effectiveness of APPs Some country-specific factors (central bank credibility, larger monetary policy space, low share of nonresident holdings of government bonds) and implementation modalities (quantity-based pro- grams, smaller announced size, single as opposed to repeated announcements) seemed to increase the impact of APPs on yields. No statistically significant differences were found between purchasing assets on the primary and the secondary market, nor between single announcement and announcements made in coordination with other national authorities. Overall, the results suggest that APPs can be use- fully deployed by emerging market and developing economies in response to domestic market stress, but may not work in dampening external market pressures more broadly. Interquartile range Median Figure 4.1.1. Asset Purchase Program Announcement: Effect on Bond Yields (Percentage point change) Source: Fratto and others (2021).  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 Six-month Two-year Five-year Ten-year Box 4.1. Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness 98 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries References Adrian, Tobias, Richard K. Crump, and Emanuel Moench. 2013.  Pricing the Term Structure with Linear Regressions.  Journal of Financial Economics 110 (1): 110 38. Ahmed, Shaghil, Brahima Coulibaly, and Andrei Zlate. 2017.  International Financial Spillovers to Emerging Market Econ- omies: How Important are Economic Fundamentals?  Journal of International Money and Finance 76: 133 52. Albagli, Elias, Luis Ceballos, Sebastian Claro, and Damian Romero. 2019.  Channels of US Monetary Policy Spillovers to International Bond Markets.  Journal of Financial Econom- ics 134 (2): 447 73. Altavilla, Carlo, Luca Brugnolini, Refet S. G rkaynak, Roberto Motto, and Giuseppe Ragusa. 2019.  Measuring Euro Area Monetary Policy.  Journal of Monetary Economics 108: 162 79. Arslan, Yavuz, Mathias Drehmann, and Boris Hofmann. 2020.  Central Bank Bond Purchases in Emerging Market Economies.  BIS Bulletin 20, Bank for International Settlements, Basel. Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, Marco Lo Duca. 2013.  Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy.  Journal of Monetary Economics 60: 771 88. Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, Nancy R. Xu. 2020.  Risk, Monetary Policy, and Asset Prices in a Global World.  https:// papers .ssrn .com/ sol3/ papers .cfm ?abstract _id = 3599583. Bowman, David, J. Londono, and H. Sapriza. 2015.  US Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerg- ing Market Economies.  Journal of International Money and Finance 55: 27 59. Caballero, Ricardo J., and Gunes Kamber. 2019.  On the Global Impact of Risk-Off Shocks and Policy-Put Frameworks.  NBER Working Paper 26031, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2002.  Fear of Floating.  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2): 379 408. Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Andrew K. Rose. 2019.  How Important Is the Global Financial Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows.  IMF Economic Review 67: 24 60. Chen, Jiaqian, Tommaso Mancini Griffoli, and Ratna Sahay. 2014.  Spillovers from United States Monetary Policy on Emerging Markets: Different This Time?  IMF Working Paper 14/240, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2006.  What Matters for Finan- cial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, and Interac- tions.  Journal of Development Economics 81 (1): 163 92. Curcuru, Stephanie E., Steven B. Kamin, Canlin Li, and Marius Rodriguez. 2018.  International Spillovers of Monetary Policy: Conventional Policy vs. Quantitative Easing.  FRB International Finance Discussion Paper 1234, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC. Din er, Nergiz, Barry Eichengreen, and Petra Geraats. 2019.  Transparency of Monetary Policy in the Postcrisis World.  In The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Central Banking. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Fratto, Chiara, Brendan Harnoys Vannier, Borislava Mircheva, David de Padua, and H l ne Poirson. 2021.  Unconven- tional Monetary Policies in Emerging Markets and Frontier Countries.  IMF Working Paper 2021/14, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Gelos, Gaston, Umang Rawat, and Hanqing Ye. 2020.  Have Emerging Market and Developing Economies Escaped the Monetary Policy Procyclicality Trap? Evidence from the COVID-19 Crisis.  VoxEU, August 20. Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2015.  Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity.  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1): 44 76. Gopinath, Gita, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. D ez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mikkel Plagborg-M ller. 2020.  Dominant Currency Paradigm.  American Economic Review 110 (3): 677 719. G rkaynak, Refet S., Bur in Kisaciko lu, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2020.  Missing Events in Event Studies: Identifying the Effects of Partially Measured News Surprises.  American Economic Review 110 (12): 3871 912. Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein. 2015.  Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates.  Journal of Financial Eco- nomics 115 (3): 429 48. Hartley, Jonathan S., and Alessandro Rebucci. 2020.  An Event Study of COVID-19 Central Bank Quantitative Easing in Advanced and Emerging Economies.  NBER Working Paper 27339, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Hoek, Jasper, Steven B. Kamin, and Emre Yoldas. 2020.  When is Bad News Good News? US Monetary Policy, Macro- economic News, and Financial Conditions in Emerging Markets.  FRB International Finance Discussion Paper 1269, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2014. Spillover Report. Washington, DC. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2015. Staff Report on Assessing Reserve Adequacy Specific Proposals. Washington, DC. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020.  Toward an Integrated Policy Framework.  IMF Policy Paper 20/046, Washington, DC. Kalemli- zcan, Sebnem. 2019.  US Monetary Policy and International Risk Spillovers.  NBER Working Paper 26297, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Obstfeld, Maurice, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi, 2019.  A Tie That Binds: Revisiting the Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies.  The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press 101 (2): 279 93. 99 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 CHAPTER 4 SHIFTING GEARS: MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS DURING THE RECOVERY FROM COVID-19 Rey, H l ne. 2015.  Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence.  NBER Working Paper 21162, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Athanasios Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, Papa N Diaye, and Tommaso Mancini Griffoli. 2014.  Emerging Markets Volatility: Lessons from the Taper Tantrum.  IMF Staff Discussion Note 2014/9, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Sever, Can, Rohit Goel, Dimitris Drakopoulos, and Evan Papageorgiou. 2020.  Effects of Emerging Market Asset Pur- chase Program Announcements on Financial Markets during the COVID-19 Pandemic.  IMF Working Paper 2020/292, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. V gh, Carlos A., and Guillermo Vuletin. 2012.  Overcoming the Fear of Free Falling: Monetary Policy Graduation in Emerg- ing Markets.  NBER Working Paper 18175, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. International Monetary Fund | April 2021 101 T he Statistical Appendix presents historical data as well as projections. It comprises seven sections: Assumptions, What s New, Data and Conventions, Country Notes, Classification of Countries, Key Data Documentation, and Statistical Tables. The first section summarizes the assump- tions underlying the estimates and projections for 2021 22. The second section briefly describes the changes to the database and statistical tables since the October 2020 World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section offers a general description of the data and the conventions used for calculating coun- try group composites. The fourth section presents selected key information for each country. The fifth section summarizes the classification of countries in the various groups presented in the WEO. The sixth section provides information on methods and report- ing standards for the member countries  national account and government finance indicators included in the report. The last, and main, section comprises the statistical tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statisti- cal Appendix B is available online at www.imf.org/en/ Publications/WEO). Data in these tables have been compiled on the basis of information available through March 22, 2021. The figures for 2021 22 are shown with the same degree of precision as the historical figures solely for conve- nience; because they are projections, the same degree of accuracy is not to be inferred. Assumptions Real effective exchange rates for the advanced economies are assumed to remain constant at their average levels measured during January 18, 2021 February 15, 2021. For 2021 and 2022 these assumptions imply average US dollar special draw- ing right (SDR) conversion rates of 1.445 and 1.458, US dollar euro conversion rates1 of 1.218 and 1.235, and yen US dollar conversion rates of 104.1 and 102.1, respectively. It is assumed that the price of oil will average $58.52 a barrel in 2021 and $54.83 a barrel in 2022. National authorities  established policies are assumed to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific policy assumptions underlying the projections for selected economies. With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month US dollar deposits will average 0.3 percent in 2021 and 0.4 percent in 2022, the LIBOR on three-month euro deposits will average  0.5 percent in 2021 and 2022, and the LIBOR on six-month yen deposits will average  0.1 percent in 2021 and 0.0 percent in 2022. What s New   The emerging market and middle-income econo- mies group (EMMIEs) has been added to selected Chapter 1 and Statistical Appendix tables and com- prises emerging market and developing economies that are not classified as low-income developing countries (LIDCs).   Starting with the April 2021 WEO, real GDP data and forecasts for New Zealand are reported on a production basis rather than an expenditure basis. Data and Conventions Data and projections for 195 economies form the statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are maintained jointly by the IMF s Research Department 1 In regard to the introduction of the euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro and currencies of the member countries adopting the euro are as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO. See Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO as well for details on how the conversion rates were established. For the most recent table of fixed conversion rates, see the Statistical Appendix of the October 2020 WEO. STATISTICAL APPENDIX WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 102 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 and regional departments, with the latter regularly updating country projections based on consistent global assumptions. Although national statistical agencies are the ultimate providers of historical data and definitions, international organizations are also involved in statisti- cal issues, with the objective of harmonizing meth- odologies for the compilation of national statistics, including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, classifications, and valuation procedures used in the production of economic statistics. The WEO database reflects information from both national source agencies and international organizations. Most countries  macroeconomic data as presented in the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version of the System of National Accounts (SNA 2008). The IMF s sector statistical standards the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and  Financial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide, and the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM 2014) have been aligned with the SNA 2008. These standards reflect the IMF s special interest in countries  external positions, financial sector stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The process of adapting country data to the new standards begins in earnest when the manuals are released. However, full concordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent on the provision by national statistical compilers of revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are only partly adapted to these manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, con- version to the updated standards will have only a small impact on major balances and aggregates. Many other countries have partly adopted the latest standards and will continue implementation over a number of years.2 The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF staff estimates. While attempts are made to align gross and net debt data with the definitions in the GFSM, as a result of data limitations or specific country circumstances, these data can sometimes deviate from the formal definitions. Although every effort is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant and interna- tionally comparable, differences in both sectoral 2 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few countries use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards each country adheres to. and  instrument coverage mean that the data are not universally comparable. As more information becomes available, changes in either data sources or instrument coverage can give rise to data revisions that can some- times be substantial. For clarification on the deviations in sectoral or instrument coverage, please refer to the metadata for the online WEO database. Composite data for country groups in the WEO are either sums or weighted averages of data for individual countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates of change.3 Arithmetically weighted averages are used for all data for the emerging market and developing economies group except data on inflation and money growth, for which geometric averages are used. The following conventions apply: Country group composites for exchange rates, interest rates, and growth rates of monetary aggre- gates are weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three years) as a share of group GDP. Composites for other data relating to the domestic economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share of total world or group GDP.4 Annual inflation rates are simple percentage changes from the previous years, except in the case of emerging market and develop- ing economies, for which the rates are based on  logarithmic differences. Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing- power-parity terms are sums of individual country data after conversion to the international dollar in the years indicated. Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepan- cies in intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual GDP data are used for the euro area and for the majority of individual countries, except for Cyprus, Ireland, 3 Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and com- modity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based on the simple arithmetic average. 4 See Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based weights as well as  Revised Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights  in the July 2014 WEO Update, Appendix 1.1 of the April 2008 WEO, Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO, Box A1 of the May 2000 WEO, and Annex IV of the May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne Schulze-Ghattas,  Purchasing-Power-Parity-Based Weights for the World Economic Outlook,  in Staff Studies for the World Eco- nomic Outlook (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, December 1993), 106 23. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 103 Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-adjusted data. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 1995 European currency unit exchange rates. Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver- age market exchange rates in the years indicated. Composite unemployment rates and employment growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group labor force. Composites relating to external sector statistics are sums of individual country data after conversion to US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years indicated for balance of payments data and at end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denomi- nated in currencies other than US dollars. Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of per- cent changes for individual countries weighted by the US dollar value of exports or imports as a share of total world or group exports or imports (in the preceding year). Unless noted otherwise, group composites are computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group weights is represented. Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and government finance data for each country. For some countries, the figures for 2020 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; Table G lists the latest actual outturns for the indi- cators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country. Country Notes For Argentina, fiscal and inflation variables are excluded from publication for 2021 26 as these are to a large extent linked to still-pending program negotia- tions. The official national consumer price index (CPI) for Argentina starts in December 2016. For earlier periods, CPI data for Argentina reflect the Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (prior to December 2013), the national CPI (IPCNu, December 2013 to October 2015), the City of Buenos Aires CPI (November 2015 to April 2016), and the Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (May 2016 to December 2016). Given limited comparability of these series on account of differences in geographical coverage, weights, sampling, and meth- odology, the average CPI inflation for 2014 16 and end-of-period inflation for 2015 16 are not reported in the April 2021 WEO. Also, Argentina discontinued the publication of labor market data in December 2015 and new series became available starting in the second quarter of 2016. Data and forecasts for Bangladesh are presented on a fiscal year basis starting with the October 2020 WEO. However, the real GDP and purchasing-power-parity GDP aggregates that include Bangladesh are based on calendar year estimates. The fiscal series for the Dominican Republic have the following coverage: public debt, debt service, and the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the consolidated public sector (which includes central government, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector, and the central bank); the remaining fiscal series are for the central government. The fiscal data for Ecuador reflect net lending/ borrowing for the nonfinancial public sector. Ecuadorian authorities, with technical support from the IMF, are revising the historical fiscal data for the net lending/ borrowing of the nonfinancial public sector over the period 2012 17, with the view of correcting recently identified statistical errors in data compilation at the subnational level and the consistency between above-the- line and financing data by subsectors. For Germany, projections do not reflect the exten- sions of lockdowns in response to a third wave of infections, the 2021 supplementary budget, and the draft 2022 federal budget. India s real GDP growth rates are calculated as per national accounts: for 1998 to 2011, with base year 2004/05 and, thereafter, with base year 2011/12. For Lebanon, projections for 2021 26 are omitted due to an unusually high degree of uncertainty. Against the backdrop of a civil war and weak capac- ity, the reliability of Libya s data, especially regarding national accounts and medium-term projections, is low. Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward because of the uncertain political situation. For Turkey, projections were finalized in early March 2021. For Turkmenistan, estimates and projections of the fiscal balance exclude receipts from domestic bond issuance, in line with GFSM 2014. The authorities  official estimates, which are compiled using domestic statistical methodologies, include bond issuance as part of government revenues. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 104 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Ukraine s revised national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward. In December 2020 the Uruguay authorities began reporting the national accounts data according to SNA 2008, with the base year 2016. The new series began in 2016. Data prior to 2016 reflect the IMF staff s best effort to preserve previously reported data and avoid structural breaks. Starting in October 2018 Uruguay s public pension system has been receiving transfers in the context of a new law that compensates persons affected by the creation of the mixed pension system. These funds are recorded as revenues, consistent with the IMF s meth- odology. Therefore, data and projections for 2018 21 are affected by these transfers, which amounted to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2018 and 1.1 percent of GDP in 2019, and are projected to be 0.6 percent of GDP in 2020, 0.2 percent of GDP in 2021, and zero percent thereafter (see IMF Country Report 19/64 for further details).5 The disclaimer about the public pension system applies only to the revenues and net lending/borrowing series. The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was changed from consolidated public sector to nonfinancial public sector with the October 2019 WEO. In Uruguay, nonfinancial public sector coverage includes central government, local government, social security funds, nonfinancial public corporations, and Banco de Seguros del Estado. Historical data were also revised accordingly. Under this narrower fiscal perimeter which excludes the central bank assets and liabilities held by the nonfinancial public sector where the counterpart is the central bank are not netted out in debt figures. In this context, capitalization bonds issued in the past by the government to the central bank are now part of the nonfinancial public sector debt. Gross and net debt estimates for 2008 11 are preliminary. Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, including assessing past and current economic devel- opments as the basis for the projections, is compli- cated by the lack of discussions with the authorities (the last Article IV consultation took place in 2004), incomplete understanding of the reported data, and difficulties in interpreting certain reported economic indicators given economic developments. The fiscal 5 Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Country Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, February 2019). accounts include the budgetary central govern- ment; social security; FOGADE (insurance deposit institution); and a sample of public enterprises, includ- ing Petr leos de Venezuela, S.A.; and data for 2018 19 are IMF staff estimates. The effects of hyperinflation and the paucity of reported data mean that the IMF staff s projected macroeconomic indicators need to be interpreted with caution. For example, nominal GDP is estimated assuming the GDP deflator rises in line with the IMF staff s projection of average inflation. Public external debt in relation to GDP is projected using the IMF staff s estimate of the average exchange rate for the year. Wide uncertainty surrounds these projections. Venezuela s consumer prices are excluded from all WEO group composites. In 2019 Zimbabwe authorities introduced the Real Time Gross Settlement dollar, later renamed the Zimbabwe dollar, and are in the process of redenomi- nating their national accounts statistics. Current data are subject to revision. The Zimbabwe dollar previ- ously ceased circulating in 2009 and, during 2009 19, Zimbabwe operated under a multicurrency regime, with the US dollar as the unit of account. Classification of Countries Summary of the Country Classification The country classification in the WEO divides the world into two major groups: advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies.6 This classification is not based on strict criteria, economic or otherwise, and has evolved over time. The objec- tive is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably meaningful method of organizing data. Table A pro- vides an overview of the country classification, showing the number of countries in each group by region and summarizing some key indicators of their relative size (GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports of goods and services, and population). Some countries remain outside the country classifica- tion and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba and the Democratic People s Republic of Korea are examples of countries that are not IMF members, and the IMF therefore does not monitor their economies. 6 As used here, the terms  country  and  economy  do not always refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by interna- tional law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 105 General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification Advanced Economies Table B lists the 39 advanced economies. The seven largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange rates Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States constitute the subgroup of major advanced economies, often referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of the euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Com- posite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover the current members for all years, even though the membership has increased over time. Table C lists the member countries of the European Union, not all of which are classified as advanced economies in the WEO. Emerging Market and Developing Economies The group of emerging market and developing economies (156) includes all those that are not classi- fied as advanced economies. The regional breakdowns of emerging market and developing economies are emerging and developing Asia; emerging and developing Europe (sometimes also referred to as  central and eastern Europe ); Latin America and the Caribbean; Middle East and Central Asia (which comprises the regional subgroups Caucasus and Central Asia; and Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan); and sub-Saharan Africa. Emerging market and developing economies are also classified according to analytical criteria that reflect the composition of export earnings and a distinc- tion between net creditor and net debtor economies. Tables D and E show the detailed composition of emerging market and developing economies in the regional and analytical groups. The analytical criterion source of export earnings distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) 3) and nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products (SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized into one of these groups if their main source of export earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on aver- age between 2015 and 2019. The financial and income criteria focus on net creditor economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries (HIPCs), LIDCs, and EMMIEs. Economies are categorized as net debtors when their latest net international investment position, where available, was less than zero or their current account balance accumulations from 1972 (or earliest available data) to 2019 were negative. Net debtor economies are further differentiated on the basis of experience with debt servicing.7 The HIPC group comprises the countries that are or have been considered by the IMF and the World Bank for participation in their debt initiative known as the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a  sustainable  level in a reasonably short period of time.8 Many of these countries have already benefited from debt relief and have graduated from the initiative. The LIDCs are countries that have per capita income levels below a certain threshold (set at $2,700 in 2016 as measured by the World Bank s Atlas method), structural features consistent with limited development and structural transformation, and exter- nal financial links insufficiently close for them to be widely seen as emerging market economies. The EMMIEs comprise emerging market and devel- oping economies that are not classified as LIDCs. 7 During 2015 19, 27 economies incurred external payments arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or rescheduling during 2015 19. 8 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and Sukwinder Singh,  Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The Enhanced HIPC Initiative,  IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999). WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 106 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A. Classification, by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 20201 (Percent of total for group or world) GDP Exports of Goods and Services Population Number of Economies Advanced Economies World Advanced Economies World Advanced Economies World Advanced Economies 39 100.0 42.5 100.0 63.0 100.0 14.1 United States 37.4 15.9 15.3 9.7 30.7 4.3 Euro Area 19 28.3 12.0 42.3 26.7 31.7 4.5 Germany 8.0 3.4 12.0 7.6 7.7 1.1 France 5.4 2.3 5.4 3.4 6.1 0.9 Italy 4.4 1.9 4.0 2.5 5.6 0.8 Spain 3.2 1.4 2.8 1.8 4.4 0.6 Japan 9.5 4.0 5.7 3.6 11.7 1.6 United Kingdom 5.3 2.2 5.3 3.3 6.2 0.9 Canada 3.3 1.4 3.4 2.2 3.5 0.5 Other Advanced Economies 16 16.2 6.9 28.0 17.6 16.2 2.3 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 7 73.3 31.2 51.1 32.2 71.6 10.1 Emerging Market and Developing Economies World Emerging Market and Developing Economies World Emerging Market and Developing Economies World Emerging Market and Developing Economies 156 100.0 57.5 100.0 37.0 100.0 85.9 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia 30 55.9 32.2 53.4 19.8 55.9 48.0 China 31.9 18.3 33.5 12.4 21.4 18.4 India 11.8 6.8 6.0 2.2 21.0 18.0 ASEAN-5 5 9.8 5.7 12.4 4.6 8.8 7.6 Emerging and Developing Europe 16 13.5 7.7 16.2 6.0 5.8 5.0 Russia 5.4 3.1 4.6 1.7 2.2 1.9 Latin America and the Caribbean 33 12.7 7.3 13.1 4.9 9.7 8.3 Brazil 4.2 2.4 2.9 1.1 3.2 2.8 Mexico 3.2 1.9 5.3 2.0 1.9 1.7 Middle East and Central Asia 32 12.5 7.2 13.3 4.9 12.7 10.9 Saudi Arabia 2.1 1.2 2.2 0.8 0.5 0.5 Sub-Saharan Africa 45 5.4 3.1 4.0 1.5 15.9 13.7 Nigeria 1.4 0.8 0.5 0.2 3.1 2.7 South Africa 0.9 0.5 1.1 0.4 0.9 0.8 Analytical Groups2 By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 26 10.0 5.8 12.5 4.6 9.5 8.2 Nonfuel 129 90.0 51.7 87.5 32.4 90.5 77.7 Of Which, Primary Products 35 5.3 3.0 5.1 1.9 9.2 7.9 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies 123 52.7 30.3 49.4 18.3 68.7 59.1 Net Debtor Economies by Debt- Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19 28 3.8 2.2 2.7 1.0 7.4 6.3 Other Groups Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 97 91.6 52.7 92.4 34.2 76.7 65.9 Low-Income Developing Countries 57 8.4 4.8 7.6 2.8 23.3 20.1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 39 2.9 1.7 2.0 0.8 12.1 10.4 1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies  GDP. The number of economies composing each group reflects those for which data are included in the group aggregates. 2Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings, and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of insufficient data. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 107 Table B. Advanced Economies, by Subgroup Major Currency Areas United States Euro Area Japan Euro Area Austria Greece The Netherlands Belgium Ireland Portugal Cyprus Italy Slovak Republic Estonia Latvia Slovenia Finland Lithuania Spain France Luxembourg Germany Malta Major Advanced Economies Canada Italy United States France Japan Germany United Kingdom Other Advanced Economies Australia Korea Singapore Czech Republic Macao SAR2 Sweden Denmark New Zealand Switzerland Hong Kong SAR1 Norway Taiwan Province of China Iceland Puerto Rico Israel San Marino 1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People s Republic of China and became a Special Administrative Region of China. 2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People s Republic of China and became a Special Administrative Region of China. Table C. European Union Austria France Malta Belgium Germany The Netherlands Bulgaria Greece Poland Croatia Hungary Portugal Cyprus Ireland Romania Czech Republic Italy Slovak Republic Denmark Latvia Slovenia Estonia Lithuania Spain Finland Luxembourg Sweden WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 108 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings1 Fuel Nonfuel Primary Products Emerging and Developing Asia Brunei Darussalam Kiribati Timor-Leste Marshall Islands Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Tuvalu Latin America and the Caribbean Ecuador Argentina Trinidad and Tobago Bolivia Venezuela Chile Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Middle East and Central Asia Algeria Afghanistan Azerbaijan Mauritania Bahrain Somalia Iran Sudan Iraq Tajikistan Kazakhstan Uzbekistan Kuwait Libya Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Yemen Sub-Saharan Africa Angola Benin Chad Burkina Faso Republic of Congo Burundi Equatorial Guinea Central African Republic Gabon Democratic Republic of the Congo Nigeria C te d Ivoire South Sudan Eritrea Guinea Guinea-Bissau Liberia Malawi Mali Sierra Leone South Africa Zambia Zimbabwe 1Emerging and Developing Europe is omitted because no economies in the group have fuel or nonfuel primary products as the main source of export earnings. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 109 Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Per Capita Income Classification3 Emerging and Developing Asia Bangladesh * * Bhutan * * Brunei Darussalam     Cambodia * * China     Fiji *   India *   Indonesia *   Kiribati   * Lao P.D.R. * * Malaysia *   Maldives *   Marshall Islands *   Micronesia     Mongolia *   Myanmar * * Nauru *   Nepal   * Palau *   Papua New Guinea * * Philippines *   Samoa *   Solomon Islands * * Sri Lanka *   Thailand *   Timor-Leste   * Tonga *   Tuvalu *   Vanuatu *   Vietnam * * Emerging and Developing Europe Albania *   Belarus *   Bosnia and Herzegovina *   Bulgaria *   Croatia *   Hungary *   Kosovo *   Moldova * * Montenegro *   Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Per Capita Income Classification3 North Macedonia *   Poland *   Romania *   Russia     Serbia *   Turkey *   Ukraine *   Latin America and the Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda *   Argentina     Aruba *   The Bahamas *   Barbados *   Belize *   Bolivia *     Brazil *   Chile *   Colombia *   Costa Rica *   Dominica     Dominican Republic *   Ecuador *   El Salvador *   Grenada *   Guatemala *   Guyana *     Haiti *   * Honduras *   * Jamaica *   Mexico *   Nicaragua *   * Panama *   Paraguay *   Peru *   St. Kitts and Nevis *   St. Lucia *   St. Vincent and the Grenadines *   Suriname *   Trinidad and Tobago     Uruguay *   Venezuela     Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 110 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Per Capita Income Classification3 Middle East and Central Asia Afghanistan     * Algeria     Armenia *   Azerbaijan     Bahrain     Djibouti * * Egypt *   Georgia *   Iran     Iraq     Jordan *   Kazakhstan *   Kuwait     Kyrgyz Republic * * Lebanon *   Libya     Mauritania *   * Morocco *   Oman *   Pakistan *   Qatar     Saudi Arabia     Somalia * * * Sudan * * * Syria4 . . .   Tajikistan * * Tunisia *   Turkmenistan     United Arab Emirates     Uzbekistan   * West Bank and Gaza *   Yemen * * Sub-Saharan Africa Angola *   Benin *   * Botswana     Burkina Faso *   * Burundi *   * Cabo Verde *   Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Per Capita Income Classification3 Cameroon *   * Central African Republic *   * Chad *   * Comoros *   * Democratic Republic of the Congo *   * Republic of Congo *   * C te d Ivoire *   * Equatorial Guinea     Eritrea   * * Eswatini     Ethiopia *   * Gabon     The Gambia *   * Ghana *   * Guinea *   * Guinea-Bissau *   * Kenya * * Lesotho * * Liberia *   * Madagascar *   * Malawi *   * Mali *   * Mauritius     Mozambique *   * Namibia *   Niger *   * Nigeria * * Rwanda *   * S o Tom  and Pr ncipe *   * Senegal *   * Seychelles *   Sierra Leone *   * South Africa     South Sudan4 . . . * Tanzania *   * Togo *   * Uganda *   * Zambia *   * Zimbabwe * * Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification (continued) 1Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor). 2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point. 3Dot (star) indicates that the country is classified as an emerging market and middle-income economy (low-income developing country). 4South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 111 Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1 National Accounts Government Finance The Bahamas Jul/Jun Bangladesh Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Barbados Apr/Mar Bhutan Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Botswana Apr/Mar Burundi Jul/Jun Dominica Jul/Jun Egypt Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Eswatini Apr/Mar Ethiopia Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Haiti Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Hong Kong SAR Apr/Mar India Apr/Mar Apr/Mar Iran Apr/Mar Apr/Mar Jamaica Apr/Mar Lesotho Apr/Mar Apr/Mar Marshall Islands Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Mauritius Jul/Jun Micronesia Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Myanmar Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Namibia Apr/Mar Nauru Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Nepal Aug/Jul Aug/Jul Pakistan Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Palau Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Puerto Rico Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Rwanda Jul/Jun St. Lucia Apr/Mar Samoa Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Singapore Apr/Mar Thailand Oct/Sep Tonga Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Trinidad and Tobago Oct/Sep 1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 112 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table G. Key Data Documentation Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Afghanistan Afghan afghani NSO 2019 2016 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Albania Albanian lek IMF staff 2019 1996 ESA 2010 From 1996 NSO 2020 Algeria Algerian dinar NSO 2019 2001 SNA 1993 From 2005 NSO 2019 Angola Angolan kwanza NSO and MEP 2019 2002 ESA 1995 NSO 2019 Antigua and Barbuda Eastern Caribbean dollar CB 2019 20066 SNA 1993 CB 2020 Argentina Argentine peso NSO 2019 2004 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Armenia Armenian dram NSO 2019 2005 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Aruba Aruban Florin NSO 2017 2000 SNA 1993 From 2000 NSO 2020 Australia Australian dollar NSO 2020 2018 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2020 Austria Euro NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2020 Azerbaijan Azerbaijan manat NSO 2019 2005 SNA 1993 From 1994 NSO 2020 The Bahamas Bahamian dollar NSO 2019 2012 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Bahrain Bahrain dinar NSO 2019 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Bangladesh Bangladesh taka NSO 2019/20 2005/06 SNA 2008 NSO 2019/20 Barbados Barbados dollar NSO and CB 2019 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Belarus Belarusian ruble NSO 2019 2018 SNA 2008 From 2005 NSO 2019 Belgium Euro CB 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 CB 2020 Belize Belize dollar NSO 2020 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Benin CFA franc NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Bhutan Bhutanese ngultrum NSO 2019/20 2000/016 SNA 1993 CB 2019/20 Bolivia Bolivian boliviano NSO 2019 1990 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Bosnia and Herzegovina Bosnian convertible marka NSO 2018 2015 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2019 Botswana Botswana pula NSO 2019 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Brazil Brazilian real NSO 2020 1995 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Brunei Darussalam Brunei dollar NSO and GAD 2019 2010 SNA 2008 NSO and GAD 2019 Bulgaria Bulgarian lev NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 1996 NSO 2020 Burkina Faso CFA franc NSO and MEP 2018 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Burundi Burundi franc NSO and IMF staff 2019 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Cabo Verde Cabo Verdean escudo NSO 2019 2007 SNA 2008 From 2011 NSO 2019 Cambodia Cambodian riel NSO 2019 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Cameroon CFA franc NSO 2019 2005 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Canada Canadian dollar NSO 2020 2012 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2020 Central African Republic CFA franc NSO 2017 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Chad CFA franc CB 2017 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Chile Chilean peso CB 2020 20136 SNA 2008 From 2003 NSO 2019 China Chinese yuan NSO 2020 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Colombia Colombian peso NSO 2020 2015 SNA 2008 From 2005 NSO 2020 Comoros Comorian franc MoF 2018 2007 SNA 1993 From 2007 NSO 2019 Democratic Republic of the Congo Congolese franc NSO 2019 2005 SNA 1993 CB 2019 Republic of Congo CFA franc NSO 2018 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Costa Rica Costa Rican col n CB 2019 2017 SNA 2008 CB 2019 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 113 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Afghanistan MoF 2019 2001 CG C NSO, MoF, and CB 2018 BPM 6 Albania IMF staff 2019 1986 CG,LG,SS,MPC, NFPC . . . CB 2019 BPM 6 Algeria MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Angola MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG . . . CB 2019 BPM 6 Antigua and Barbuda MoF 2020 2001 CG Mixed CB 2018 BPM 6 Argentina MEP 2019 1986 CG,SG,SS C NSO 2019 BPM 6 Armenia MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Aruba MoF 2019 2001 CG Mixed CB 2019 BPM 6 Australia MoF 2019 2014 CG,SG,LG,TG A NSO 2020 BPM 6 Austria NSO 2019 2014 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 Azerbaijan MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 The Bahamas MoF 2019/20 2014 CG C CB 2019 BPM 5 Bahrain MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Bangladesh MoF 2018/19 . . . CG C CB 2018/19 BPM 6 Barbados MoF 2019/20 1986 BCG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Belarus MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2019 BPM 6 Belgium CB 2019 ESA 2010 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 Belize MoF 2019 1986 CG,MPC Mixed CB 2019 BPM 6 Benin MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Bhutan MoF 2019/20 1986 CG C CB 2019/20 BPM 6 Bolivia MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS,NMPC, NFPC C CB 2019 BPM 6 Bosnia and Herzegovina MoF 2019 2014 CG,SG,LG,SS Mixed CB 2019 BPM 6 Botswana MoF 2019/20 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Brazil MoF 2020 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC C CB 2020 BPM 6 Brunei Darussalam MoF 2020 . . . CG,BCG C NSO, MEP, and GAD 2019 BPM 6 Bulgaria MoF 2020 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Burkina Faso MoF 2019 2001 CG CB CB 2018 BPM 6 Burundi MoF 2019/20 2001 CG Mixed CB 2020 BPM 6 Cabo Verde MoF 2018 2001 CG A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Cambodia MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG Mixed CB 2019 BPM 5 Cameroon MoF 2019 2001 CG,NFPC,NMPC Mixed MoF 2019 BPM 6 Canada MoF 2020 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS,other A NSO 2020 BPM 6 Central African Republic MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2017 BPM 5 Chad MoF 2020 1986 CG,NFPC C CB 2013 BPM 5 Chile MoF 2020 2001 CG,LG A CB 2020 BPM 6 China MoF 2019 . . . CG,LG C GAD 2020 BPM 6 Colombia MoF 2019 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS . . . CB and NSO 2019 BPM 6 Comoros MoF 2018 1986 CG Mixed CB and IMF staff 2018 BPM 5 Democratic Republic of the Congo MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG A CB 2019 BPM 6 Republic of Congo MoF 2018 2001 CG A CB 2017 BPM 6 Costa Rica MoF and CB 2019 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 114 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data C te d'Ivoire CFA franc NSO 2017 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Croatia Croatian kuna NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 NSO 2019 Cyprus Euro NSO 2020 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2020 Czech Republic Czech koruna NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2019 Denmark Danish krone NSO 2019 2010 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2019 Djibouti Djibouti franc NSO 2018 2013 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Dominica Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2018 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Dominican Republic Dominican peso CB 2019 2007 SNA 2008 From 2007 CB 2020 Ecuador US dollar CB 2019 2007 SNA 1993 NSO and CB 2020 Egypt Egyptian pound MEP 2019/20 2016/17 SNA 2008 NSO 2019/20 El Salvador US dollar CB 2019 2014 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Equatorial Guinea CFA franc MEP and CB 2017 2006 SNA 1993 MEP 2019 Eritrea Eritrean nakfa IMF staff 2018 2011 SNA 1993 NSO 2018 Estonia Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 2010 NSO 2020 Eswatini Swazi lilangeni NSO 2019 2011 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Ethiopia Ethiopian birr NSO 2019/20 2015/16 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Fiji Fijian dollar NSO 2019 2014 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Finland Euro NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2019 France Euro NSO 2020 2014 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2020 Gabon CFA franc MoF 2019 2001 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 The Gambia Gambian dalasi NSO 2018 2013 SNA 2008 NSO 2018 Georgia Georgian lari NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 From 1996 NSO 2019 Germany Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 1991 NSO 2020 Ghana Ghanaian cedi NSO 2019 2013 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Greece Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2020 Grenada Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2019 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Guatemala Guatemalan quetzal CB 2019 2013 SNA 2008 From 2001 NSO 2019 Guinea Guinean franc NSO 2018 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Guinea-Bissau CFA franc NSO 2018 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Guyana Guyanese dollar NSO 2019 20126 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Haiti Haitian gourde NSO 2018/19 2012 SNA 2008 NSO 2019/20 Honduras Honduran lempira CB 2019 2000 SNA 1993 CB 2019 Hong Kong SAR Hong Kong dollar NSO 2020 2018 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2020 Hungary Hungarian forint NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 IEO 2020 Iceland Icelandic kr na NSO 2018 2015 ESA 2010 From 1990 NSO 2018 India Indian rupee NSO 2020/21 2011/12 SNA 2008 NSO 2019/20 Indonesia Indonesian rupiah NSO 2020 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Iran Iranian rial CB 2019/20 2011/12 SNA 1993 CB 2018/19 Iraq Iraqi dinar NSO 2020 2007 SNA 1968/93 NSO 2020 Ireland Euro NSO 2019 2017 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2019 Israel New Israeli shekel NSO 2020 2015 SNA 2008 From 1995 NSO 2020 Italy Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2020 Jamaica Jamaican dollar NSO 2019 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 115 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source C te d'Ivoire MoF 2019 1986 CG A CB 2018 BPM 6 Croatia MoF 2019 2014 CG,LG A CB 2019 BPM 6 Cyprus NSO 2019 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 Czech Republic MoF 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Denmark NSO 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Djibouti MoF 2019 2001 CG A CB 2018 BPM 5 Dominica MoF 2020/21 1986 CG C CB 2018 BPM 6 Dominican Republic MoF 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS,NMPC A CB 2019 BPM 6 Ecuador CB and MoF 2019 1986 CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC Mixed CB 2019 BPM 6 Egypt MoF 2019/20 2001 CG,LG,SS,MPC C CB 2019/20 BPM 5 El Salvador MoF and CB 2019 1986 CG,LG,SS,NFPC C CB 2019 BPM 6 Equatorial Guinea MoF and MEP 2018 1986 CG C CB 2017 BPM 5 Eritrea MoF 2018 2001 CG C CB 2018 BPM 5 Estonia MoF 2019 1986/2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Eswatini MoF 2019/20 2001 CG A CB 2019 BPM 6 Ethiopia MoF 2019/20 1986 CG,SG,LG,NFPC C CB 2019/20 BPM 5 Fiji MoF 2019/20 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Finland MoF 2020 2014 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2020 BPM 6 France NSO 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS A CB 2020 BPM 6 Gabon IMF staff 2019 2001 CG A CB 2019 BPM 5 The Gambia MoF 2018 1986 CG C CB and IMF staff 2018 BPM 5 Georgia MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG C NSO and CB 2019 BPM 6 Germany NSO 2020 ESA 2010 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2020 BPM 6 Ghana MoF 2018 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 5 Greece NSO 2019 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 Grenada MoF 2019 2014 CG CB CB 2018 BPM 6 Guatemala MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Guinea MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB and MEP 2019 BPM 6 Guinea-Bissau MoF 2019 2001 CG A CB 2019 BPM 6 Guyana MoF 2019 1986 CG,SS,NFPC C CB 2019 BPM 6 Haiti MoF 2019/20 1986 CG C CB 2019/20 BPM 5 Honduras MoF 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS,other Mixed CB 2019 BPM 5 Hong Kong SAR NSO 2019/20 2001 CG C NSO 2019 BPM 6 Hungary MEP and NSO 2019 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS,NMPC A CB 2019 BPM 6 Iceland NSO 2018 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2018 BPM 6 India MoF and IMF staff 2019/20 1986 CG,SG C CB 2019/20 BPM 6 Indonesia MoF 2020 2001 CG,LG C CB 2020 BPM 6 Iran MoF 2018/19 2001 CG C CB 2019/20 BPM 5 Iraq MoF 2020 2001 CG C CB 2020 BPM 6 Ireland MoF and NSO 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Israel MoF and NSO 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS . . . NSO 2020 BPM 6 Italy NSO 2020 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2020 BPM 6 Jamaica MoF 2019/20 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 116 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Japan Japanese yen GAD 2020 2015 SNA 2008 From 1980 GAD 2020 Jordan Jordanian dinar NSO 2019 2016 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Kazakhstan Kazakhstani tenge NSO 2020 2005 SNA 1993 From 1994 CB 2020 Kenya Kenyan shilling NSO 2019 2009 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Kiribati Australian dollar NSO 2017 2006 SNA 2008 IMF Staff 2017 Korea South Korean won CB 2020 2015 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2020 Kosovo Euro NSO 2019 2016 ESA 2010 NSO 2020 Kuwait Kuwaiti dinar MEP and NSO 2019 2010 SNA 1993 NSO and MEP 2019 Kyrgyz Republic Kyrgyz som NSO 2019 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Lao P.D.R. Lao kip NSO 2019 2012 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Latvia Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2020 Lebanon Lebanese pound NSO 2018 2010 SNA 2008 From 2010 NSO 2019/20 Lesotho Lesotho loti NSO 2018/19 2012/13 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Liberia US dollar IMF staff 2016 2018 SNA 1993 CB 2019 Libya Libyan dinar CB 2017 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Lithuania Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 2005 NSO 2020 Luxembourg Euro NSO 2020 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2020 Macao SAR Macanese pataca NSO 2020 2018 SNA 2008 From 2001 NSO 2020 Madagascar Malagasy ariary NSO 2018 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Malawi Malawian kwacha NSO 2019 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Malaysia Malaysian ringgit NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Maldives Maldivian rufiyaa MoF and NSO 2020 2014 SNA 1993 CB 2020 Mali CFA franc NSO 2018 1999 SNA 1993 NSO 2018 Malta Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2020 Marshall Islands US dollar NSO 2018/19 2003/04 SNA 1993 NSO 2018/19 Mauritania New Mauritanian ouguiya NSO 2018 2014 SNA 2008 From 2014 NSO 2019 Mauritius Mauritian rupee NSO 2018 2006 SNA 1993 From 1999 NSO 2020 Mexico Mexican peso NSO 2020 2013 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Micronesia US dollar NSO 2017/18 2003/04 SNA 1993 NSO 2017/18 Moldova Moldovan leu NSO 2019 1995 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Mongolia Mongolian t gr g NSO 2020 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Montenegro Euro NSO 2020 2006 ESA 2010 NSO 2020 Morocco Moroccan dirham NSO 2019 2007 SNA 2008 From 2007 NSO 2019 Mozambique Mozambican metical NSO 2019 2014 SNA 1993/ 2008 NSO 2019 Myanmar Myanmar kyat MEP 2019/20 2015/16 . . . NSO 2019/20 Namibia Namibian dollar NSO 2020 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Nauru Australian dollar . . . 2018/19 2006/07 SNA 2008 NSO 2019/20 Nepal Nepalese rupee NSO 2019/20 2000/01 SNA 1993 CB 2019/20 The Netherlands Euro NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2019 New Zealand6 New Zealand dollar NSO 2020 2009 SNA 2008 From 1987 NSO 2020 Nicaragua Nicaraguan c rdoba CB 2019 2006 SNA 1993 From 1994 CB 2020 Niger CFA franc NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Nigeria Nigerian naira NSO 2019 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 North Macedonia Macedonian denar NSO 2020 2005 ESA 2010 NSO 2020 Norway Norwegian krone NSO 2018 2018 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2019 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 117 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Japan GAD 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS A MoF 2020 BPM 6 Jordan MoF 2019 2001 CG,NFPC C CB 2019 BPM 6 Kazakhstan NSO 2020 2001 CG,LG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Kenya MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2020 BPM 6 Kiribati MoF 2017 1986 CG C NSO and IMF staff 2018 BPM 6 Korea MoF 2019 2001 CG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Kosovo MoF 2020 . . . CG,LG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Kuwait MoF 2019 2014 CG,SS Mixed CB 2018 BPM 6 Kyrgyz Republic MoF 2019 . . . CG,LG,SS C CB 2019 BPM 6 Lao P.D.R. MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Latvia MoF 2020 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Lebanon MoF 2019 2001 CG Mixed CB and IMF staff 2019 BPM 5 Lesotho MoF 2019/20 2001 CG,LG C CB 2018/19 BPM 6 Liberia MoF 2019 2001 CG A CB 2019 BPM 5 Libya CB 2019 1986 CG,SG,LG C CB 2017 BPM 6 Lithuania MoF 2019 2014 CG,LG,SS A CB 2020 BPM 6 Luxembourg MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Macao SAR MoF 2019 2014 CG,SS C NSO 2019 BPM 6 Madagascar MoF 2020 1986 CG,LG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Malawi MoF 2019 2014 CG C NSO and GAD 2020 BPM 6 Malaysia MoF 2019 2001 CG,SG,LG C NSO 2019 BPM 6 Maldives MoF 2020 1986 CG C CB 2020 BPM 6 Mali MoF 2018 2001 CG Mixed CB 2018 BPM 6 Malta NSO 2019 2001 CG,SS A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Marshall Islands MoF 2018/19 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2018/19 BPM 6 Mauritania MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2018 BPM 6 Mauritius MoF 2019/20 2001 CG,LG,NFPC C CB 2020 BPM 6 Mexico MoF 2020 2014 CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC C CB 2019 BPM 6 Micronesia MoF 2017/18 2001 CG,SG . . . NSO 2017/18 BPM 6 Moldova MoF 2019 1986 CG,LG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Mongolia MoF 2020 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Montenegro MoF 2020 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Morocco MEP 2019 2001 CG A GAD 2019 BPM 6 Mozambique MoF 2019 2001 CG,SG Mixed CB 2019 BPM 6 Myanmar MoF 2019/20 2014 CG,NFPC C IMF staff 2018/19 BPM 6 Namibia MoF 2018/19 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Nauru MoF 2019/20 2001 CG Mixed IMF staff 2018/19 BPM 6 Nepal MoF 2019/20 2001 CG C CB 2019/20 BPM 5 The Netherlands MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 New Zealand MoF 2020 2014 CG, LG A NSO 2020 BPM 6 Nicaragua MoF 2019 1986 CG,LG,SS C IMF staff 2019 BPM 6 Niger MoF 2019 1986 CG A CB 2018 BPM 6 Nigeria MoF 2019 2001 CG,SG,LG C CB 2019 BPM 6 North Macedonia MoF 2020 1986 CG,SG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Norway NSO and MoF 2020 2014 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2018 BPM 6 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 118 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Oman Omani rial NSO 2019 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Pakistan Pakistan rupee NSO 2019/20 2005/066 . . . NSO 2019/20 Palau US dollar MoF 2018/19 2014/15 SNA 1993 MoF 2018/19 Panama US dollar NSO 2019 2007 SNA 1993 From 2007 NSO 2020 Papua New Guinea Papua New Guinea kina NSO and MoF 2019 2013 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Paraguay Paraguayan guaran  CB 2019 2014 SNA 2008 CB 2019 Peru Peruvian sol CB 2020 2007 SNA 1993 CB 2019 Philippines Philippine peso NSO 2020 2018 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Poland Polish zloty NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 2010 NSO 2020 Portugal Euro NSO 2020 2016 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2020 Puerto Rico US dollar NSO 2018/19 1954 SNA1968 NSO 2018/19 Qatar Qatari riyal NSO and MEP 2019 2018 SNA 1993 NSO and MEP 2019 Romania Romanian leu NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2019 Russia Russian ruble NSO 2020 2016 SNA 2008 From 1995 NSO 2020 Rwanda Rwandan franc NSO 2018 2017 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Samoa Samoan tala NSO 2019/20 2012/13 SNA 2008 NSO 2019/20 San Marino Euro NSO 2019 2007 ESA 2010 NSO 2020 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe S o Tom  and Pr ncipe dobra NSO 2019 2008 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Saudi Arabia Saudi riyal NSO 2019 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Senegal CFA franc NSO 2019 2014 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Serbia Serbian dinar NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 2010 NSO 2020 Seychelles Seychelles rupee NSO 2019 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Sierra Leone Sierra Leonean leone NSO 2018 2006 SNA 2008 From 2010 NSO 2019 Singapore Singapore dollar NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 From 2015 NSO 2019 Slovak Republic Euro NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 1997 NSO 2020 Slovenia Euro NSO 2020 2010 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2020 Solomon Islands Solomon Islands dollar CB 2019 2012 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Somalia US dollar CB 2019 2013 SNA 2008 CB 2020 South Africa South African rand NSO 2020 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 South Sudan South Sudanese pound NSO and IMF staff 2018 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Spain Euro NSO 2020 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2020 Sri Lanka Sri Lankan rupee NSO 2019 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 St. Kitts and Nevis Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2019 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 St. Lucia Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2019 2018 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 St. Vincent and the Grenadines Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2019 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Sudan Sudanese pound NSO 2019 1982 SNA 1968 NSO 2019 Suriname Surinamese dollar NSO 2019 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 119 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Oman MoF 2018 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 5 Pakistan MoF 2019/20 1986 CG,SG,LG C CB 2019/20 BPM 6 Palau MoF 2018/19 2001 CG . . . MoF 2018/19 BPM 6 Panama MoF 2020 2014 CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC C NSO 2019 BPM 6 Papua New Guinea MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 5 Paraguay MoF 2019 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC, NFPC C CB 2019 BPM 6 Peru CB and MoF 2019 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS Mixed CB 2020 BPM 5 Philippines MoF 2020 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2019 BPM 6 Poland MoF and NSO 2019 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS A CB 2020 BPM 6 Portugal NSO 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2020 BPM 6 Puerto Rico MEP 2015/16 2001 . . . A . . . . . . . . . Qatar MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB and IMF staff 2019 BPM 5 Romania MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2019 BPM 6 Russia MoF 2019 2014 CG,SG,SS Mixed CB 2019 BPM 6 Rwanda MoF 2018 1986 CG,LG Mixed CB 2018 BPM 6 Samoa MoF 2019/20 2001 CG A CB 2019/20 BPM 6 San Marino MoF 2019 . . . CG . . . Other 2019 . . . S o Tom  and Pr ncipe MoF and Customs 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Saudi Arabia MoF 2019 2014 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Senegal MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB and IMF staff 2019 BPM 6 Serbia MoF 2020 1986/2001 CG,SG,LG,SS,other C CB 2020 BPM 6 Seychelles MoF 2019 1986 CG,SS C CB 2017 BPM 6 Sierra Leone MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2018 BPM 6 Singapore MoF and NSO 2019/20 2014 CG C NSO 2019 BPM 6 Slovak Republic NSO 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 Slovenia MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2020 BPM 6 Solomon Islands MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Somalia MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 5 South Africa MoF 2020 2001 CG,SG,SS,other C CB 2019 BPM 6 South Sudan MoF and MEP 2019 . . . CG C MoF, NSO, and MEP 2018 BPM 6 Spain MoF and NSO 2019 ESA 2010 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 Sri Lanka MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 St. Kitts and Nevis MoF 2020 1986 CG,SG C CB 2018 BPM 6 St. Lucia MoF 2019/20 1986 CG C CB 2018 BPM 6 St. Vincent and the Grenadines MoF 2020 1986 CG C CB 2018 BPM 6 Sudan MoF 2019 2001 CG Mixed CB 2019 BPM 6 Suriname MoF 2019 1986 CG Mixed CB 2020 BPM 6 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 120 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Sweden Swedish krona NSO 2019 2019 ESA 2010 From 1993 NSO 2020 Switzerland Swiss franc NSO 2019 2015 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2020 Syria Syrian pound NSO 2010 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2011 Taiwan Province of China New Taiwan dollar NSO 2020 2016 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Tajikistan Tajik somoni NSO 2019 1995 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Tanzania Tanzanian shilling NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Thailand Thai baht MEP 2020 2002 SNA 1993 From 1993 MEP 2020 Timor-Leste US dollar NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2019 Togo CFA franc NSO 2016 2016 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Tonga Tongan pa anga CB 2018/19 2016/17 SNA 1993 CB 2019/20 Trinidad and Tobago Trinidad and Tobago dollar NSO 2019 2012 SNA 1993 NSO 2020 Tunisia Tunisian dinar NSO 2019 2010 SNA 1993 From 2009 NSO 2019 Turkey Turkish lira NSO 2020 2009 ESA 2010 From 2009 NSO 2020 Turkmenistan New Turkmen manat NSO 2019 2008 SNA 1993 From 2000 NSO 2019 Tuvalu Australian dollar PFTAC advisors 2018 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2018 Uganda Ugandan shilling NSO 2019 2016 SNA 1993 CB 2020 Ukraine Ukrainian hryvnia NSO 2019 2016 SNA 2008 From 2005 NSO 2020 United Arab Emirates U.A.E. dirham NSO 2019 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 United Kingdom British pound NSO 2020 2018 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2020 United States US dollar NSO 2020 2012 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2020 Uruguay Uruguayan peso CB 2019 2016 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Uzbekistan Uzbek som NSO 2019 2015 SNA 1993 NSO, and IMF staff 2020 Vanuatu Vanuatu vatu NSO 2018 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 Venezuela Venezuelan bol var soberano CB 2018 1997 SNA 1993 CB 2020 Vietnam Vietnamese dong NSO 2019 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2019 West Bank and Gaza New Israeli shekel NSO 2019 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Yemen Yemeni rial IMF staff 2019 1990 SNA 1993 NSO, CB, and IMF staff 2019 Zambia Zambian kwacha NSO 2019 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2020 Zimbabwe Zimbabwe dollar NSO 2019 2012 . . . NSO 2019 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 121 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Sweden MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Switzerland MoF 2018 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2020 BPM 6 Syria MoF 2009 1986 CG C CB 2009 BPM 5 Taiwan Province of China MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2020 BPM 6 Tajikistan MoF 2019 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2019 BPM 6 Tanzania MoF 2019 1986 CG,LG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Thailand MoF 2019/20 2001 CG,BCG,LG,SS A CB 2019 BPM 6 Timor-Leste MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Togo MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2018 BPM 6 Tonga MoF 2018/19 2014 CG C CB and NSO 2018/19 BPM 6 Trinidad and Tobago MoF 2019/20 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Tunisia MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 5 Turkey MoF 2020 2001 CG,LG,SS,other A CB 2020 BPM 6 Turkmenistan MoF 2019 1986 CG,LG C NSO and IMF staff 2015 BPM 6 Tuvalu MoF 2019 . . . CG Mixed IMF staff 2012 BPM 6 Uganda MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Ukraine MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2019 BPM 6 United Arab Emirates MoF 2019 2001 CG,BCG,SG,SS Mixed CB 2019 BPM 5 United Kingdom NSO 2020 2001 CG,LG A NSO 2019 BPM 6 United States MEP 2019 2014 CG,SG,LG A NSO 2019 BPM 6 Uruguay MoF 2020 1986 CG,LG,SS,NFPC, NMPC C CB 2019 BPM 6 Uzbekistan MoF 2019 2014 CG,SG,LG,SS C CB and MEP 2019 BPM 6 Vanuatu MoF 2019 2001 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Venezuela MoF 2017 2001 BCG,NFPC,SS,other C CB 2018 BPM 6 Vietnam MoF 2019 2001 CG,SG,LG C CB 2019 BPM 5 West Bank and Gaza MoF 2020 2001 CG Mixed NSO 2019 BPM 6 Yemen MoF 2019 2001 CG,LG C IMF staff 2019 BPM 5 Zambia MoF 2019 1986 CG C CB 2019 BPM 6 Zimbabwe MoF 2018 1986 CG C CB and MoF 2018 BPM 6 Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts. 1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre. 2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to calculate the index. 3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past. 4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; NMPC = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments. 5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting. 6Base year deflator is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 122 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Fiscal Policy Assumptions The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for differences between the national authorities and the IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions and projected fiscal outturns. When no official budget has been announced, projections incorporate policy measures judged likely to be implemented. The medium-term fiscal projections are similarly based on a judgment about policies  most likely path. For cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient information to assess the authorities  budget intentions and prospects for policy implementation, an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions used in regard to some of the advanced economies follow. (See also Tables B4 to B6 in the online section of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1 Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the avail- able information regarding budget outturn and budget plans for the federal and provincial governments, fiscal measures announced by the authorities, and the IMF staff s macroeconomic projections. Australia: Fiscal projections are based on data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, FY2020/21 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook of the Commonwealth government, the FY2020/21 budget published by each state/territory government, and the IMF staff s estimates and projections. Austria: Fiscal projections are based on the 2021 budget but take into consideration available data 1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, such as asset and commodity prices and output composition effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of structural balances are based on the IMF staff s estimates of potential GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus financial assets corresponding to debt instru- ments. Estimates of the output gap and of the structural balance are subject to significant margins of uncertainty. for 2020 and include the new EU recovery funds (not included in the budget) for projection years. Belgium: Projections are based on the 2020 21 Stability Program, the Draft Budgetary Plan for 2020, the 2021 budget, and other available information on the authorities  fiscal plans, with adjustments for the IMF staff s assumptions. Brazil: Fiscal projections for 2021 reflect policy announcements as of March 12, 2021. Medium-term projections reflect full compliance with Brazil s consti- tutional expenditure ceiling. Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts from the Fall Economic Statement 2020 and the latest provincial budgets. The IMF staff makes some adjust- ments to these forecasts, including for differences in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff s forecast also incorporates the most recent data releases from Statistics Canada s National Economic Accounts, including federal, provincial, and territorial budgetary outturns through the third quarter of 2020. Chile: Projections are based on the authorities  budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff s projections for GDP and copper prices. China: After a large fiscal expansion estimated for 2020, a mild tightening is projected for 2021 based on government policy announcements. Denmark: Estimates for 2020 are aligned with the latest official budget numbers, adjusted where appro- priate for the IMF staff s macroeconomic assumptions. For 2021 the projections incorporate key features of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the authorities  latest budget. France: Estimates for 2020 and projections for 2021 onward are based on the measures of the 2018 20 budget laws; the four amending budget laws enacted in 2020; and the 2021 budget law, adjusted for differ- ences in assumptions on macroeconomic and financial variables, and in revenue projections. Germany: The IMF staff s projections for 2021 and beyond are based on the 2021 budgets, and data updates from the national statistical agency (Destatis) and Ministry of Finance, adjusted for the differences in the IMF staff  s macroeconomic framework and assump- tions concerning revenue elasticities. The projections do not reflect the 2021 supplementary budget or draft 2022 federal budget. The estimate of gross debt includes portfolios of impaired assets and noncore business transferred to institutions that are winding up as well as other financial sector and EU support operations. Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for Selected Economies STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 123 Greece: The general government primary balance estimate for 2019 is based on the preliminary budget execution data by the Greek authorities. Historical data since 2010 reflect adjustments in line with the primary balance definition under the enhanced sur- veillance framework for Greece. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections are based on the authorities  medium-term fiscal projections on expenditures. Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF staff s projections of the macroeconomic framework and fiscal policy plans announced in the 2020 budget. India: Historical data are based on budgetary execu- tion data. Projections are based on available informa- tion on the authorities  fiscal plans, with adjustments for the IMF staff s assumptions. Subnational data are incorporated with a lag of up to one year; general government data are thus finalized well after central government data. IMF and Indian presentations differ, particularly regarding disinvestment and license- auction proceeds, net versus gross recording of revenues in certain minor categories, and some public sector lending. Starting in FY2020/21 expenditure also includes the off-budget component of food subsidies, consistent with the revised treatment of food subsidies in the budget. The IMF staff adjust expenditure to take out payments for previous years  food subsidies, which are included as expenditure in budget estimates for FY2020/21 and FY2021/22. Indonesia: IMF projections are based on moderate tax policy and administration reforms and a gradual increase in social and capital spending over the medium term in line with fiscal space. Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country s Budget 2021 and Stability Programme Update 2020. Israel: Historical data are based on government finance statistics data prepared by the Central Bureau of Statistics. Projections are based on figures from the Ministry of Finance for the execution of the corona- virus fiscal package during 2020 and assume partial implementation of the package for 2021. Italy: The IMF estimates and projections are informed by the fiscal plans included in the govern- ment s 2021 budget. The stock of maturing postal bonds is included in the debt projections. Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures already announced by the government as of March 9, with adjustments for IMF staff assumptions. Korea: The forecast incorporates the overall fiscal balance in the 2021 annual and supplementary bud- gets and the medium-term fiscal plan announced with the 2021 budget, and the IMF staff s adjustments. Mexico: The 2020 Public Sector Borrowing Require- ments estimate by the IMF staff adjusts for some statistical discrepancies between above-the-line and below-the-line numbers and proceeds from the oil hedge program. Fiscal projections for 2021 are broadly in line with the approved budget; projections for 2022 onward assume compliance with rules established in the Fiscal Responsibility Law. The Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2020 25 are based on the IMF staff forecast framework and are also informed by the authorities  draft budget plan and Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis projec- tions. Historical data were revised following the June 2014 Central Bureau of Statistics release of revised macroeconomic data because of the adoption of the European System of National and Regional Accounts and revisions of data sources. New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2020 and the IMF staff s estimates. Portugal: The projections for the current year are based on the authorities  approved budget, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff s macroeconomic forecast. Projections thereafter are based on the assumption of unchanged policies. Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the Puerto Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plans (FEGPs), which were prepared in October 2018, and are certified by the Financial Oversight and Manage- ment Board. In line with these plans  assumptions, IMF projections assume federal aid for rebuilding after Hurricane Maria, which devastated the island in September 2017. The projections also assume revenue losses from elimination of federal funding for the Affordable Care Act starting in 2020 for Puerto Rico; elimination of federal tax incentives starting in 2018 that had neutralized the effects of Puerto Rico s Act 154 on foreign firms; and the effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which reduce the tax advantage of US firms producing in Puerto Rico. Given sizable policy uncertainty, some FEGP and IMF assumptions may differ, in particular those relating to the effects of the corporate tax reform, tax compliance, and tax adjustments (fees and rates); reduction of subsidies and expenses, freezing of payroll operational costs, Box A1 (continued) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 124 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 and improvement of mobility; reduction of expenses; and increased health care efficiency. On the expen- diture side, measures include extension of Act 66, which freezes much government spending, through 2020; reduction of operating costs; decreases in government subsidies; and spending cuts in educa- tion. Although IMF policy assumptions are similar to those in the FEGP scenario with full measures, the IMF s projections of fiscal revenues, expendi- tures, and balance are different from the FEGPs . This stems from two main differences in methodolo- gies: first, while IMF projections are on an accrual basis, the FEGPs  are on a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGPs make very different macroeconomic assumptions. Russia: Fiscal policy was countercyclical in 2020. There will be some degree of consolidation in 2021 in line with economic recovery, and the deficit is likely to come back to the fiscal rule s limit in 2022. Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff baseline fiscal projec- tions are based on the IMF staff s understanding of government policies as outlined in the 2021 budget. Exported oil revenues are based on WEO baseline oil price assumptions and staff s understanding of current oil policy under the OPEC+ agreement. Singapore: For FY2020, projections are based on the initial and supplementary budgets as well as budget execution through the end of 2020. FY2021 projections are based on the initial budget of February 16, 2020. The IMF staff assume gradual withdrawal of remaining exception measures in FY2022 and unchanged policies for the remainder of the projection period. South Africa: Fiscal assumptions draw on the 2020 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. Nontax revenue excludes transactions in financial assets and liabilities, as they involve primarily revenues associated with realized exchange rate valuation gains from the holding of foreign currency deposits, sale of assets, and conceptually similar items. Spain: For 2020 fiscal projections include the discretionary measures adopted in response to the COVID-19 crisis, the legislated pension and public wage increases, and the minimum vital income sup- port. Fiscal projections for 2021 include COVID-19  related support measures, the legislated increase in pensions, and the legislated revenue measures. Fiscal projections from 2022 onward assume no policy changes. Disbursements under the EU Recovery and Resilience Facility are reflected in the projections for 2021 24. Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2020 are based on preliminary information on the fall 2020 budget bill. The impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal accounts is calculated using the 2014 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development elasticity2 to take into account output and employment gaps. Switzerland: The authorities  announced discretion- ary stimulus as reflected in the fiscal projections for 2020 and 2021 is permitted within the context of the debt brake rule in the event of  exceptional circumstances.  Turkey: The basis for the projections in the WEO and Fiscal Monitor is the IMF-defined fiscal balance, which excludes some revenue and expenditure items that are included in the authorities  headline balance. United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on the latest GDP data published by the Office of National Statistics on February 12, 2021, and fore- casts by the Office for Budget Responsibility from November 23, 2020. Revenue projections are adjusted for differences between the IMF staff s forecasts of macroeconomic variables (such as GDP growth and inflation) and the forecasts of these variables assumed in the authorities  fiscal projections. Projections assume that the measures taken in response to the coronavirus outbreak expire as announced. It is also assumed there is some additional fiscal consolidation relative to the policies announced to date starting in FY2023/24 with the goal of stabilizing public debt within five years. The IMF staff s data exclude public sector banks and the effect of transferring assets from the Royal Mail Pension Plan to the public sector in April 2012. Real government consumption and invest- ment are part of the real GDP path, which, accord- ing to the IMF staff, may or may not be the same as projected by the UK Office for Budget Responsibility. Data are presented on a calendar year basis. United States: Fiscal projections are based on the September 2020 Congressional Budget Office baseline adjusted for the IMF staff s policy and macroeconomic assumptions. Projections incorporate the effects of the American Rescue Plan; the Coronavirus Prepared- ness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act; 2 R. W. Price, T. Dang, and Y. Guillemette,  New Tax and Expenditure Elasticity Estimates for EU Budget Surveillance,  OECD Economics Department Working Paper 1174 (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2014). Box A1 (continued) STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 125 the Families First Coronavirus Response Act; the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act. Finally, fiscal projections are adjusted to reflect the IMF staff s forecasts for key macroeconomic and financial vari- ables and different accounting treatment of financial sector support and of defined-benefit pension plans and are converted to a general government basis. Data are compiled using System of National Accounts 2008, and when translated into government finance statistics, this is in accordance with the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014. Because of data limi- tations, most series begin in 2001. Monetary Policy Assumptions Monetary policy assumptions are based on the established policy framework in each country. In most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance over the business cycle: official interest rates will increase when economic indicators suggest that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or range; they will decrease when indicators suggest inflation will not exceed the acceptable rate or range, that output growth is below its potential rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy is significant. On this basis, the LIBOR on six-month US dollar deposits is assumed to average 0.3 percent in 2021 and 0.4 percent in 2022 (also see Table 1.1 in Chapter 1). The rate on three-month euro deposits is assumed to average  0.5 percent in 2021 and 2022. The rate on six-month Japanese yen deposits is assumed to average  0.1 percent in 2021 and 0.0 percent in 2022. Argentina: Monetary policy assumptions are con- sistent with the current monetary policy framework, which targets zero-based money growth in seasonally adjusted terms. Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with market expectations. Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with the convergence of inflation toward the middle of the target range at the end of 2021. Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are based on the IMF staff s analysis. Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are based on the GDP growth rate. China: Monetary policy is expected to remain sup- portive in 2021 and gradually tighten to be around neutral in 2022. Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg to the euro. Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro area member countries are in line with market expectations. Greece: Interest rates are based on the WEO LIBOR with an assumption of a spread for Greece. Broad money projections are based on monetary financial institution balance sheets and deposit flow assumptions. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The IMF staff assumes that the currency board system will remain intact. India: Monetary policy projections are consistent with achieving the Reserve Bank of India s inflation target over the medium term. Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with inflation within the central bank s targeted band over the medium term. Israel: Monetary policy assumptions are based on gradual normalization of monetary policy. Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with market expectations. Korea: The projections assume the policy rate evolves in line with market expectations. Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with attaining the inflation target. The Netherlands: Monetary projections are based on the IMF staff-estimated six-month euro LIBOR projections. New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on the growth of nominal GDP estimates and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand s Large Assets Purchase Program. Portugal: Monetary policy assumptions are based on the country desk officers  spreadsheets given input projections for the real and fiscal sectors. Russia: Monetary projections assume that the Central Bank of the Russian Federation is adopting a moderately accommodative monetary policy stance. Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the US dollar. Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line with the projected growth in nominal GDP. South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are con- sistent with maintaining inflation within the 3 percent to 6 percent target band. Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with Riksbank projections. Box A1 (continued) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 126 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Switzerland: The projections assume no change in the policy rate in 2021 22. Turkey: The baseline assumes that the authorities remain committed to a firm monetary policy stance, with no easing in 2021. Further measured monetary policy tightening would likely be needed should infla- tion expectations fail to stabilize. United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate path is based on market interest rate expectations. United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the federal funds target rate, in line with the broader mac- roeconomic outlook. Box A1 (continued) STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 127 List of Tables1 Output A1. Summary of World Output A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP Inflation A5. Summary of Inflation A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices Financial Policies A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt Foreign Trade A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices Current Account Transactions A10. Summary of Current Account Balances A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance Balance of Payments and External Financing A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances Flow of Funds A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing Medium-Term Baseline Scenario A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario 1 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 128 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A1. Summary of World Output1 (Annual percent change) Average Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 World 4.2 3.5 3.6 3.5 3.3 3.8 3.6 2.8  3.3 6.0 4.4 3.3 Advanced Economies 1.7 1.4 2.1 2.4 1.8 2.5 2.3 1.6  4.7 5.1 3.6 1.5 United States 1.8 1.8 2.5 3.1 1.7 2.3 3.0 2.2  3.5 6.4 3.5 1.6 Euro Area 0.9  0.2 1.4 2.0 1.9 2.6 1.9 1.3  6.6 4.4 3.8 1.3 Japan 0.7 2.0 0.3 1.6 0.8 1.7 0.6 0.3  4.8 3.3 2.5 0.5 Other Advanced Economies2 2.7 2.4 3.0 2.1 2.2 2.8 2.4 1.8  4.2 4.7 4.0 2.0 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 6.6 5.1 4.7 4.3 4.5 4.8 4.5 3.6  2.2 6.7 5.0 4.4 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia 8.7 6.9 6.9 6.8 6.8 6.6 6.4 5.3  1.0 8.6 6.0 5.4 Emerging and Developing Europe 4.6 3.1 1.8 1.0 1.9 4.1 3.4 2.4  2.0 4.4 3.9 2.7 Latin America and the Caribbean 3.9 2.9 1.3 0.4  0.6 1.3 1.2 0.2  7.0 4.6 3.1 2.4 Middle East and Central Asia 5.7 3.1 3.3 2.8 4.7 2.5 2.0 1.4  2.9 3.7 3.8 3.6 Sub-Saharan Africa 5.7 5.1 5.1 3.2 1.5 3.1 3.2 3.2  1.9 3.4 4.0 4.0 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 6.2 3.1 3.1 1.4 2.3 0.6  0.1  0.4  4.4 3.8 3.0 2.6 Nonfuel 6.7 5.4 5.0 4.7 4.8 5.3 5.1 4.1  1.9 7.0 5.2 4.6 Of Which, Primary Products 4.8 4.0 2.2 2.9 1.7 2.7 1.6 0.9  5.7 5.0 3.8 2.9 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies 5.3 4.7 4.4 4.1 4.1 4.7 4.5 3.4  4.2 6.3 5.1 4.7 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19 4.3 2.9 1.6 0.2 2.7 2.9 3.5 3.1  1.3 2.4 4.2 4.9 Other Groups European Union 1.3 0.0 1.7 2.5 2.1 3.0 2.3 1.7  6.1 4.4 3.9 1.6 Middle East and North Africa 5.5 2.6 3.0 2.5 5.1 1.9 1.2 0.8  3.4 4.0 3.7 3.3 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 6.6 5.0 4.6 4.3 4.6 4.8 4.5 3.5  2.4 6.9 5.0 4.3 Low-Income Developing Countries 6.2 5.9 6.1 4.7 3.9 4.9 5.1 5.3 0.0 4.3 5.2 5.4 Memorandum Median Growth Rate Advanced Economies 2.1 1.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 3.0 2.8 2.0  5.1 4.0 3.6 2.0 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.8 3.9 3.8 3.3 3.4 3.7 3.4 3.0  4.1 3.5 4.4 3.5 Emerging Market Middle-Income Economies 4.2 3.4 3.2 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.9 2.2  6.0 3.4 4.0 3.0 Low-Income Developing Countries 5.4 5.1 5.4 4.0 4.4 4.5 3.9 4.5  1.3 3.5 4.7 5.0 Output per Capita3 Advanced Economies 1.0 0.9 1.6 1.9 1.2 2.0 1.9 1.2  5.1 4.8 3.3 1.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.8 3.5 3.1 2.8 3.0 3.4 3.2 2.3  3.5 5.3 3.8 3.3 Emerging Market Middle-Income Economies 5.1 3.7 3.3 3.0 3.3 3.6 3.5 2.4  3.4 5.9 4.1 3.6 Low-Income Developing Countries 3.6 3.5 3.8 2.1 1.5 2.6 2.7 2.9  2.2 2.0 3.0 3.2 World Growth Rate Based on Market Exchange Rates 2.7 2.6 2.9 2.9 2.6 3.3 3.1 2.4  3.6 5.8 4.1 2.7 Value of World Output (billions of US dollars) At Market Exchange Rates 57,997 77,084 79,155 74,937 76,159 80,834 85,893 87,345 84,538 93,864 100,105 122,363 At Purchasing Power Parities 79,632 105,061 108,996 111,271 115,533 121,690 128,965 134,784 131,656 141,962 151,543 187,448 1Real GDP. 2Excludes euro area countries, Japan, and the United States. 3Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 129 Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1 (Annual percent change) Q4 over Q42 Average Projections Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 2020:Q4 2021:Q4 2022:Q4 Real GDP Advanced Economies 1.7 1.4 2.1 2.4 1.8 2.5 2.3 1.6  4.7 5.1 3.6 1.5  3.1 4.9 2.3 United States 1.8 1.8 2.5 3.1 1.7 2.3 3.0 2.2  3.5 6.4 3.5 1.6  2.5 6.3 2.3 Euro Area 0.9  0.2 1.4 2.0 1.9 2.6 1.9 1.3  6.6 4.4 3.8 1.3  4.9 4.4 2.4 Germany 1.1 0.4 2.2 1.5 2.2 2.6 1.3 0.6  4.9 3.6 3.4 1.1  3.6 3.4 2.8 France 1.2 0.6 1.0 1.1 1.1 2.3 1.9 1.5  8.2 5.8 4.2 1.2  4.9 4.5 2.6 Italy  0.1  1.8 0.0 0.8 1.3 1.7 0.9 0.3  8.9 4.2 3.6 0.8  6.6 4.1 2.1 Spain 1.1  1.4 1.4 3.8 3.0 3.0 2.4 2.0  11.0 6.4 4.7 1.4  9.1 7.2 1.5 The Netherlands 1.2  0.1 1.4 2.0 2.2 2.9 2.4 1.7  3.8 3.5 3.0 1.5  3.1 4.0 1.8 Belgium 1.7 0.5 1.6 2.0 1.3 1.6 1.8 1.7  6.4 4.0 3.1 1.3  5.1 3.4 2.3 Austria 1.6 0.0 0.7 1.0 2.0 2.4 2.6 1.4  6.6 3.5 4.0 1.8  5.9 5.9 1.7 Ireland 1.8 1.5 8.6 25.3 2.0 9.4 8.9 5.9 2.5 4.2 4.8 2.6  0.2 8.5  0.4 Portugal  0.1  0.9 0.8 1.8 2.0 3.5 2.8 2.5  7.6 3.9 4.8 1.7  6.1 4.7 2.3 Greece  0.9  2.7 0.7  0.4  0.5 1.3 1.6 1.9  8.2 3.8 5.0 1.4  7.9 6.9 3.6 Finland 1.4  0.9  0.4 0.5 2.8 3.2 1.3 1.3  2.9 2.3 2.5 1.3  1.7 4.3 0.4 Slovak Republic 4.7 0.7 2.6 4.8 2.1 3.0 3.8 2.3  5.2 4.7 4.4 2.5  2.6 3.1 4.0 Lithuania 4.0 3.6 3.5 2.0 2.5 4.3 3.9 4.3  0.8 3.2 3.2 2.3  1.0 4.6 1.0 Slovenia 1.9  1.0 2.8 2.2 3.2 4.8 4.4 3.2  5.5 3.7 4.5 2.5  4.7 5.6 3.9 Luxembourg 2.3 3.7 4.3 4.3 4.6 1.8 3.1 2.3  1.3 4.1 3.6 2.5 1.4 0.9 4.8 Latvia 3.5 2.3 1.1 4.0 2.4 3.3 4.0 2.0  3.6 3.9 5.2 3.0  1.8 4.1 5.6 Estonia 3.2 1.3 3.0 1.8 3.2 5.5 4.4 5.0  2.9 3.4 4.2 3.0  1.9 3.6 3.8 Cyprus 2.2  6.6  1.8 3.2 6.4 5.2 5.2 3.1  5.1 3.0 3.9 2.5  4.5 5.1 0.2 Malta 2.7 5.5 7.6 9.6 4.1 8.1 5.2 5.5  7.0 4.7 5.6 4.5  6.2 4.3 4.8 Japan 0.7 2.0 0.3 1.6 0.8 1.7 0.6 0.3  4.8 3.3 2.5 0.5  1.3 2.0 1.8 United Kingdom 1.4 2.2 2.9 2.4 1.7 1.7 1.3 1.4  9.9 5.3 5.1 1.4  7.8 6.5 2.0 Korea 4.0 3.2 3.2 2.8 2.9 3.2 2.9 2.0  1.0 3.6 2.8 2.3  1.2 3.7 2.1 Canada 1.9 2.3 2.9 0.7 1.0 3.0 2.4 1.9  5.4 5.0 4.7 1.5  3.2 4.1 3.8 Australia 3.1 2.1 2.6 2.3 2.7 2.4 2.8 1.9  2.4 4.5 2.8 2.5  1.1 3.2 2.8 Taiwan Province of China 4.4 2.5 4.7 1.5 2.2 3.3 2.8 3.0 3.1 4.7 3.0 2.1 4.6 3.0 2.9 Switzerland 2.0 1.9 2.4 1.6 2.0 1.7 3.0 1.1  3.0 3.5 2.8 1.8  1.7 4.5  0.1 Singapore 6.6 4.8 3.9 3.0 3.3 4.5 3.5 1.3  5.4 5.2 3.2 2.5  2.4 3.3 2.3 Sweden 2.1 1.2 2.7 4.5 2.1 2.6 2.0 1.4  2.8 3.1 3.0 2.0  2.1 3.7 2.2 Hong Kong SAR 4.5 3.1 2.8 2.4 2.2 3.8 2.8  1.2  6.1 4.3 3.8 2.9  2.9 5.8 1.3 Czech Republic 2.8 0.0 2.3 5.4 2.5 5.2 3.2 2.3  5.6 4.2 4.3 2.5  4.7 5.9 1.7 Israel 3.9 4.3 3.9 2.2 3.8 3.6 3.5 3.4  2.4 5.0 4.3 3.1  0.6 3.8 3.5 Norway 1.6 1.0 2.0 2.0 1.1 2.3 1.1 0.9  0.8 3.9 4.0 1.7  1.1 4.3 3.3 Denmark 0.8 0.9 1.6 2.3 3.2 2.8 2.2 2.9  3.3 2.8 2.9 1.8  2.6 2.6 2.7 New Zealand 2.3 2.3 3.7 3.6 3.9 3.5 3.4 2.4  3.0 4.0 3.2 2.5  0.9 2.1 3.9 Puerto Rico  0.5  0.3  1.2  1.0  1.3  2.9  4.7 1.2  7.5 2.5 0.7  0.4 . . . . . . . . . Macao SAR 13.2 10.8  2.0  21.5  0.7 10.0 6.5  2.6  56.3 61.2 43.0 3.0 . . . . . . . . . Iceland 2.4 4.6 1.7 4.4 6.3 4.2 4.7 2.6  6.6 3.7 3.6 2.3  5.9 0.3 3.6 San Marino  1.2  0.8  0.7 2.7 2.3 0.3 1.5 2.4  9.7 4.5 3.4 1.1 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.4 1.4 1.9 2.2 1.5 2.2 2.1 1.5  5.0 5.4 3.6 1.3  3.3 5.1 2.4 Real Total Domestic Demand Advanced Economies 1.5 1.2 2.1 2.7 2.1 2.5 2.3 1.8  4.6 5.1 3.6 1.5  2.9 5.2 2.0 United States 1.7 1.6 2.7 3.7 1.9 2.5 3.2 2.3  3.3 7.6 3.2 1.5  1.3 6.7 1.8 Euro Area 0.7  0.5 1.3 2.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 1.9  6.4 3.4 4.0 1.3  5.8 4.3 2.4 Germany 0.8 1.1 1.7 1.4 3.1 2.7 1.8 1.2  4.2 2.6 4.3 1.2  4.3 4.8 2.8 France 1.4 0.7 1.5 1.5 1.5 2.4 1.4 1.8  6.7 5.0 4.3 1.1  4.3 5.1 1.9 Italy  0.4  2.7 0.1 1.2 1.8 1.8 1.3  0.4  8.4 3.8 3.4 0.8  6.2 4.4 1.7 Spain 0.7  2.9 1.9 4.1 2.1 3.3 3.1 1.4  9.3 5.6 3.9 1.4  6.5 4.5 2.3 Japan 0.4 2.4 0.3 1.1 0.3 1.1 0.5 0.5  3.9 3.0 3.0 0.6  1.3 4.0 1.3 United Kingdom 1.2 2.6 3.1 3.0 3.0 1.6 0.5 1.6  10.5 6.7 5.2 1.5  3.2 4.8 2.3 Canada 3.1 2.2 1.7  0.2 0.4 4.1 2.2 1.5  6.7 5.0 5.1 1.7  4.0 3.8 4.6 Other Advanced Economies3 3.0 1.7 2.8 2.5 2.9 3.6 2.7 1.3  2.9 3.4 3.2 2.3  2.2 3.9 2.1 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.3 1.4 2.0 2.6 1.8 2.3 2.2 1.6  4.7 5.9 3.6 1.3  2.4 5.6 2.0 1In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size. 2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year. 3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 130 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (Annual percent change) Averages Projections 2003 12 2013 22 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Private Consumer Expenditure Advanced Economies 1.6 1.6 1.2 1.9 2.6 2.2 2.2 2.1 1.7  6.0 4.5 4.2 United States 1.9 2.4 1.5 3.0 3.8 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.4  3.9 6.1 3.3 Euro Area 0.8 0.9  0.7 0.9 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.5 1.3  8.0 3.6 5.0 Germany 0.7 1.2 0.4 1.1 1.9 2.4 1.5 1.5 1.6  6.1 1.8 5.9 France 1.3 1.2 0.5 0.8 1.5 1.8 1.5 0.9 1.5  7.3 4.5 6.3 Italy 0.0 0.0  2.4 0.2 1.9 1.2 1.5 1.0 0.3  10.7 4.5 3.5 Spain 0.8 0.6  2.9 1.7 2.9 2.7 3.0 1.8 0.9  12.4 6.0 3.3 Japan 0.7 0.4 2.6  0.9  0.2  0.4 1.1 0.3  0.3  5.9 3.0 5.4 United Kingdom 1.2 1.3 2.6 2.3 3.0 3.4 1.1 1.4 1.1  11.0 4.0 6.3 Canada 2.9 2.0 2.6 2.6 2.3 2.1 3.7 2.5 1.7  6.1 3.5 5.0 Other Advanced Economies1 2.8 1.9 2.3 2.5 2.9 2.7 2.8 2.8 1.8  5.6 3.5 3.5 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.4 1.7 1.3 1.8 2.6 2.1 2.1 1.9 1.6  5.7 4.8 4.4 Public Consumption Advanced Economies 1.5 1.7  0.1 0.6 1.7 2.0 1.0 1.7 2.3 1.2 5.9 1.3 United States 0.9 1.6  1.9  0.8 1.6 1.8 0.6 1.5 1.8 0.3 10.1 1.7 Euro Area 1.4 1.2 0.2 0.8 1.3 1.9 1.1 1.2 1.8 1.2 2.0 0.4 Germany 1.4 2.1 1.4 1.7 2.9 4.0 1.6 1.2 2.7 3.3 1.0 1.1 France 1.6 0.8 1.5 1.3 1.0 1.4 1.4 1.0 1.7  3.1 2.6  0.6 Italy 0.1 0.1  1.1  0.6  0.6 0.7  0.1 0.1  0.8 1.6 2.0 0.2 Spain 3.5 1.5  2.1  0.7 2.0 1.0 1.0 2.6 2.3 4.5 3.9 0.4 Japan 1.3 1.5 1.5 1.0 1.9 1.6 0.1 1.0 1.9 2.7 3.2  0.1 United Kingdom 1.9 1.7  0.5 2.0 1.8 1.0 0.7 0.6 4.0  5.7 12.0 1.4 Canada 2.2 1.8  0.8 0.6 1.4 1.8 2.1 2.9 2.0  1.1 6.4 3.3 Other Advanced Economies1 2.8 3.0 2.7 2.7 2.7 3.5 2.4 3.5 3.8 4.6 2.1 2.1 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.1 1.5  0.6 0.2 1.6 1.8 0.7 1.3 1.9 0.3 7.2 1.2 Gross Fixed Capital Formation Advanced Economies 1.1 2.6 1.7 3.4 3.5 2.4 3.7 3.2 2.4  3.7 6.0 3.8 United States 1.4 3.5 3.6 5.1 3.7 1.8 3.5 4.8 2.3  0.8 7.9 3.6 Euro Area 0.2 2.0  2.3 1.4 4.7 4.0 3.8 3.2 5.7  8.3 3.9 4.6 Germany 1.3 2.0  1.3 3.2 1.7 3.8 2.5 3.5 2.5  3.1 3.6 3.7 France 1.3 1.8  0.8 0.0 1.0 2.7 4.7 3.3 4.3  10.3 9.7 4.7 Italy  1.9 0.4  6.4  2.2 1.8 4.0 3.2 3.1 1.1  9.1 5.4 3.9 Spain  1.6 2.5  3.8 4.1 4.9 2.4 6.8 6.1 2.7  12.4 8.9 7.5 Japan  1.0 1.2 4.1 2.2 2.3 1.2 1.6 0.2 0.9  4.1 3.7 0.5 United Kingdom 0.3 2.6 3.7 7.0 5.3 4.4 2.8 0.4 1.5  8.7 5.9 4.2 Canada 4.2 1.3 1.4 2.3  5.2  4.7 3.3 1.8 0.3  3.6 11.5 7.2 Other Advanced Economies1 3.4 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.3 3.0 5.0 2.0 0.1  1.7 4.3 3.5 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 0.8 2.6 2.1 3.7 2.7 2.1 3.2 3.4 2.1  3.4 6.9 3.5 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 131 Averages Projections 2003 12 2013 22 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Final Domestic Demand Advanced Economies 1.5 1.9 1.1 2.0 2.7 2.3 2.4 2.2 2.0  4.2 4.9 3.5 United States 1.7 2.5 1.3 2.8 3.5 2.4 2.5 3.0 2.3  2.7 7.1 3.2 Euro Area 0.8 1.2  0.8 1.0 2.3 2.4 2.1 1.8 2.4  6.1 3.3 3.9 Germany 1.0 1.5 0.2 1.7 2.1 3.1 1.8 1.9 2.0  3.4 2.0 4.3 France 1.4 1.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.2 1.5 2.2  7.0 5.2 4.3 Italy  0.4 0.1  2.9  0.4 1.4 1.6 1.5 1.2 0.2  8.1 4.1 2.9 Spain 0.8 1.1  2.9 1.6 3.1 2.3 3.3 2.8 1.5  9.1 6.1 3.5 Japan 0.4 0.9 2.8 0.1 0.8 0.3 1.0 0.4 0.4  3.8 3.7 3.0 United Kingdom 1.2 1.6 2.2 3.0 3.2 3.1 1.3 1.1 1.7  9.6 5.9 4.9 Canada 3.0 1.6 1.6 2.1 0.3 0.5 3.3 2.5 1.4  4.5 4.6 5.1 Other Advanced Economies1 2.9 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.7 2.9 3.4 2.4 1.6  2.8 3.5 3.1 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.3 1.8 1.2 1.9 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.1 1.8  4.1 5.6 3.5 Stock Building2 Advanced Economies 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0  0.2 0.2 0.1  0.2  0.4 0.2 0.1 United States 0.0 0.0 0.2  0.1 0.3  0.6 0.0 0.2 0.0  0.6 0.5 0.0 Euro Area  0.1 0.0 0.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.1  0.5  0.3 0.0 0.1 Germany  0.2 0.0 0.8 0.0  0.7 0.0 0.8  0.1  0.7  0.8 0.6 0.0 France 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.7 0.3  0.4 0.2 0.0  0.4 0.2  0.2 0.0 Italy  0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5  0.1 0.2 0.2 0.1  0.6  0.3  0.3 0.5 Spain  0.1  0.2 0.1 0.2  1.5  0.1 0.0 0.3  0.1  0.3  0.4 0.3 Japan 0.1 0.0  0.4 0.1 0.3  0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0  0.2  0.2 0.1 United Kingdom 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.4  0.1  0.1 0.2  0.7 0.1  0.7 0.3 0.3 Canada 0.1 0.0 0.5  0.4  0.5 0.0 0.9  0.2 0.2  1.3 0.9 0.0 Other Advanced Economies1 0.1 0.0  0.6 0.3  0.1 0.0 0.2 0.3  0.2  0.1  0.1 0.1 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.1  0.3 0.2 0.1  0.1  0.5 0.3 0.1 Foreign Balance2 Advanced Economies 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.0  0.3  0.1 0.0 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1 0.1 United States 0.1  0.3 0.2  0.3  0.8  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.2  0.2  1.4 0.2 Euro Area 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.1  0.2  0.4 0.4 0.1  0.5  0.5 1.2 0.0 Germany 0.4  0.2  0.5 0.7 0.3  0.6 0.1  0.4  0.6  0.9 1.2  0.6 France  0.2  0.2  0.1  0.5  0.4  0.4  0.1 0.4  0.3  1.4 0.6  0.2 Italy 0.3 0.0 0.8  0.1  0.4  0.5 0.0  0.3 0.7  0.7 0.4 0.3 Spain 0.3 0.2 1.4  0.5  0.1 1.0  0.2  0.5 0.6  1.9 0.8 0.9 Japan 0.2 0.0  0.4 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.0  0.2  1.1 0.3  0.5 United Kingdom 0.2  0.3  0.6  0.9  0.8  0.4 0.8 0.1  0.1 0.7  1.4  0.3 Canada  1.2 0.1 0.1 1.2 0.8 0.4  1.1 0.1 0.3 0.6  0.7  0.5 Other Advanced Economies1 0.6 0.5 0.7 0.5 0.1 0.0  0.3 0.3 0.6 0.7 1.4 0.6 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 0.1  0.2 0.0  0.1  0.4  0.2 0.0  0.1  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.1 1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period. Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued) (Annual percent change) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 132 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (Annual percent change) Average Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Emerging and Developing Asia 8.7 6.9 6.9 6.8 6.8 6.6 6.4 5.3  1.0 8.6 6.0 5.4 Bangladesh 6.1 6.0 6.1 6.6 7.1 7.3 7.9 8.2 3.8 5.0 7.5 7.2 Bhutan 8.5 3.6 4.0 6.2 7.4 6.3 3.8 4.3  0.8  1.9 5.7 5.8 Brunei Darussalam 0.5  2.1  2.5  0.4  2.5 1.3 0.1 3.9 1.2 1.6 2.5 2.0 Cambodia 8.0 7.4 7.1 7.0 6.9 7.0 7.5 7.0  3.5 4.2 6.0 6.8 China 10.5 7.8 7.4 7.0 6.9 6.9 6.7 5.8 2.3 8.4 5.6 4.9 Fiji 1.2 4.7 5.6 4.5 2.4 5.4 3.8  0.4  19.0 5.0 9.0 3.3 India1 7.9 6.4 7.4 8.0 8.3 6.8 6.5 4.0  8.0 12.5 6.9 6.5 Indonesia 5.8 5.6 5.0 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.0  2.1 4.3 5.8 5.2 Kiribati 1.1 4.2  0.7 10.4 5.1 0.9 3.8 3.9  0.5 1.8 2.5 2.0 Lao P.D.R. 7.6 8.0 7.6 7.3 7.0 6.9 6.3 4.7  0.4 4.6 5.6 6.0 Malaysia 5.1 4.7 6.0 5.0 4.4 5.8 4.8 4.3  5.6 6.5 6.0 5.0 Maldives 6.6 7.3 7.3 2.9 6.3 7.2 8.1 7.0  32.2 18.9 13.4 5.5 Marshall Islands 0.3 3.9  1.0 1.6 1.4 3.3 3.1 6.5  3.3  1.5 3.5 1.6 Micronesia 0.1  3.7  2.3 4.6 0.9 2.7 0.2 1.2  1.6  3.7 2.8 0.6 Mongolia 8.2 11.6 7.9 2.4 1.2 5.3 7.2 5.2  5.3 5.0 7.5 5.0 Myanmar 9.6 7.9 8.2 7.5 6.4 5.8 6.4 6.8 3.2  8.9 1.4 5.1 Nauru . . . 31.0 27.2 3.4 3.0  5.5 5.7 1.0 0.7 1.6 0.9 0.5 Nepal 4.2 3.5 6.0 4.0 0.4 9.0 7.6 6.7  1.9 2.9 4.2 5.2 Palau 0.1  1.7 6.0 5.0  0.4  2.0 5.8  1.8  10.3  10.8 10.4 2.0 Papua New Guinea 4.6 3.8 13.5 6.6 5.5 3.5  0.3 5.9  3.9 3.5 4.2 2.8 Philippines 5.2 6.8 6.3 6.3 7.1 6.9 6.3 6.0  9.5 6.9 6.5 6.5 Samoa 2.3  0.4 0.1 4.3 8.1 1.0  2.1 3.6  3.2  7.8 1.7 2.1 Solomon Islands 5.4 5.3 1.0 1.4 5.9 5.3 3.9 1.2  4.3 1.5 4.5 2.9 Sri Lanka 6.7 3.4 5.0 5.0 4.5 3.6 3.3 2.3  3.6 4.0 4.1 4.2 Thailand 4.4 2.7 1.0 3.1 3.4 4.2 4.2 2.3  6.1 2.6 5.6 3.6 Timor-Leste2 4.9 2.1 4.4 2.9 3.4  4.1  1.1 1.8  6.8 2.8 4.9 3.0 Tonga 0.1 0.3 2.0 1.2 6.6 3.3 0.3 0.7  0.5  2.5 2.5 1.8 Tuvalu 0.2 4.9 1.2 9.2 5.9 4.6 3.2 6.0 0.5 2.5 3.5 4.0 Vanuatu 3.9 0.5 3.1 0.4 4.7 6.3 2.9 3.3  9.2 3.2 4.6 2.7 Vietnam 6.6 5.6 6.4 7.0 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.0 2.9 6.5 7.2 6.6 Emerging and Developing Europe 4.6 3.1 1.8 1.0 1.9 4.1 3.4 2.4  2.0 4.4 3.9 2.7 Albania 4.7 1.0 1.8 2.2 3.3 3.8 4.1 2.2  3.5 5.0 4.0 3.5 Belarus 7.1 1.0 1.7  3.8  2.5 2.5 3.1 1.4  0.9  0.4 0.8 1.4 Bosnia and Herzegovina 3.1 2.4 1.1 3.1 3.1 3.2 3.7 2.8  5.5 3.5 3.2 3.0 Bulgaria 3.8 0.3 1.9 4.0 3.8 3.5 3.1 3.7  3.8 4.4 4.4 2.8 Croatia 1.4  0.4  0.3 2.4 3.5 3.4 2.8 2.9  9.0 4.7 5.0 3.0 Hungary 1.3 1.9 4.2 3.8 2.1 4.3 5.4 4.6  5.0 4.3 5.9 2.6 Kosovo 4.3 3.4 1.2 4.1 4.1 4.2 3.8 4.9  6.0 4.5 5.5 4.0 Moldova 4.3 9.0 5.0  0.3 4.4 4.7 4.0 3.6  7.5 4.5 4.0 4.2 Montenegro 3.0 3.5 1.8 3.4 2.9 4.7 5.1 4.1  15.2 9.0 5.5 3.0 North Macedonia 3.3 2.9 3.6 3.9 2.8 1.1 2.9 3.2  4.5 3.8 4.0 3.5 Poland 4.2 1.1 3.4 4.2 3.1 4.8 5.4 4.5  2.7 3.5 4.5 2.6 Romania 3.5 3.8 3.6 3.0 4.7 7.3 4.5 4.1  3.9 6.0 4.8 3.5 Russia 4.8 1.8 0.7  2.0 0.2 1.8 2.8 2.0  3.1 3.8 3.8 1.8 Serbia 3.9 2.9  1.6 1.8 3.3 2.1 4.5 4.2  1.0 5.0 4.5 4.0 Turkey1 5.6 8.5 4.9 6.1 3.3 7.5 3.0 0.9 1.8 6.0 3.5 3.5 Ukraine1 3.4 0.0  6.6  9.8 2.4 2.5 3.4 3.2  4.2 4.0 3.4 4.0 Latin America and the Caribbean 3.9 2.9 1.3 0.4  0.6 1.3 1.2 0.2  7.0 4.6 3.1 2.4 Antigua and Barbuda 1.9  0.6 3.8 3.8 5.5 3.1 7.0 3.4  17.3  3.0 11.9 3.0 Argentina 5.6 2.4  2.5 2.7  2.1 2.8  2.6  2.1  10.0 5.8 2.5 1.5 Aruba 0.1 4.2 0.9  0.4 0.5 2.3 1.2 0.4  25.5 5.0 12.0 1.4 The Bahamas 0.5  2.7 1.1 0.2 1.4 3.1 3.0 1.2  16.3 2.0 8.5 1.5 Barbados 0.7  1.4  0.1 2.4 2.5 0.5  0.6  0.1  17.6 4.1 7.7 1.8 Belize 3.2 1.3 4.0 2.6 0.0 1.8 2.9 1.8  14.1 1.9 6.4 2.0 Bolivia 4.5 6.8 5.5 4.9 4.3 4.2 4.2 2.2  7.7 5.5 4.2 3.4 Brazil 3.8 3.0 0.5  3.5  3.3 1.3 1.8 1.4  4.1 3.7 2.6 2.0 Chile 4.7 4.0 1.8 2.3 1.7 1.2 3.7 1.0  5.8 6.2 3.8 2.5 Colombia 4.7 5.1 4.5 3.0 2.1 1.4 2.6 3.3  6.8 5.1 3.6 3.6 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 133 Average Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Latin America and the Caribbean (continued) 3.9 2.9 1.3 0.4  0.6 1.3 1.2 0.2  7.0 4.6 3.1 2.4 Costa Rica 4.7 2.5 3.5 3.7 4.2 4.2 2.1 2.2  4.8 2.6 3.3 3.3 Dominica 2.6  0.6 4.4  2.6 2.5  9.5 0.5 7.6  10.4  0.4 5.8 1.5 Dominican Republic 4.5 4.9 7.1 6.9 6.7 4.7 7.0 5.1  6.7 5.5 5.0 5.0 Ecuador 4.7 4.9 3.8 0.1  1.2 2.4 1.3 0.0  7.5 2.5 1.3 2.5 El Salvador 2.0 2.2 1.7 2.4 2.5 2.2 2.4 2.4  8.6 4.2 2.8 2.0 Grenada 1.6 2.4 7.3 6.4 3.7 4.4 4.1 1.9  13.5  1.5 5.2 2.7 Guatemala 3.5 3.5 4.4 4.1 2.7 3.0 3.2 3.8  1.5 4.5 4.0 3.5 Guyana 3.1 3.7 1.7 0.7 3.8 3.7 4.4 5.4 43.4 16.4 46.5 3.0 Haiti 2.4 3.1 3.4 1.6 1.7 2.3 1.7  1.7  3.7 1.0 1.0 1.4 Honduras 4.3 2.8 3.1 3.8 3.9 4.8 3.7 2.7  8.0 4.5 3.3 3.9 Jamaica 0.5 0.2 0.6 0.9 1.5 0.7 1.8 1.0  10.2 1.5 5.7 2.2 Mexico 2.2 1.4 2.8 3.3 2.6 2.1 2.2  0.1  8.2 5.0 3.0 2.0 Nicaragua 3.8 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.6 4.6  4.0  3.9  3.0 0.2 2.7 2.8 Panama 7.7 6.9 5.1 5.7 5.0 5.6 3.6 3.0  17.9 12.0 5.0 5.0 Paraguay 4.1 8.4 4.9 3.1 4.3 5.0 3.4 0.0  0.9 4.0 4.0 3.5 Peru 6.2 5.8 2.4 3.3 4.4 2.1 4.0 2.2  11.1 8.5 5.2 3.3 St. Kitts and Nevis 1.4 5.4 6.3 1.0 2.8  2.0 2.9 2.8  18.7  2.0 10.0 2.7 St. Lucia 2.7  2.2 1.3  0.2 3.8 3.5 2.6 1.7  18.9 3.1 10.7 1.4 St. Vincent and the Grenadines 2.2 1.8 1.2 1.3 1.9 1.0 2.2 0.3  4.2  0.1 4.9 2.7 Suriname 5.0 2.9 0.3  3.4  5.6 1.8 2.6 0.3  13.5 0.7 1.5 1.0 Trinidad and Tobago 4.5 2.2  0.9 1.5  5.6  3.0 0.1  1.2  7.8 2.1 4.1 1.5 Uruguay1 5.2 4.6 3.2 0.4 1.7 1.6 0.5 0.3  5.7 3.0 3.1 2.3 Venezuela 4.7 1.3  3.9  6.2  17.0  15.7  19.6  35.0  30.0  10.0  5.0 . . . Middle East and Central Asia 5.7 3.1 3.3 2.8 4.7 2.5 2.0 1.4  2.9 3.7 3.8 3.6 Afghanistan 9.2 5.7 2.7 1.0 2.2 2.6 1.2 3.9  5.0 4.0 4.5 4.0 Algeria 3.6 2.8 3.8 3.7 3.2 1.3 1.2 0.8  6.0 2.9 2.7 1.1 Armenia 6.9 3.4 3.6 3.3 0.2 7.5 5.2 7.6  7.6 1.0 3.5 4.5 Azerbaijan 12.7 5.8 2.8 1.0  3.1 0.2 1.5 2.2  4.3 2.3 1.7 1.7 Bahrain 5.3 5.4 4.4 2.5 3.6 4.3 1.7 2.0  5.4 3.3 3.1 3.1 Djibouti 4.3 5.0 7.1 7.7 6.9 5.1 8.5 7.5  1.0 5.0 5.5 6.0 Egypt 4.6 3.3 2.9 4.4 4.3 4.1 5.3 5.6 3.6 2.5 5.7 5.8 Georgia 6.6 3.6 4.4 3.0 2.9 4.8 4.8 5.0  6.1 3.5 5.8 5.2 Iran 3.1  0.2 4.6  1.3 13.4 3.8  6.0  6.8 1.5 2.5 2.1 2.1 Iraq 16.1 7.6 0.7 2.5 15.2  3.4 0.8 4.5  10.9 1.1 4.4 3.3 Jordan 5.6 2.6 3.4 2.5 2.0 2.1 1.9 2.0  2.0 2.0 2.7 3.3 Kazakhstan 7.2 6.0 4.2 1.2 1.1 4.1 4.1 4.5  2.6 3.2 4.0 4.4 Kuwait 5.9 1.2 0.5 0.6 2.9  4.7 1.2 0.4  8.1 0.7 3.2 2.5 Kyrgyz Republic 4.1 10.9 4.0 3.9 4.3 4.7 3.5 4.5  8.0 6.0 4.6 4.0 Lebanon1 5.3 3.8 2.5 0.2 1.5 0.9  1.9  6.7  25.0 . . . . . . . . . Libya1  0.8  36.8  53.0  13.0  7.4 64.0 17.9 13.2  59.7 131.0 5.4 4.2 Mauritania 4.6 4.2 4.3 5.4 1.3 3.5 2.1 5.6  2.2 3.1 5.6 3.8 Morocco 4.7 4.5 2.7 4.5 1.1 4.2 3.1 2.5  7.0 4.5 3.9 3.5 Oman 3.8 5.1 1.4 4.7 4.9 0.3 0.9  0.8  6.4 1.8 7.4 2.0 Pakistan 4.8 3.7 4.1 4.1 4.6 5.2 5.5 1.9  0.4 1.5 4.0 5.0 Qatar 13.9 5.6 5.3 4.8 3.1  1.5 1.2 0.8  2.6 2.4 3.6 1.9 Saudi Arabia 5.3 2.7 3.7 4.1 1.7  0.7 2.4 0.3  4.1 2.9 4.0 2.8 Somalia . . . 1.9 2.4 3.5 2.9 1.4 2.8 2.9  1.5 2.9 3.2 4.3 Sudan3 1.1 2.0 4.7 1.9 3.5 0.7  2.3  2.5  3.6 0.4 1.1 4.4 Syria4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tajikistan 7.5 7.4 6.7 6.0 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 4.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 Tunisia 3.9 2.8 2.9 1.2 1.2 1.9 2.7 1.0  8.8 3.8 2.4 1.8 Turkmenistan 12.2 10.2 10.3 6.5 6.2 6.4 6.2 6.3 0.8 4.6 3.9 3.7 United Arab Emirates 4.6 5.1 4.3 5.1 3.1 2.4 1.2 1.7  5.9 3.1 2.6 2.6 Uzbekistan 7.5 7.6 7.2 7.4 6.1 4.5 5.4 5.8 1.6 5.0 5.3 5.5 West Bank and Gaza 8.6 4.7  0.2 3.7 8.9 1.4 1.2 1.4  11.0 5.7 7.0 2.0 Yemen 2.3 4.8  0.2  28.0  9.4  5.1 0.8 2.1  5.0 0.5 2.5 5.5 Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued) (Annual percent change) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 134 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Average Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Sub-Saharan Africa 5.7 5.1 5.1 3.2 1.5 3.1 3.2 3.2  1.9 3.4 4.0 4.0 Angola 8.2 5.0 4.8 0.9  2.6  0.2  2.0  0.6  4.0 0.4 2.4 3.7 Benin 3.7 7.2 6.4 1.8 3.3 5.7 6.7 6.9 2.0 5.0 6.0 6.4 Botswana 4.5 11.3 4.1  1.7 4.3 2.9 4.5 3.0  8.3 7.5 5.4 3.9 Burkina Faso 6.1 5.8 4.3 3.9 6.0 6.2 6.8 5.7 0.8 4.3 5.2 5.6 Burundi 4.2 4.9 4.2  3.9  0.6 0.5 1.6 1.8  1.3 2.8 3.7 3.0 Cabo Verde 4.8 0.8 0.6 1.0 4.7 3.7 4.5 5.7  14.0 5.8 6.0 6.2 Cameroon 3.9 5.4 5.9 5.7 4.6 3.5 4.1 3.9  2.8 3.4 4.3 5.5 Central African Republic 2.8  36.4 0.1 4.3 4.7 4.5 3.8 3.0 0.0 3.5 5.0 4.8 Chad 8.6 5.8 6.9 1.8  5.6  2.4 2.3 3.0  0.9 1.8 2.6 3.8 Comoros 2.8 4.5 2.1 1.3 3.5 4.2 3.6 1.9  0.5 0.0 3.6 3.8 Democratic Republic of the Congo 6.0 8.5 9.5 6.9 2.4 3.7 5.8 4.4  0.1 3.8 4.9 4.1 Republic of Congo 4.9  0.7 6.7  3.6  10.7  4.4  6.4  0.6  7.8 0.2 1.0 1.0 C te d Ivoire 1.8 9.3 8.8 8.8 7.2 7.4 6.9 6.2 2.3 6.0 6.5 6.0 Equatorial Guinea 9.5  4.1 0.4  9.1  8.8  5.7  6.4  5.6  5.8 4.0  5.9  2.4 Eritrea 2.7  10.5 30.9  20.6 7.4  10.0 13.0 3.8  0.6 2.0 4.9 3.9 Eswatini 3.8 3.9 0.9 2.2 1.1 2.0 2.4 2.2  3.3 1.4 0.9 2.3 Ethiopia 9.7 9.9 10.3 10.4 8.0 10.2 7.7 9.0 6.1 2.0 8.7 8.0 Gabon 2.4 5.5 4.4 3.9 2.1 0.5 0.8 3.9  1.8 1.2 2.7 3.9 The Gambia 2.9 2.9  1.4 4.1 1.9 4.8 7.2 6.1 0.0 6.0 6.5 5.6 Ghana 7.1 7.2 2.9 2.2 3.4 8.1 6.3 6.5 0.9 4.6 6.1 5.4 Guinea 3.4 3.9 3.7 3.8 10.8 10.3 6.2 5.6 5.2 5.6 5.2 5.0 Guinea-Bissau 3.1 3.3 1.0 6.1 5.3 4.8 3.4 4.5  2.4 3.0 4.0 5.0 Kenya 4.8 5.9 5.4 5.7 5.9 4.8 6.3 5.4  0.1 7.6 5.7 6.1 Lesotho 3.8 1.8 2.1 3.3 1.9  2.7  1.0 1.1  4.5 3.5 4.3 3.2 Liberia 2.9 8.8 0.7 0.0  1.6 2.5 1.2  2.5  3.0 3.6 4.7 5.7 Madagascar 3.8 2.3 3.3 3.1 4.0 3.9 3.2 4.4  4.2 3.2 5.0 5.0 Malawi 5.8 5.2 5.7 2.9 2.3 4.0 3.2 4.5 0.6 2.2 6.5 6.0 Mali 4.2 2.3 7.1 6.2 5.9 5.3 4.7 4.8  2.0 4.0 6.0 5.0 Mauritius 4.3 3.4 3.7 3.6 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.0  15.8 6.6 5.2 3.3 Mozambique 7.4 7.0 7.4 6.7 3.8 3.7 3.4 2.3  0.5 2.1 4.7 5.3 Namibia 4.1 5.6 6.1 4.3 0.0  1.0 1.1  1.6  7.2 2.6 3.3 2.5 Niger 5.0 5.3 6.6 4.4 5.7 5.0 7.2 5.9 1.2 6.9 12.8 5.8 Nigeria 7.7 5.4 6.3 2.7  1.6 0.8 1.9 2.2  1.8 2.5 2.3 2.2 Rwanda 7.7 4.7 6.2 8.9 6.0 4.0 8.6 9.4  0.2 5.7 6.8 6.1 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe 5.4 4.8 6.5 3.8 4.2 3.9 3.0 1.3  6.5 3.0 5.0 4.5 Senegal 3.5 2.4 6.2 6.4 6.4 7.4 6.2 4.4 0.8 5.2 6.0 6.5 Seychelles 3.0 6.0 4.5 4.9 4.4 5.0 1.3 1.9  13.4 1.8 4.3 3.5 Sierra Leone 6.8 20.7 4.6  20.5 6.4 3.8 3.5 5.5  2.2 3.0 3.6 4.8 South Africa 3.4 2.5 1.8 1.2 0.4 1.4 0.8 0.2  7.0 3.1 2.0 1.3 South Sudan . . . 29.3 2.9  0.2  13.5  5.8  1.9 0.9  6.6 5.3 6.5 4.4 Tanzania 6.5 6.8 6.7 6.2 6.9 6.8 7.0 7.0 1.0 2.7 4.6 5.5 Togo 3.0 6.1 5.9 5.7 5.6 4.3 5.0 5.5 0.7 3.5 4.5 5.5 Uganda 7.3 3.9 5.7 7.3 0.3 7.3 6.0 8.0  2.1 6.3 5.0 6.4 Zambia 7.8 5.1 4.7 2.9 3.8 3.5 4.0 1.4  3.5 0.6 1.1 1.6 Zimbabwe1  0.3 2.0 2.4 1.8 0.7 4.7 3.5  7.4  8.0 3.1 4.0 2.5 1See country-specific notes for India, Lebanon, Libya, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, and Zimbabwe in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 2Data for Timor-Leste excludes projections for oil exports from the Joint Petroleum Development Area. 3Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan. 4Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation. Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued) (Annual percent change) STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 135 Table A5. Summary of Inflation (Percent) Average Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 GDP Deflators Advanced Economies 1.6 1.3 1.4 1.2 1.0 1.5 1.7 1.5 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.7 United States 2.1 1.8 1.9 1.0 1.0 1.9 2.4 1.8 1.2 1.8 2.3 1.9 Euro Area 1.7 1.2 0.9 1.4 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.8 Japan  1.1  0.4 1.7 2.1 0.4  0.1 0.0 0.6 0.9 0.6 0.5 0.5 Other Advanced Economies1 2.1 1.5 1.4 1.2 1.3 2.0 1.7 1.3 1.8 1.5 0.7 1.8 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies 2.0 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.7 1.7 2.0 1.4 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.9 United States 2.5 1.5 1.6 0.1 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 2.3 2.4 2.2 Euro Area2 2.1 1.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 1.5 1.8 1.2 0.3 1.4 1.2 1.8 Japan  0.1 0.3 2.8 0.8  0.1 0.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.7 1.0 Other Advanced Economies1 2.3 1.7 1.5 0.5 0.9 1.8 1.9 1.4 0.6 1.4 1.4 1.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies3 6.4 5.4 4.7 4.7 4.3 4.4 4.9 5.1 5.1 4.9 4.4 3.8 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia 4.8 4.6 3.4 2.7 2.8 2.4 2.7 3.3 3.1 2.3 2.7 2.7 Emerging and Developing Europe 8.8 5.5 6.5 10.6 5.5 5.6 6.4 6.6 5.4 6.5 5.4 5.4 Latin America and the Caribbean 5.4 4.6 4.9 5.4 5.5 6.3 6.6 7.7 6.4 7.2 6.6 4.0 Middle East and Central Asia 7.9 8.3 6.4 5.5 5.7 6.9 9.5 7.4 10.2 11.2 8.1 6.4 Sub-Saharan Africa 9.2 6.5 6.3 6.8 10.4 10.7 8.4 8.5 10.8 9.8 7.8 6.0 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 8.2 8.2 5.6 5.6 7.6 6.4 8.4 6.5 9.0 11.0 8.5 6.9 Nonfuel 6.0 5.0 4.5 4.6 3.9 4.2 4.5 4.9 4.7 4.3 4.0 3.5 Of Which, Primary Products4 6.3 6.4 7.0 5.2 6.2 11.7 14.2 17.9 19.5 19.1 13.7 6.0 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies 7.1 6.1 5.6 5.4 5.2 5.6 5.5 5.3 5.8 5.8 4.9 4.4 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19 9.4 6.1 10.0 15.0 10.0 17.3 16.9 13.6 16.5 15.8 9.6 6.1 Other Groups European Union 2.4 1.4 0.4 0.1 0.2 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.7 1.6 1.4 1.9 Middle East and North Africa 7.6 8.7 6.3 5.6 5.5 7.0 10.7 7.6 10.6 12.4 8.5 6.8 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 6.1 5.2 4.5 4.6 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.8 4.5 4.4 4.1 3.6 Low-Income Developing Countries 9.9 7.8 7.2 6.5 8.4 9.2 8.8 8.4 11.7 11.2 7.8 5.7 Memorandum Median Inflation Rate Advanced Economies 2.3 1.4 0.7 0.1 0.6 1.6 1.8 1.5 0.4 1.4 1.5 1.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies3 5.3 3.7 3.1 2.6 2.7 3.3 3.1 2.7 2.8 3.1 3.1 3.0 1Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan. 2Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices. 3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 4Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See country-specific note for Argentina in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 136 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1 (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 2020 2021 2022 Advanced Economies 2.0 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.7 1.7 2.0 1.4 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.9 0.5 1.9 1.7 United States 2.5 1.5 1.6 0.1 1.3 2.1 2.4 1.8 1.2 2.3 2.4 2.2 1.4 2.3 2.5 Euro Area3 2.1 1.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 1.5 1.8 1.2 0.3 1.4 1.2 1.8  0.3 1.8 1.2 Germany 1.8 1.6 0.8 0.7 0.4 1.7 1.9 1.4 0.4 2.2 1.1 2.1  0.7 3.1 1.0 France 1.9 1.0 0.6 0.1 0.3 1.2 2.1 1.3 0.5 1.1 1.2 1.6  0.1 1.3 1.4 Italy 2.4 1.2 0.2 0.1  0.1 1.3 1.2 0.6  0.1 0.8 0.9 1.3  0.3 0.8 0.9 Spain 2.7 1.4  0.2  0.5  0.2 2.0 1.7 0.7  0.3 1.0 1.3 1.7  0.5 1.3 1.4 The Netherlands 1.8 2.6 0.3 0.2 0.1 1.3 1.6 2.7 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.8 0.9 1.4 1.5 Belgium 2.3 1.2 0.5 0.6 1.8 2.2 2.3 1.2 0.4 1.7 1.9 1.8 0.4 2.1 1.6 Austria 2.1 2.1 1.5 0.8 1.0 2.2 2.1 1.5 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 1.0 1.9 1.8 Ireland 1.7 0.5 0.3 0.0  0.2 0.3 0.7 0.9  0.5 1.6 1.9 2.0  1.0 2.0 2.0 Portugal 2.3 0.4  0.2 0.5 0.6 1.6 1.2 0.3  0.1 0.9 1.2 1.6 0.0 0.8 1.2 Greece 3.1  0.9  1.4  1.1 0.0 1.1 0.8 0.5  1.3 0.2 0.8 1.9  2.4 0.8 0.8 Finland 1.9 2.2 1.2  0.2 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.4 1.4 1.5 1.9 0.2 1.6 1.5 Slovak Republic 3.8 1.5  0.1  0.3  0.5 1.4 2.5 2.8 2.0 1.2 1.9 2.0 1.6 1.5 1.9 Lithuania 3.6 1.2 0.2  0.7 0.7 3.7 2.5 2.2 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.1  0.1 1.5 1.9 Slovenia 3.0 1.8 0.2  0.5  0.1 1.4 1.7 1.6  0.1 0.8 1.5 2.1  1.1 1.7 1.3 Luxembourg 2.9 1.7 0.7 0.1 0.0 2.1 2.0 1.7 0.0 0.9 1.8 1.9  0.4 1.3 1.7 Latvia 5.6 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.1 2.9 2.6 2.7 0.1 2.1 2.2 2.2  0.5 3.9 1.8 Estonia 4.2 3.2 0.5 0.1 0.8 3.7 3.4 2.3  0.6 1.8 2.5 1.9  0.9 1.8 2.5 Cyprus 2.6 0.4  0.3  1.5  1.2 0.7 0.8 0.6  1.1 0.5 0.8 1.9  0.8 1.0 0.8 Malta 2.5 1.0 0.8 1.2 0.9 1.3 1.7 1.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 2.0 0.2 1.7 1.5 Japan  0.1 0.3 2.8 0.8  0.1 0.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.7 1.0  0.9 1.2 0.2 United Kingdom 2.6 2.6 1.5 0.0 0.7 2.7 2.5 1.8 0.9 1.5 1.9 2.0 0.5 2.1 1.8 Korea 3.1 1.3 1.3 0.7 1.0 1.9 1.5 0.4 0.5 1.4 0.9 2.0 0.5 1.2 1.0 Canada 2.0 0.9 1.9 1.1 1.4 1.6 2.3 1.9 0.7 1.7 2.0 2.0 0.8 1.6 2.2 Australia 2.8 2.5 2.5 1.5 1.3 2.0 1.9 1.6 0.9 1.7 1.6 2.4 0.9 1.5 1.7 Taiwan Province of China 1.3 1.0 1.3  0.6 1.0 1.1 1.5 0.5  0.2 0.9 1.2 1.4 0.1 0.9 1.2 Switzerland 0.7  0.2 0.0  1.1  0.4 0.5 0.9 0.4  0.7 0.1 0.3 1.0  0.8 0.1 0.6 Singapore 2.5 2.4 1.0  0.5  0.5 0.6 0.4 0.6  0.2 0.2 0.8 1.5 0.0 0.4 0.9 Sweden 1.7 0.4 0.2 0.7 1.1 1.9 2.0 1.6 0.7 1.5 1.2 1.9 0.4 1.5 1.2 Hong Kong SAR 1.8 4.3 4.4 3.0 2.4 1.5 2.4 2.9 0.3 1.4 1.9 2.4 0.3 1.4 1.9 Czech Republic 2.4 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.7 2.5 2.1 2.8 3.2 2.3 2.0 2.0 2.7 2.3 2.0 Israel 2.0 1.5 0.5  0.6  0.5 0.2 0.8 0.8  0.6 0.3 0.6 0.9  0.7 0.7 0.6 Norway 1.8 2.1 2.0 2.2 3.6 1.9 2.8 2.2 1.3 2.2 2.0 2.0 1.4 2.5 2.0 Denmark 2.0 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.0 1.1 0.7 0.7 0.3 1.1 1.4 1.8 0.4 1.1 1.4 New Zealand 2.6 1.1 1.2 0.3 0.6 1.9 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.6 2.2 1.4 2.1 1.7 Puerto Rico 3.1 1.1 0.6  0.8  0.3 1.8 1.3 0.1  1.3 2.5 1.5 1.6  1.3 2.5 1.5 Macao SAR 3.9 5.5 6.0 4.6 2.4 1.2 3.0 2.8 0.8 1.4 1.9 2.4  0.9 1.4 1.9 Iceland 6.0 3.9 2.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.7 3.0 2.9 3.2 2.5 2.5 3.6 2.6 2.5 San Marino 2.3 1.6 1.1 0.1 0.6 1.0 1.8 1.0 0.2 0.8 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.8 0.9 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.9 1.3 1.5 0.3 0.8 1.8 2.1 1.5 0.8 1.7 1.8 1.9 0.6 2.1 1.8 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. 2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis. 3Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 137 Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 2020 2021 2022 Emerging and Developing Asia 4.8 4.6 3.4 2.7 2.8 2.4 2.7 3.3 3.1 2.3 2.7 2.7 1.2 3.0 2.5 Bangladesh 7.9 6.8 7.3 6.4 5.9 5.4 5.8 5.5 5.6 5.8 5.6 5.5 6.0 5.7 5.6 Bhutan 5.8 8.1 9.6 6.7 3.3 4.3 3.7 2.8 4.2 4.9 4.9 4.0 4.5 5.3 4.4 Brunei Darussalam 0.7 0.4  0.2  0.3  0.4  1.3 1.1  0.4 1.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 2.0 0.7 0.7 Cambodia 6.0 3.0 3.9 1.2 3.0 2.9 2.4 2.0 2.9 3.1 2.8 3.0 2.9 3.0 2.8 China 3.0 2.6 2.0 1.4 2.0 1.6 2.1 2.9 2.4 1.2 1.9 2.0  0.3 2.3 1.9 Fiji 4.2 2.9 0.5 1.4 3.9 3.4 4.1 1.8  2.6  1.1 2.0 2.0  2.8 1.5 2.0 India 7.6 9.4 5.8 4.9 4.5 3.6 3.4 4.8 6.2 4.9 4.1 4.0 4.9 4.8 3.9 Indonesia 7.2 6.4 6.4 6.4 3.5 3.8 3.3 2.8 2.0 2.0 3.1 2.9 1.7 2.8 1.2 Kiribati 2.0  1.5 2.1 0.6 1.9 0.4 0.6  1.8 2.5 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.6 1.9 Lao P.D.R. 6.9 6.4 4.1 1.3 1.8 0.7 2.0 3.3 5.1 4.9 3.7 3.1 3.2 4.3 3.1 Malaysia 2.4 2.1 3.1 2.1 2.1 3.8 1.0 0.7  1.1 2.0 2.0 2.0  1.4 2.0 2.0 Maldives 6.0 4.0 2.4 1.4 0.8 2.3 1.4 1.3  1.6 1.6 2.1 2.0  2.0 2.3 2.0 Marshall Islands . . . 1.9 1.1  2.2  1.5 0.1 0.8  0.5 0.6 1.1 1.5 2.0 0.6 1.1 1.5 Micronesia 4.2 2.2 0.7  0.2  0.6 0.1 1.4 1.5 0.5 1.9 2.2 2.0 0.5 1.9 2.2 Mongolia 10.7 10.5 12.3 5.7 0.7 4.3 6.8 7.3 3.7 5.4 6.4 6.0 2.3 6.5 6.2 Myanmar 14.2 6.4 5.7 7.3 9.1 4.6 5.9 8.6 5.7 5.0 5.6 6.3 2.0 6.5 5.9 Nauru . . .  1.1 0.3 9.8 8.2 5.1 0.5 4.3 0.9 1.2 2.0 2.0  0.9 1.2 1.4 Nepal 7.4 9.9 9.0 7.2 9.9 4.5 4.1 4.6 6.1 4.2 6.4 5.3 4.8 5.6 6.0 Palau 3.5 2.8 4.0 2.2  1.3 1.1 2.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 Papua New Guinea 5.3 5.0 5.2 6.0 6.7 5.4 4.7 3.7 5.0 3.3 4.7 3.2 5.2 3.8 4.7 Philippines 4.6 2.6 3.6 0.7 1.3 2.9 5.2 2.5 2.6 3.4 3.0 3.0 3.5 2.8 3.0 Samoa 5.7  0.2  1.2 1.9 0.1 1.3 3.7 2.2 1.5  2.5 2.7 2.6  3.3 3.1 1.9 Solomon Islands 8.1 5.2 5.3  0.6 0.5 0.5 3.5 1.6 3.4 2.6 3.2 2.3  1.8 3.8 3.6 Sri Lanka 8.8 6.9 2.8 2.2 4.0 6.6 4.3 4.3 4.6 4.4 5.0 5.0 4.2 4.6 5.5 Thailand 3.1 2.2 1.9  0.9 0.2 0.7 1.1 0.7  0.8 1.3 1.0 1.9  0.3 1.0 1.1 Timor-Leste 6.1 9.5 0.8 0.6  1.5 0.5 2.3 0.9 0.5 1.6 2.5 2.0 1.2 2.0 3.0 Tonga 7.0 0.7 2.3 0.1  0.6 7.2 6.8 3.5 0.2  0.1 3.4 2.6  1.4 3.4 3.5 Tuvalu 2.5 2.0 1.1 3.1 3.5 4.1 2.2 3.5 1.6 2.8 3.0 3.4 1.6 2.8 3.0 Vanuatu 2.6 1.5 0.8 2.5 0.8 3.1 2.3 2.7 2.9 2.4 2.1 2.3 2.6 2.2 2.1 Vietnam 10.1 6.6 4.1 0.6 2.7 3.5 3.5 2.8 3.2 3.9 3.9 4.0 0.2 4.3 4.0 Emerging and Developing Europe 8.8 5.5 6.5 10.6 5.5 5.6 6.4 6.6 5.4 6.5 5.4 5.4 6.5 5.8 5.4 Albania 2.8 1.9 1.6 1.9 1.3 2.0 2.0 1.4 1.6 2.0 2.3 3.0 1.0 1.8 2.0 Belarus 20.8 18.3 18.1 13.5 11.8 6.0 4.9 5.6 5.5 6.9 5.5 5.0 7.3 5.9 5.4 Bosnia and Herzegovina 2.7  0.1  0.9  1.0  1.6 0.8 1.4 0.6  0.6 1.2 1.0 2.1  0.6 1.1 0.9 Bulgaria3 5.2 0.4  1.6  1.1  1.3 1.2 2.6 2.5 1.2 1.0 2.0 2.0 0.0 1.9 2.0 Croatia 2.8 2.2  0.2  0.5  1.1 1.1 1.5 0.8 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.6 0.1 0.9 1.6 Hungary 5.1 1.7  0.2  0.1 0.4 2.4 2.8 3.4 3.3 3.6 3.5 3.0 2.7 3.9 3.7 Kosovo 2.2 1.8 0.4  0.5 0.3 1.5 1.1 2.7 0.2 0.3 1.5 1.9 0.1 1.1 1.6 Moldova 9.3 4.6 5.1 9.6 6.4 6.5 3.1 4.8 3.8 3.0 5.0 5.0 0.4 5.0 5.0 Montenegro 4.0 2.2  0.7 1.5  0.3 2.4 2.6 0.4  0.2 0.4 1.0 1.7  0.9 1.0 1.2 North Macedonia 2.2 2.8  0.3  0.3  0.2 1.4 1.5 0.8 1.2 2.0 1.5 2.0 2.3 1.6 1.2 Poland 2.8 0.9 0.0  0.9  0.6 2.0 1.6 2.3 3.4 3.2 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.7 2.6 Romania 7.6 4.0 1.1  0.6  1.6 1.3 4.6 3.8 2.6 2.8 2.1 2.5 2.1 2.8 2.5 Russia 10.2 6.8 7.8 15.5 7.0 3.7 2.9 4.5 3.4 4.5 3.4 4.0 4.9 3.7 3.5 Serbia 9.1 7.7 2.1 1.4 1.1 3.1 2.0 1.9 1.7 2.2 2.4 3.0 1.7 2.3 2.4 Turkey4 10.0 7.5 8.9 7.7 7.8 11.1 16.3 15.2 12.3 13.6 11.8 11.0 14.6 12.5 11.5 Ukraine4 10.7  0.3 12.1 48.7 13.9 14.4 10.9 7.9 2.7 7.9 6.8 5.0 5.0 7.2 6.0 Latin America and the Caribbean5 5.4 4.6 4.9 5.4 5.5 6.3 6.6 7.7 6.4 7.2 6.6 4.0 6.3 7.3 6.0 Antigua and Barbuda 2.4 1.1 1.1 1.0  0.5 2.4 1.2 1.4 1.1 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.8 2.0 2.0 Argentina4 9.2 10.6 . . . . . . . . . 25.7 34.3 53.5 42.0 . . . . . . . . . 36.1 . . . . . . Aruba 3.2  2.4 0.4 0.5  0.9  1.0 3.6 3.9  1.3 0.1 2.0 2.1  3.1 1.3 2.5 The Bahamas 2.4 0.4 1.2 1.9  0.3 1.5 2.3 2.5 0.0 2.0 2.8 2.3 1.2 3.0 2.5 Barbados 5.2 1.8 1.8  1.1 1.5 4.4 3.7 4.1 2.9 3.7 2.3 2.3 1.3 2.4 2.3 Belize 2.5 0.5 1.2  0.9 0.7 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.1 1.0 2.0 2.0 0.6 1.5 2.0 Bolivia 5.8 5.7 5.8 4.1 3.6 2.8 2.3 1.8 0.9 3.9 3.7 3.5 0.7 6.2 2.6 Brazil 6.3 6.2 6.3 9.0 8.7 3.4 3.7 3.7 3.2 4.6 4.0 3.3 4.5 4.5 3.5 Chile 3.2 1.8 4.7 4.3 3.8 2.2 2.3 2.3 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.0 2.9 3.0 3.0 Colombia 4.8 2.0 2.9 5.0 7.5 4.3 3.2 3.5 2.5 2.1 2.6 2.9 1.6 2.5 2.6 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 138 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued) (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 2020 2021 2022 Latin America and the Caribbean (continued)5 5.4 4.6 4.9 5.4 5.5 6.3 6.6 7.7 6.4 7.2 6.6 4.0 6.3 7.3 6.0 Costa Rica 9.2 5.2 4.5 0.8 0.0 1.6 2.2 2.1 0.7 1.2 1.1 2.9 0.9 1.2 0.9 Dominica 2.3 0.0 0.8  0.9 0.1 0.3 1.0 1.5  0.3 1.6 2.0 2.0 1.7 2.0 2.0 Dominican Republic 11.9 4.8 3.0 0.8 1.6 3.3 3.6 1.8 3.8 6.2 4.0 4.0 5.6 4.5 4.0 Ecuador 4.5 2.7 3.6 4.0 1.7 0.4  0.2 0.3  0.3 0.5 2.4 1.0  0.9 2.1 1.9 El Salvador 3.6 0.8 1.1  0.7 0.6 1.0 1.1 0.1 0.2 1.1 1.4 1.0 0.7 1.5 1.3 Grenada 3.2 0.0  1.0  0.6 1.7 0.9 0.8 0.6  0.7 1.8 1.7 1.9  0.8 1.8 1.7 Guatemala 6.2 4.3 3.4 2.4 4.4 4.4 3.8 3.7 2.4 2.9 3.6 4.0 4.8 4.5 3.6 Guyana 5.8 1.9 0.7  0.9 0.8 1.9 1.3 2.1 0.7 2.0 2.0 3.1 0.9 1.9 2.1 Haiti 12.8 6.8 3.9 7.5 13.4 14.7 12.9 17.3 22.9 20.5 22.4 9.4 25.2 22.0 19.0 Honduras 7.1 5.2 6.1 3.2 2.7 3.9 4.3 4.4 3.5 4.3 4.1 4.0 4.0 4.2 4.0 Jamaica 11.4 9.4 8.3 3.7 2.3 4.4 3.7 3.9 5.2 5.0 5.1 5.0 5.2 4.3 5.8 Mexico 4.3 3.8 4.0 2.7 2.8 6.0 4.9 3.6 3.4 3.5 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.1 Nicaragua 8.7 7.1 6.0 4.0 3.5 3.9 4.9 5.4 3.7 3.9 3.5 3.5 2.9 3.9 3.5 Panama 3.6 4.0 2.6 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.8  0.4  1.6 0.1 1.1 2.0  1.6 0.5 2.0 Paraguay 7.2 2.7 5.0 3.1 4.1 3.6 4.0 2.8 1.8 2.7 3.2 3.2 2.2 3.2 3.2 Peru 2.9 2.8 3.2 3.5 3.6 2.8 1.3 2.1 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 St. Kitts and Nevis 3.5 1.1 0.2  2.3  0.7 0.7  1.0  0.3  0.6  1.0  0.5 2.0  1.2  0.8  0.3 St. Lucia 2.8 1.5 3.5  1.0  3.1 0.1 2.4 0.5  1.8 2.4 2.0 2.0  0.4 2.2 2.0 St. Vincent and the Grenadines 3.3 0.8 0.2  1.7  0.2 2.2 2.3 0.9  0.6 1.4 2.0 2.0  1.0 1.4 2.1 Suriname 10.6 1.9 3.4 6.9 55.5 22.0 6.9 4.4 34.9 52.1 29.0 12.2 61.0 40.5 24.5 Trinidad and Tobago 7.4 5.2 5.7 4.7 3.1 1.9 1.0 1.0 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.3 0.8 1.2 1.5 Uruguay 8.5 8.6 8.9 8.7 9.6 6.2 7.6 7.9 9.8 8.3 7.4 4.0 9.4 7.5 6.0 Venezuela4 23.3 40.6 62.2 122 255 438 65,374 19,906 2,355 5,500 5,500 . . . 2,960 5,500 5,500 Middle East and Central Asia 7.9 8.3 6.4 5.5 5.7 6.9 9.5 7.4 10.2 11.2 8.1 6.4 12.5 9.7 7.3 Afghanistan 11.2 7.4 4.7  0.7 4.4 5.0 0.6 2.3 5.6 5.1 4.5 4.0 5.0 5.8 4.8 Algeria 4.3 3.3 2.9 4.8 6.4 5.6 4.3 2.0 2.4 4.9 6.0 7.0 3.1 5.3 5.6 Armenia 4.9 5.8 3.0 3.7  1.4 1.0 2.5 1.4 1.2 3.9 3.2 4.0 3.8 3.0 3.5 Azerbaijan 7.8 2.4 1.4 4.0 12.4 12.8 2.3 2.7 2.8 3.5 3.2 3.2 2.7 3.5 3.2 Bahrain 2.2 3.3 2.6 1.8 2.8 1.4 2.1 1.0  2.3 1.5 2.1 2.2  1.6 2.3 2.1 Djibouti 4.3 1.1 1.3  0.8 2.7 0.6 0.1 3.3 2.9 2.4 2.1 2.0 2.5 2.2 2.0 Egypt 9.4 6.9 10.1 11.0 10.2 23.5 20.9 13.9 5.7 4.8 7.2 7.3 5.7 6.3 7.4 Georgia 6.3  0.5 3.1 4.0 2.1 6.0 2.6 4.9 5.2 3.8 2.7 3.0 2.4 5.0 2.4 Iran 17.0 34.7 15.6 11.9 9.1 9.6 30.2 34.6 36.5 39.0 27.5 25.0 48.0 30.0 25.0 Iraq . . . 1.9 2.2 1.4 0.5 0.1 0.4  0.2 0.6 9.4 7.5 2.0 3.2 11.9 4.8 Jordan 4.4 4.9 3.0  1.1  0.6 3.6 4.5 0.7 0.4 2.3 2.0 2.5  0.3 2.5 2.0 Kazakhstan 8.5 5.8 6.7 6.7 14.6 7.4 6.0 5.2 6.8 6.4 5.0 4.0 7.5 5.9 5.0 Kuwait 3.8 2.7 3.1 3.7 3.5 1.5 0.6 1.1 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.5 3.0 2.5 2.5 Kyrgyz Republic 8.4 6.6 7.5 6.5 0.4 3.2 1.5 1.1 6.3 8.6 5.4 4.6 7.5 5.3 5.2 Lebanon4 3.6 4.8 1.8  3.7  0.8 4.5 4.6 2.9 88.2 . . . . . . . . . 150.4 . . . . . . Libya4 4.6 2.6 2.4 14.8 24.0 28.0  1.2 4.6 22.3 18.2 14.2 4.0 22.3 18.2 14.2 Mauritania 6.7 4.1 3.8 0.5 1.5 2.3 3.1 2.3 2.3 2.4 3.5 4.0 1.8 3.0 4.0 Morocco 1.8 1.6 0.4 1.4 1.5 0.7 1.6 0.2 0.6 0.8 1.2 2.0  0.9 0.8 1.2 Oman 3.8 1.2 1.0 0.1 1.1 1.6 0.9 0.1  0.9 3.8 2.4 0.9  0.9 3.8 2.4 Pakistan 9.8 7.4 8.6 4.5 2.9 4.1 3.9 6.7 10.7 8.7 8.0 6.5 8.6 10.0 7.9 Qatar 5.3 3.1 4.2 0.9 2.7 0.4 0.3  0.7  2.7 2.4 2.9 2.2  3.4 6.3  0.3 Saudi Arabia 2.9 3.6 2.2 1.2 2.0  0.8 2.5  2.1 3.4 2.7 2.0 2.0 5.4 0.6 2.0 Somalia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.1 2.5 2.1 Sudan6 13.6 36.5 36.9 16.9 17.8 32.4 63.3 51.0 163.3 197.1 44.5 10.4 269.3 119.6 28.8 Syria7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tajikistan 10.5 5.0 6.1 5.8 5.9 7.3 3.8 7.8 8.6 8.0 6.5 6.5 9.4 8.0 6.5 Tunisia 3.7 5.3 4.6 4.4 3.6 5.3 7.3 6.7 5.7 5.8 6.3 7.6 5.5 6.0 6.4 Turkmenistan 6.3 6.8 6.0 7.4 3.6 8.0 13.3 5.1 7.6 8.0 6.5 6.0 8.9 7.0 6.0 United Arab Emirates 5.0 1.1 2.3 4.1 1.6 2.0 3.1  1.9  2.1 2.9 1.2 1.8  2.1 2.9 1.2 Uzbekistan 11.7 11.7 9.1 8.5 8.8 13.9 17.5 14.5 12.9 10.3 11.2 5.0 11.1 10.0 10.6 West Bank and Gaza 4.0 1.7 1.7 1.4  0.2 0.2  0.2 1.6  0.7 0.3 1.1 1.3 0.1 0.6 1.1 Yemen 11.4 11.0 8.2 22.0 21.3 30.4 27.6 10.0 26.2 30.6 19.2 7.2 45.0 20.7 17.9 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 139 Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued) (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 2020 2021 2022 Sub-Saharan Africa 9.2 6.5 6.3 6.8 10.4 10.7 8.4 8.5 10.8 9.8 7.8 6.0 11.1 8.7 7.3 Angola 23.3 8.8 7.3 9.2 30.7 29.8 19.6 17.1 22.3 22.3 13.1 5.8 25.1 18.7 10.0 Benin 3.4 1.0  1.1 0.2  0.8 1.8 0.8  0.9 3.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 3.0 2.0 2.0 Botswana 8.7 5.9 4.4 3.1 2.8 3.3 3.2 2.8 2.0 4.7 4.3 4.3 2.3 4.7 4.3 Burkina Faso 2.7 0.5  0.3 1.7 0.4 1.5 2.0  3.2 1.9 2.7 2.6 2.5 2.3 2.7 2.6 Burundi 11.1 7.9 4.4 5.6 5.5 1.6  4.0  0.7 7.3 4.1 2.0 2.1 7.5 1.9 2.1 Cabo Verde 2.6 1.5  0.2 0.1  1.4 0.8 1.3 1.1 0.6 1.2 1.4 1.7  0.9 1.2 1.4 Cameroon 2.4 2.1 1.9 2.7 0.9 0.6 1.1 2.5 2.8 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.4 2.1 2.0 Central African Republic 3.3 7.0 14.9 1.4 4.9 4.2 1.6 2.7 2.3 3.3 2.5 2.5 4.8 2.5 2.5 Chad 2.4 0.2 1.7 4.8  1.6  0.9 4.0  1.0 3.5 3.0 3.0 3.0 1.2 5.6 2.9 Comoros 4.1 0.4 0.0 0.9 0.8 0.1 1.7 3.7 1.1 0.3 1.2 2.0  6.3 11.4  0.1 Democratic Republic of the Congo 16.6 0.9 1.2 0.7 3.2 35.8 29.3 4.7 11.3 10.9 7.5 5.0 15.8 7.8 7.4 Republic of Congo 3.2 4.6 0.9 3.2 3.2 0.4 1.2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 2.5 2.7 3.0 C te d Ivoire 2.8 2.6 0.4 1.2 0.7 0.7 0.4 0.8 2.5 2.0 1.6 2.0 2.0 1.6 1.4 Equatorial Guinea 4.8 3.2 4.3 1.7 1.4 0.7 1.3 1.2 4.8 1.5 3.1 3.0  0.5 3.2 3.0 Eritrea 15.8 5.9 10.0 28.5  5.6  13.3  14.4  16.4 4.9 2.9 1.9 2.0 4.0 2.0 2.0 Eswatini 6.8 5.6 5.7 5.0 7.8 6.2 4.8 2.6 3.9 4.5 4.7 4.9 4.6 4.6 4.7 Ethiopia 17.6 8.1 7.4 9.6 6.6 10.7 13.8 15.8 20.4 13.1 8.0 8.0 18.2 8.4 8.0 Gabon 1.4 0.5 4.5  0.1 2.1 2.7 4.8 2.0 1.3 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.6 2.0 2.0 The Gambia 6.6 5.2 6.3 6.8 7.2 8.0 6.5 7.1 5.9 6.0 5.5 5.0 5.7 5.8 5.2 Ghana 12.7 11.7 15.5 17.2 17.5 12.4 9.8 7.1 9.9 9.0 8.2 6.0 10.5 9.8 7.5 Guinea 19.0 11.9 9.7 8.2 8.2 8.9 9.8 9.5 10.6 8.0 7.9 7.8 10.6 8.0 7.9 Guinea-Bissau 2.4 0.8  1.0 1.5 2.7  0.2 0.4 0.3 1.5 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.5 2.0 2.0 Kenya 8.5 5.7 6.9 6.6 6.3 8.0 4.7 5.2 5.3 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.6 5.0 5.0 Lesotho 6.2 4.9 5.4 3.2 6.6 4.4 4.8 5.2 4.9 4.6 4.9 5.5 5.2 4.9 4.8 Liberia 8.9 7.6 9.9 7.7 8.8 12.4 23.5 27.0 17.0 10.9 15.2 4.0 13.1 16.0 9.7 Madagascar 9.3 5.8 6.1 7.4 6.1 8.6 8.6 5.6 4.2 5.4 5.7 5.4 4.6 5.4 6.0 Malawi 9.4 28.3 23.8 21.9 21.7 11.5 9.2 9.4 8.6 9.5 7.7 5.0 7.6 9.5 6.6 Mali 2.5  2.4 2.7 1.4  1.8 1.8 1.7  2.9 0.6 1.7 2.0 2.0 0.7 1.7 2.0 Mauritius 5.5 3.5 3.2 1.3 1.0 3.7 3.2 0.5 2.5 2.6 3.9 3.2 2.7 4.0 3.8 Mozambique 9.8 4.3 2.6 3.6 19.9 15.1 3.9 2.8 3.1 5.3 5.5 5.5 3.5 5.5 5.5 Namibia 6.0 5.6 5.3 3.4 6.7 6.1 4.3 3.7 2.6 3.4 4.4 4.5 3.2 3.4 4.5 Niger 2.2 2.3  0.9 1.0 0.2 0.2 2.8  2.5 2.8 0.4 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 Nigeria 12.1 8.5 8.0 9.0 15.7 16.5 12.1 11.4 13.2 16.0 13.5 10.5 15.8 14.5 12.6 Rwanda 8.6 4.2 1.8 2.5 5.7 4.8 1.4 2.4 8.0 2.5 4.1 5.0 5.0 2.3 5.0 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe 16.7 8.1 7.0 6.1 5.4 5.7 7.9 7.7 9.8 10.6 8.1 4.4 10.2 10.1 6.2 Senegal 2.0 0.7  1.1 0.9 1.2 1.1 0.5 1.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 2.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 Seychelles 8.0 4.3 1.4 4.0  1.0 2.9 3.7 1.8 1.2 3.7 2.5 3.0 3.8 1.5 3.0 Sierra Leone 9.4 5.5 4.6 6.7 10.9 18.2 16.0 14.8 15.7 15.5 12.3 7.0 10.4 13.3 12.1 South Africa 5.5 5.8 6.1 4.6 6.3 5.3 4.6 4.1 3.3 4.3 4.5 4.5 3.2 4.9 4.5 South Sudan . . . 0.0 1.7 52.8 379.8 187.9 83.5 51.2 38.0 40.0 33.8 11.3 66.1 23.8 25.5 Tanzania 8.5 7.9 6.1 5.6 5.2 5.3 3.5 3.4 3.0 3.3 3.6 3.5 3.2 3.4 3.6 Togo 2.4 1.8 0.2 1.8 0.9  0.2 0.9 0.7 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 3.5 1.7 2.3 Uganda 9.0 4.9 3.1 5.4 5.5 5.6 2.6 2.9 3.8 5.2 5.5 5.0 3.6 5.8 5.1 Zambia 12.6 7.0 7.8 10.1 17.9 6.6 7.0 9.8 16.3 17.8 14.8 7.2 19.2 16.3 13.2 Zimbabwe4 3.9 1.6  0.2  2.4  1.6 0.9 10.6 255.3 557.2 99.3 24.7 3.3 348.6 49.4 22.0 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. 2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis. 3Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices. 4See country-specific notes for Argentina, Lebanon, Libya, Turkey, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 5Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan. 7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation. WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 140 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1 (Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise) Average Projections 2003 12 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Major Advanced Economies Net Lending/Borrowing  5.4  4.3  3.6  3.0  3.3  3.3  3.4  3.7  13.2  11.9  5.0  3.3 Output Gap2  2.0  3.5  2.8  1.8  1.5  0.6 0.2 0.3  3.4  1.0 0.4 0.2 Structural Balance2  4.4  3.2  2.6  2.4  2.9  3.1  3.4  3.9  8.9  9.6  5.1  3.5 United States Net Lending/Borrowing3  6.6  4.6  4.1  3.5  4.3  4.6  5.4  5.7  15.8  15.0  6.1  4.7 Output Gap2  3.5  5.4  4.1  2.3  1.9  1.0 0.4 1.0  3.1 0.6 1.4 0.5 Structural Balance2  4.6  3.0  2.6  2.6  3.7  4.3  5.4  6.1  11.7  12.9  6.8  5.1 Net Debt 56.7 80.7 81.2 80.7 81.7 81.4 81.7 83.0 103.2 109.0 109.5 115.3 Gross Debt 77.8 104.8 104.6 104.7 106.6 105.6 106.6 108.2 127.1 132.8 132.1 134.5 Euro Area Net Lending/Borrowing  3.3  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  0.9  0.5  0.6  7.6  6.7  3.3  1.6 Output Gap2  0.2  3.1  2.8  2.2  1.5  0.4 0.1 0.1  4.3  3.1  1.0 0.0 Structural Balance2  3.2  1.1  0.7  0.6  0.6  0.5  0.5  0.5  4.0  4.6  2.6  1.5 Net Debt 60.6 75.6 75.8 74.7 74.2 72.1 70.4 69.2 80.8 82.8 81.8 78.6 Gross Debt 75.8 92.6 92.8 90.9 90.1 87.7 85.8 84.0 96.9 98.2 96.5 91.9 Germany Net Lending/Borrowing  2.0 0.0 0.6 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.8 1.5  4.2  5.5  0.4 0.6 Output Gap2  0.2  0.8  0.3  0.3 0.2 1.0 1.2 0.4  3.0  2.0  0.3 0.0 Structural Balance2  1.7 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.3  2.6  4.0  0.3 0.6 Net Debt 56.8 58.7 55.1 52.5 49.6 45.8 43.0 41.4 50.0 52.5 50.4 42.2 Gross Debt 70.8 78.7 75.6 72.3 69.3 65.1 61.8 59.6 68.9 70.3 67.3 57.1 France Net Lending/Borrowing  4.4  4.1  3.9  3.6  3.6  2.9  2.3  3.0  9.9  7.2  4.4  3.5 Output Gap2  0.3  1.8  2.0  2.1  2.2  1.2  0.4 0.0  4.6  2.9  0.5 0.0 Structural Balance2  4.2  2.9  2.7  2.3  2.1  2.1  1.8  2.0  3.6  5.2  4.0  3.5 Net Debt 64.6 83.0 85.5 86.3 89.2 89.4 89.3 89.3 104.3 106.1 105.1 107.7 Gross Debt 74.2 93.4 94.9 95.6 98.0 98.3 98.0 98.1 113.5 115.2 114.3 116.9 Italy Net Lending/Borrowing  3.4  2.9  3.0  2.6  2.4  2.4  2.2  1.6  9.5  8.8  5.5  1.8 Output Gap2  0.3  4.1  4.1  3.4  2.5  1.3  0.8  0.9  5.7  5.8  2.4  0.5 Structural Balance2  3.7  0.5  1.0  0.6  1.3  1.7  1.9  1.1  5.1  5.2  4.1  1.5 Net Debt 102.1 119.2 121.4 122.2 121.6 121.3 121.8 122.1 142.0 144.2 143.1 139.7 Gross Debt 111.6 132.5 135.4 135.3 134.8 134.1 134.4 134.6 155.6 157.1 155.5 151.0 Japan Net Lending/Borrowing  6.8  7.9  5.9  3.9  3.8  3.3  2.7  3.1  12.6  9.4  3.8  2.4 Output Gap2  1.4  1.9  2.3  1.5  1.5  0.5  0.9  1.5  2.7  1.5  0.2 0.0 Structural Balance2  6.3  7.4  5.6  4.4  4.3  3.5  2.7  2.6  11.3  8.5  3.6  2.4 Net Debt 110.4 142.9 145.1 144.6 149.6 148.1 151.2 150.4 169.2 172.3 171.0 172.6 Gross Debt4 188.1 229.6 233.5 228.4 232.5 231.4 232.5 234.9 256.2 256.5 253.6 254.7 United Kingdom Net Lending/Borrowing  5.4  5.5  5.5  4.5  3.3  2.4  2.2  2.3  13.4  11.8  6.2  3.3 Output Gap2 0.3  1.6  0.5 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.1  4.4  3.1  1.5 0.0 Structural Balance2  5.6  4.2  4.9  4.4  3.3  2.5  2.3  2.3 0.5  5.0  4.8  3.2 Net Debt 48.8 75.9 77.9 78.2 77.8 76.8 75.9 75.3 93.8 97.2 99.2 103.1 Gross Debt 54.5 84.2 86.1 86.7 86.8 86.3 85.8 85.2 103.7 107.1 109.1 113.0 Canada Net Lending/Borrowing  0.8  1.5 0.2  0.1  0.5  0.1 0.3 0.5  10.7  7.8  3.9 0.2 Output Gap2  0.1 0.0 1.0  0.1  0.9 0.4 0.6 0.4  3.4  1.5 0.6 0.0 Structural Balance2  0.8  1.5  0.6 0.0 0.1  0.3 0.0 0.3  7.8  6.7  4.2 0.2 Net Debt5 27.2 29.7 28.5 28.4 28.7 26.0 25.6 23.4 33.0 37.0 36.6 26.9 Gross Debt 75.1 86.1 85.6 91.2 91.7 88.8 88.8 86.8 117.8 116.3 112.8 98.1 Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. 1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the System of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees  defined-benefit pension plans. Fiscal data for the aggregated major advanced economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and the United States is therefore for the period 2001 07. 2Percent of potential GDP. 3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees  defined-benefit pension plans. 4Nonconsolidated basis. 5Includes equity shares. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 141 Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Averages Projections 2003 12 2013 22 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Trade in Goods and Services World Trade1 Volume 5.6 2.8 3.6 3.8 2.9 2.3 5.6 3.9 0.9  8.5 8.4 6.5 Price Deflator In US Dollars 5.1  0.8  0.6  1.8  13.3  4.1 4.3 5.5  2.6  2.2 7.6 0.4 In SDRs 3.3  0.3 0.1  1.7  5.9  3.4 4.6 3.3  0.2  2.9 3.6  0.4 Volume of Trade Exports Advanced Economies 4.5 2.6 3.1 3.8 3.7 2.0 4.8 3.6 1.3  9.5 7.9 6.4 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 8.3 3.1 4.6 3.3 1.9 2.8 6.5 3.9 0.5  5.7 7.6 6.0 Imports Advanced Economies 3.9 2.9 2.5 3.9 4.7 2.6 4.8 3.7 1.7  9.1 9.1 6.4 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.8 2.8 5.1 4.3  0.7 1.7 7.4 4.7  1.0  8.6 9.0 7.4 Terms of Trade Advanced Economies  0.4 0.5 1.0 0.3 1.8 1.1  0.2  0.4 0.2 0.7 0.3 0.6 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 1.6  0.6  0.4  0.6  4.3  1.4 1.5 1.1  1.2  1.3 0.6 0.2 Trade in Goods World Trade1 Volume 5.7 3.0 3.3 3.0 2.3 2.1 5.6 3.8 0.3  5.1 9.5 5.6 Price Deflator In US Dollars 5.3  1.2  1.2  2.4  14.5  4.8 4.9 5.8  3.2  2.6 7.7 0.0 In SDRs 3.5  0.7  0.4  2.3  7.2  4.2 5.2 3.6  0.8  3.4 3.8  0.8 World Trade Prices in US Dollars2 Manufactures 3.1  0.9  2.8  0.4  2.9  5.1 0.1 2.0 0.4  3.1 2.0 0.7 Oil 15.5  6.3  0.9  7.5  47.2  15.7 23.3 29.4  10.2  32.7 41.7  6.3 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 10.3  0.3  5.8  5.5  17.1  0.4 6.4 1.3 0.8 6.7 16.1  1.9 Food 6.8  0.7  0.3  1.6  16.9 1.5 3.8  1.2  3.1 1.7 13.9  2.0 Beverages 9.2  1.3  13.7 20.1  7.2  3.1  4.7  8.2  3.8 3.3 4.4 4.0 Agricultural Raw Materials 6.5  1.7  4.4  7.5  11.5 0.0 5.2 2.0  5.4  3.4 12.9  2.7 Metal 15.3 0.3  3.9  12.2  27.3  5.3 22.2 6.6 3.7 3.5 32.1  4.5 World Trade Prices in SDRs2 Manufactures 1.4  0.4  2.1  0.3 5.4  4.5 0.4  0.1 2.9  3.9  1.7  0.2 Oil 13.5  5.8  0.1  7.5  42.7  15.1 23.6 26.7  8.0  33.3 36.6  7.1 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 8.5 0.2  5.1  5.5  10.0 0.3 6.6  0.8 3.3 5.8 11.8  2.8 Food 5.0  0.2 0.5  1.5  9.8 2.2 4.1  3.3  0.7 0.9 9.8  2.8 Beverages 7.4  0.8  13.0 20.1 0.7  2.5  4.5  10.1  1.4 2.5 0.6 3.1 Agricultural Raw Materials 4.8  1.2  3.7  7.5  4.0 0.6 5.5  0.1  3.1  4.2 8.8  3.5 Metal 13.4 0.7  3.1  12.1  21.1  4.7 22.5 4.4 6.2 2.7 27.3  5.3 World Trade Prices in Euros2 Manufactures 0.0  0.5  5.9  0.4 16.2  4.8  1.9  2.5 6.0  5.0  4.4  0.6 Oil 12.0  5.9  4.1  7.6  36.8  15.4 20.8 23.7  5.2  34.0 32.8  7.5 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 7.0 0.1  8.9  5.6  0.7  0.1 4.2  3.1 6.4 4.6 8.7  3.2 Food 3.5  0.3  3.5  1.6  0.5 1.8 1.7  5.6 2.3  0.3 6.7  3.3 Beverages 5.9  0.9  16.4 20.0 11.1  2.8  6.6  12.2 1.5 1.3  2.2 2.6 Agricultural Raw Materials 3.3  1.3  7.5  7.6 5.9 0.3 3.1  2.5  0.2  5.2 5.8  4.0 Metal 11.8 0.7  7.0  12.2  12.9  5.0 19.7 1.9 9.4 1.5 23.7  5.7 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 142 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued) (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Averages Projections 2003 12 2013 22 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Trade in Goods Volume of Trade Exports Advanced Economies 4.5 2.7 2.6 3.1 3.1 1.6 4.8 3.1 0.8  6.3 9.4 5.6 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 8.1 3.1 4.5 2.7 1.4 2.7 6.5 3.9  0.3  2.6 7.6 5.1 Fuel Exporters 6.1 0.2 1.1  0.8 2.5 0.9 0.6  0.5  3.8  5.3 3.1 4.9 Nonfuel Exporters 8.7 3.7 5.6 3.7 1.1 3.1 7.6 4.7 0.4  2.1 8.2 5.1 Imports Advanced Economies 4.0 3.0 2.3 3.3 3.7 2.3 4.8 3.7 0.6  5.9 10.9 5.5 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.9 3.1 4.7 2.7  0.4 2.1 7.2 4.9  0.2  4.7 9.3 6.5 Fuel Exporters 10.5  0.2 5.8 4.2 0.1  6.8  1.0  3.4 1.9  10.7 5.2 4.2 Nonfuel Exporters 9.8 3.6 4.6 2.5  0.5 3.6 8.5 6.0  0.4  4.0 9.8 6.8 Price Deflators in SDRs Exports Advanced Economies 2.4  0.4 0.4  1.9  6.4  2.2 4.3 2.8  1.5  2.2 3.6 0.0 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 6.2  1.1  1.1  3.1  9.0  7.1 7.0 5.0 0.2  4.8 5.0  1.5 Fuel Exporters 10.7  4.3  1.7  7.4  30.2  10.8 15.9 15.0  4.0  22.1 18.6  4.1 Nonfuel Exporters 5.0  0.3  0.9  1.9  3.4  6.3 5.4 3.1 1.0  1.6 3.2  1.1 Imports Advanced Economies 2.9  0.9  0.6  2.0  8.1  3.5 4.5 3.5  1.5  3.2 3.2  0.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.3  0.7  0.6  2.7  5.0  5.5 5.8 3.7 0.5  4.2 3.8  1.7 Fuel Exporters 4.2  0.4  1.5  2.8  2.4  3.8 3.5 1.5 2.7  2.2 2.5  1.4 Nonfuel Exporters 4.3  0.7  0.5  2.7  5.4  5.8 6.2 4.0 0.2  4.5 4.0  1.7 Terms of Trade Advanced Economies  0.5 0.5 1.0 0.2 1.8 1.4  0.2  0.7 0.0 1.0 0.4 0.6 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 1.8  0.4  0.5  0.4  4.3  1.6 1.1 1.2  0.3  0.5 1.2 0.2 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia  1.2 0.9 1.1 2.5 8.5 0.2  3.4  2.4 1.1 4.8  4.4 1.6 Emerging and Developing Europe 3.3  1.1  3.2  0.7  10.7  5.8 2.8 4.4 0.3  2.6 6.4  0.8 Middle East and Central Asia 2.8  0.3  1.1  2.5  8.7 1.1 4.2  0.1 0.0 0.0 5.1  0.6 Latin America and the Caribbean 4.6  3.1  0.5  4.0  24.4  5.8 10.0 11.1  5.1  16.5 13.6  2.7 Sub-Saharan Africa 4.6  1.1  1.0  3.1  14.1  1.8 8.4 3.8  2.5  2.6 5.4  1.4 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 6.2  3.9  0.2  4.7  28.4  7.4 12.0 13.3  6.6  20.3 15.7  2.8 Nonfuel 0.6 0.4  0.4 0.9 2.1  0.6  0.7  0.8 0.8 3.0  0.8 0.7 Memorandum World Exports in Billions of US Dollars Goods and Services 16,452 23,669 23,373 23,798 21,130 20,747 22,864 25,048 24,612 22,062 25,636 27,421 Goods 13,055 18,292 18,556 18,637 16,199 15,739 17,442 19,105 18,562 17,191 20,175 21,309 Average Oil Price3 15.5  6.3  0.9  7.5  47.2  15.7 23.3 29.4  10.2  32.7 41.7  6.3 In US Dollars a Barrel 70.22 63.11 104.07 96.25 50.79 42.84 52.81 68.33 61.39 41.29 58.52 54.83 Export Unit Value of Manufactures4 3.1  0.9  2.8  0.4  2.9  5.1 0.1 2.0 0.4  3.1 2.0 0.7 1Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports. 2As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies  trade (export of goods) weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014 16 shares in world commodity imports. 3Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 4Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 143 Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (Billions of US dollars) Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Advanced Economies 241.9 240.2 285.7 375.3 480.2 389.5 342.1 175.8 124.3 262.6 521.1 United States  336.9  367.8  407.4  394.9  365.3  449.7  480.2  646.4  876.4  733.8  550.9 Euro Area 278.8 316.5 315.1 364.8 393.7 393.5 306.7 293.3 401.3 424.6 486.5 Germany 244.8 280.3 288.8 295.1 286.7 292.4 274.1 269.6 327.0 321.0 356.4 France  14.3  27.3  9.0  12.0  19.9  15.6  18.1  60.7  61.7  55.2  30.0 Italy 23.7 41.1 26.1 48.7 50.5 52.2 59.8 68.3 73.6 74.8 80.6 Spain 27.6 23.3 24.2 39.1 36.4 27.4 29.8 8.6 14.1 30.4 28.7 Japan 45.9 36.8 136.4 197.9 203.5 176.9 188.1 165.8 195.0 181.0 212.0 United Kingdom  136.2  149.6  147.4  146.9  100.4  105.3  87.6  106.5  121.5  133.5  142.3 Canada  58.0  41.9  54.4  47.2  46.2  40.3  35.7  31.8  14.7  26.0  47.7 Other Advanced Economies1 343.6 355.1 356.8 336.3 333.1 334.9 351.9 397.9 460.2 464.8 465.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 161.2 168.7  58.8  85.3  10.2  55.0 52.2 196.2 206.4 101.3  217.2 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia 97.2 227.5 307.9 223.1 172.8  49.9 130.5 359.0 236.0 178.0  0.5 Emerging and Developing Europe  59.0  10.8 34.6  8.0  19.1 66.9 52.5 1.0 24.2 15.7  14.3 Latin America and the Caribbean  172.6  186.1  171.9  100.9  87.8  131.3  88.8 8.0  0.5  22.0  87.3 Middle East and Central Asia 333.7 200.5  138.5  143.4  39.4 103.7 21.0  111.1 12.9 2.2  37.3 Sub-Saharan Africa  38.0  62.3  90.8  56.0  36.8  44.4  63.0  60.7  66.2  72.6  77.8 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 427.5 253.4  141.5  99.1 38.8 190.3 73.7  93.2 51.4 42.5 7.3 Nonfuel  266.3  84.7 82.7 13.9  49.1  245.3  21.6 289.4 155.0 58.8  224.6 Of Which, Primary Products  84.7  51.2  61.3  42.2  55.8  74.6  44.2  2.4  7.8  21.6  41.1 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies  384.1  353.5  315.2  222.4  247.9  337.4  232.3  77.9  206.4  249.8  399.3 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19  61.9  43.4  51.4  55.8  47.0  47.2  46.9  31.1  48.1  53.6  46.4 Memorandum World 403.1 408.9 226.9 290.1 469.9 334.5 394.2 371.9 330.7 363.9 303.9 European Union 433.6 452.1 443.3 472.5 500.4 497.9 457.7 467.1 544.0 566.9 636.3 Middle East and North Africa 326.5 190.2  122.2  120.5  20.9 119.5 40.8  97.3 23.4 15.6  9.7 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 200.4 209.5 14.3  43.6 25.8 2.8 114.4 269.0 276.6 183.6  124.8 Low-Income Developing Countries  39.2  40.8  73.1  41.6  36.1  57.8  62.2  72.9  70.2  82.3  92.4 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 144 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Advanced Economies 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.8 United States  2.0  2.1  2.2  2.1  1.9  2.2  2.2  3.1  3.9  3.1  2.0 Euro Area 2.1 2.3 2.7 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.3 2.3 2.8 2.7 2.7 Germany 6.6 7.2 8.6 8.5 7.8 7.4 7.1 7.1 7.6 7.0 6.8 France  0.5  1.0  0.4  0.5  0.8  0.6  0.7  2.3  2.1  1.8  0.8 Italy 1.1 1.9 1.4 2.6 2.6 2.5 3.0 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.3 Spain 2.0 1.7 2.0 3.2 2.8 1.9 2.1 0.7 1.0 1.9 1.6 Japan 0.9 0.8 3.1 4.0 4.1 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.6 3.2 3.2 United Kingdom  4.9  4.9  5.0  5.4  3.8  3.7  3.1  3.9  3.9  4.0  3.5 Canada  3.1  2.3  3.5  3.1  2.8  2.3  2.1  1.9  0.8  1.3  1.9 Other Advanced Economies1 5.0 5.0 5.5 5.1 4.7 4.5 4.8 5.5 5.6 5.4 4.5 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 0.5 0.5  0.2  0.3 0.0  0.2 0.1 0.6 0.5 0.2  0.4 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia 0.7 1.5 2.0 1.4 1.0  0.3 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.7 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe  1.3  0.3 1.0  0.2  0.5 1.7 1.3 0.0 0.6 0.4  0.3 Latin America and the Caribbean  2.9  3.1  3.3  2.0  1.6  2.5  1.7 0.2 0.0  0.4  1.4 Middle East and Central Asia 8.6 5.1  3.9  4.2  1.1 2.7 0.5  3.0 0.3 0.1  0.7 Sub-Saharan Africa  2.2  3.5  5.7  3.8  2.3  2.6  3.7  3.7  3.7  3.7  2.8 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 10.6 6.2  3.9  3.0 1.1 5.2 2.0  2.8 1.4 1.1 0.1 Nonfuel  1.0  0.3 0.3 0.1  0.2  0.8  0.1 0.9 0.5 0.2  0.5 Of Which, Primary Products  4.3  2.7  3.2  2.3  2.8  3.8  2.4  0.1  0.4  1.1  1.7 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies  2.7  2.4  2.4  1.6  1.7  2.2  1.5  0.5  1.3  1.5  1.7 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19  6.9  4.8  5.9  6.5  6.0  5.7  5.2  3.5  4.9  5.0  3.3 Memorandum World 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.2 European Union 2.8 2.9 3.3 3.4 3.4 3.1 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.1 3.0 Middle East and North Africa 10.3 5.9  4.3  4.3  0.7 3.8 1.2  3.2 0.7 0.4  0.2 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 0.7 0.7 0.1  0.2 0.1 0.0 0.3 0.8 0.8 0.5  0.3 Low-Income Developing Countries  2.1  2.0  3.8  2.2  1.8  2.7  2.8  3.2  2.8  3.0  2.4 Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued) (Percent of GDP) STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 145 Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Advanced Economies 1.7 1.6 2.1 2.8 3.3 2.5 2.2 1.3 0.8 1.5 2.5 United States  14.6  15.4  17.9  17.6  15.3  17.7  19.0  30.3  35.8  27.0  16.3 Euro Area 8.2 8.9 9.7 11.2 11.1 10.2 8.0 8.5 . . . . . . . . . Germany 14.4 15.8 18.3 18.5 16.5 15.6 15.1 16.2 16.8 15.4 14.6 France  1.7  3.1  1.2  1.5  2.4  1.7  2.0  8.1  7.2  6.1  2.7 Italy 3.9 6.5 4.8 8.8 8.4 8.0 9.5 12.3 11.2 10.2 9.2 Spain 6.2 5.1 6.0 9.4 7.9 5.5 6.1 2.2 3.0 5.7 4.4 Japan 5.5 4.3 17.4 24.4 23.2 19.0 20.8 21.0 20.4 17.8 18.0 United Kingdom  16.4  17.3  18.4  19.2  12.5  11.9  10.0  14.5  15.3  15.0  13.2 Canada  10.4  7.3  11.0  9.8  8.9  7.2  6.4  6.7  2.4  3.9  6.2 Other Advanced Economies1 8.2 8.5 9.6 9.2 8.4 7.7 8.4 10.2 10.4 10.0 8.5 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 1.8 2.1  0.6  1.1  0.2  0.6 0.6 2.4 2.1 1.0  1.7 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia 2.5 5.7 8.1 6.1 4.2  1.1 2.9 8.2 4.8 3.4 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe  4.0  0.7 2.9  0.7  1.4 4.4 3.4 0.1 1.5 0.9  0.7 Latin America and the Caribbean  13.6  14.9  15.9  9.6  7.5  10.3  7.1 0.7 0.0  1.6  5.5 Middle East and Central Asia 18.8 12.8  10.3  11.8  3.1 6.7 1.4  10.0 0.9 0.2  2.3 Sub-Saharan Africa  7.9  13.6  26.3  17.6  10.0  10.6  15.4  18.6  16.7  17.3  14.8 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 22.3 14.9  10.6  8.3 2.8 12.4 5.1  8.9 3.9 3.2 0.4 Nonfuel  3.8  1.2 1.3 0.2  0.7  3.2  0.3 4.0 1.9 0.7  2.0 Of Which, Primary Products  17.6  11.0  15.3  10.7  12.5  15.7  9.5  0.6  1.5  4.0  6.2 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies  9.3  8.5  8.6  6.1  6.0  7.4  5.0  1.9  4.4  4.9  6.1 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19  22.9  17.3  24.6  29.0  21.7  18.8  18.1  13.9  19.9  20.0  12.3 Memorandum World 1.7 1.8 1.1 1.4 2.0 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.3 1.3 0.9 European Union 6.2 6.3 6.9 7.2 7.0 6.3 5.9 6.6 6.6 6.4 5.9 Middle East and North Africa 20.9 13.8  10.1  11.0  1.9 8.6 3.1  9.9 1.9 1.2  0.7 Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies 2.4 2.7 0.3  0.6 0.3 0.0 1.3 3.6 3.1 2.0  1.1 Low-Income Developing Countries  7.6  7.7  15.2  8.6  6.4  9.1  9.1  11.7  9.8  10.6  8.8 1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued) (Percent of exports of goods and services) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 146 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP) Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Advanced Economies 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.8 United States  2.0  2.1  2.2  2.1  1.9  2.2  2.2  3.1  3.9  3.1  2.0 Euro Area1 2.1 2.3 2.7 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.3 2.3 2.8 2.7 2.7 Germany 6.6 7.2 8.6 8.5 7.8 7.4 7.1 7.1 7.6 7.0 6.8 France  0.5  1.0  0.4  0.5  0.8  0.6  0.7  2.3  2.1  1.8  0.8 Italy 1.1 1.9 1.4 2.6 2.6 2.5 3.0 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.3 Spain 2.0 1.7 2.0 3.2 2.8 1.9 2.1 0.7 1.0 1.9 1.6 The Netherlands 9.8 8.2 6.3 8.1 10.8 10.8 9.9 10.0 9.0 8.9 8.3 Belgium 1.0 0.8 1.4 0.6 0.7  0.8 0.3  0.7  0.9  1.5  0.4 Austria 1.9 2.5 1.7 2.7 1.4 1.3 2.8 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.2 Ireland 1.6 1.1 4.4  4.2 0.5 6.0  11.4 4.6 7.0 6.9 6.0 Portugal 1.6 0.2 0.2 1.2 1.3 0.6 0.4  1.2  0.6 0.3 0.3 Greece  2.6  2.4  1.5  2.4  2.6  3.6  2.2  7.4  6.6  3.5  3.5 Finland  1.8  1.3  0.9  2.0  0.8  1.9  0.2 0.8 1.5 1.4 0.7 Slovak Republic 1.9 1.1  2.1  2.7  1.9  2.2  2.7  0.4  1.2  2.0  1.6 Lithuania 0.8 3.2  2.8  0.8 0.6 0.3 3.3 7.9 6.2 4.8  0.6 Slovenia 3.3 5.1 3.8 4.8 6.2 5.8 5.6 7.3 6.9 6.6 4.9 Luxembourg 5.4 5.2 5.1 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.6 4.4 4.9 4.9 4.6 Latvia  2.8  1.6  0.6 1.6 1.3  0.3  0.6 3.0 0.5 0.2  1.7 Estonia 0.3 0.7 1.8 1.2 2.3 0.9 2.0  1.0 0.4  0.5  0.3 Cyprus  1.5  4.1  0.4  4.2  5.3  3.9  6.3  10.3  8.5  6.1  3.7 Malta 2.6 8.5 2.7  0.6 4.8 5.6 4.6  0.6 0.2 1.2 3.5 Japan 0.9 0.8 3.1 4.0 4.1 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.6 3.2 3.2 United Kingdom  4.9  4.9  5.0  5.4  3.8  3.7  3.1  3.9  3.9  4.0  3.5 Korea 5.6 5.6 7.2 6.5 4.6 4.5 3.6 4.6 4.2 4.0 4.3 Canada  3.1  2.3  3.5  3.1  2.8  2.3  2.1  1.9  0.8  1.3  1.9 Australia  3.4  3.1  4.6  3.3  2.6  2.1 0.7 2.5 2.4 1.0  1.2 Taiwan Province of China 9.7 11.3 13.6 13.1 14.1 11.6 10.6 14.1 14.5 14.4 12.7 Switzerland 11.4 8.1 10.3 9.0 7.2 6.7 6.7 3.8 6.7 7.5 7.5 Singapore 15.7 18.0 18.7 17.6 17.3 15.4 14.3 17.6 14.6 14.4 13.5 Sweden 5.2 4.2 3.3 2.4 3.0 2.6 5.1 5.2 5.0 4.7 3.5 Hong Kong SAR 1.5 1.4 3.3 4.0 4.6 3.7 6.0 6.5 5.5 5.0 4.0 Czech Republic  0.5 0.2 0.4 1.8 1.5 0.4  0.3 3.5 0.9 0.1 0.3 Israel 2.9 4.2 5.4 3.5 2.9 2.7 3.1 4.9 4.1 3.8 2.9 Norway 10.3 10.8 8.0 4.5 4.6 8.0 2.5 2.5 5.4 4.8 3.0 Denmark 7.8 8.9 8.2 7.8 8.0 7.0 8.9 7.9 8.0 7.8 7.6 New Zealand  3.2  3.1  2.9  2.2  3.0  4.2  3.3  0.8  2.1  2.1  2.8 Puerto Rico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Macao SAR 39.3 32.7 23.3 26.5 30.8 33.1 33.6  34.2 7.3 29.5 29.7 Iceland 6.3 4.4 5.6 8.1 4.2 3.8 6.4 1.0 1.0 1.7 2.0 San Marino . . . . . . . . . . . .  0.1  1.9 6.3 1.9 1.1 1.1 0.3 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.2 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.9  1.1  0.8  0.2 Euro Area2 2.9 3.0 3.4 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.0 3.1 3.3 3.3 3.3 1Data corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 2Data calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries. STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 147 Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP) Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Emerging and Developing Asia 0.7 1.5 2.0 1.4 1.0  0.3 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.7 0.0 Bangladesh 1.6 0.8 1.8 1.9  0.5  3.5  1.7  1.5 0.4  1.7  1.9 Bhutan  25.6  27.1  27.9  30.3  24.0  19.1  21.1  12.2  8.8  11.9 2.3 Brunei Darussalam 20.9 31.9 16.7 12.9 16.4 6.9 6.6 1.0 0.6 3.1 7.9 Cambodia  8.5  8.6  8.7  8.5  7.9  12.2  15.8  12.5  18.0  14.6  6.3 China 1.5 2.2 2.7 1.8 1.6 0.2 1.0 2.0 1.6 1.3 0.5 Fiji  8.9  5.8  3.5  3.6  6.7  8.4  12.7  16.8  11.7  7.4  4.9 India  1.7  1.3  1.0  0.6  1.8  2.1  0.9 1.0  1.2  1.6  2.5 Indonesia  3.2  3.1  2.0  1.8  1.6  2.9  2.7  0.4  1.3  1.4  1.6 Kiribati  5.5 31.1 32.8 10.8 37.6 38.1 43.9 6.8 10.7 11.2 12.1 Lao P.D.R.  26.5  23.3  22.4  11.0  10.6  12.0  6.5  5.7  7.5  7.2  6.6 Malaysia 3.4 4.3 3.0 2.4 2.8 2.2 3.4 4.4 3.8 3.7 3.4 Maldives  4.3  3.7  7.5  23.6  21.6  28.4  26.9  24.4  19.3  20.0  4.8 Marshall Islands  6.7 2.0 15.6 13.5 5.2 4.0  25.4 2.2 2.6 0.4  2.7 Micronesia  9.9 6.1 4.5 7.2 10.3 21.0 15.2 2.9 3.0 5.9  2.6 Mongolia  37.6  15.8  8.1  6.3  10.1  16.8  15.4  4.4  11.8  13.8  7.4 Myanmar  1.2  4.5  3.5  4.2  6.8  4.7  2.8  3.5  2.6  2.2  2.4 Nauru 49.5 25.2  21.3 2.0 12.7  4.6 10.6 4.2 10.5 2.1 0.6 Nepal 2.9 4.0 4.4 5.5  0.3  7.1  6.9  0.9  6.2  4.2  2.9 Palau  14.1  17.8  8.5  13.4  18.7  15.2  26.6  32.6  37.0  33.7  27.9 Papua New Guinea  31.7 13.7 24.5 28.4 28.4 24.4 20.1 13.9 21.7 21.8 17.8 Philippines 4.0 3.6 2.4  0.4  0.7  2.6  0.9 3.2  0.4  2.2  2.2 Samoa  1.5  9.1  2.8  4.5  1.9 0.9 3.0 1.2  6.5  10.9  2.0 Solomon Islands  3.0  3.7  2.7  3.5  4.3  3.1  9.8  1.7  10.0  15.1  10.4 Sri Lanka  3.4  2.5  2.3  2.1  2.6  3.2  2.2  1.4  2.3  2.2  1.6 Thailand  2.1 2.9 6.9 10.5 9.6 5.6 7.0 3.3 0.5 2.6 3.2 Timor-Leste 171.4 75.6 12.8  33.0  17.7  12.3 6.6  15.3  30.8  47.6  41.0 Tonga  9.6  6.3  10.1  6.5  6.4  6.3  0.9  3.8  18.6  16.5  14.9 Tuvalu  14.5  6.0  33.3 21.8  29.2 38.1  43.6 22.8  9.0  22.7  8.4 Vanuatu  3.5 6.5  1.6 0.8  6.4 9.4 13.1  0.4  6.1  4.9  4.9 Vietnam 3.6 3.7  0.9 0.2  0.6 1.9 3.8 2.2 2.4 1.9 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe  1.3  0.3 1.0  0.2  0.5 1.7 1.3 0.0 0.6 0.4  0.3 Albania  9.3  10.8  8.6  7.6  7.5  6.8  8.0  9.6  8.7  8.3  7.4 Belarus  10.0  6.6  3.3  3.4  1.7 0.0  2.0 0.1  0.3  1.7  1.8 Bosnia and Herzegovina  5.3  7.4  5.1  4.8  4.8  3.4  3.1  3.5  4.9  4.3  3.5 Bulgaria 1.3 1.2 0.1 3.2 3.5 1.0 3.0 0.1 1.4 1.2 0.8 Croatia  1.1 0.3 3.3 2.1 3.4 1.8 2.8  3.5  2.3  1.6 0.7 Hungary 3.5 1.2 2.3 4.5 2.0 0.3  0.2  0.2  0.4  0.3  0.2 Kosovo  3.4  6.9  8.6  7.9  5.4  7.6  5.5  7.5  6.4  6.1  5.0 Moldova  5.2  6.0  6.0  3.5  5.7  10.5  9.4  6.5  7.0  8.1  7.1 Montenegro  11.4  12.4  11.0  16.2  16.1  17.0  15.0  25.9  18.7  12.0  9.2 North Macedonia  1.6  0.5  2.0  2.9  1.0  0.1  3.3  3.5  3.2  2.8  1.9 Poland  1.8  2.6  0.9  0.8  0.4  1.3 0.5 3.5 2.0 1.3 0.1 Romania  0.8  0.2  0.6  1.4  2.8  4.4  4.7  5.1  5.0  4.7  4.0 Russia 1.5 2.8 5.0 1.9 2.0 7.0 3.8 2.2 3.9 3.3 2.1 Serbia  5.7  5.6  3.5  2.9  5.2  4.8  6.9  4.3  5.7  5.5  5.0 Turkey1  5.8  4.1  3.2  3.1  4.8  2.8 0.9  5.1  3.4  2.2  1.7 Ukraine1  9.2  3.9 1.7  1.5  2.2  3.3  2.7 4.3  2.5  3.6  3.8 Latin America and the Caribbean  2.9  3.1  3.3  2.0  1.6  2.5  1.7 0.2 0.0  0.4  1.4 Antigua and Barbuda . . . 0.3 2.2  2.4  7.8  14.5  6.8  12.7  25.0  15.1  6.5 Argentina  2.1  1.6  2.7  2.7  4.8  5.2  0.9 1.0 2.3 1.3 0.4 Aruba  12.0  4.8 3.9 4.6 1.0  0.5 2.5  16.3  13.7  3.8 1.3 The Bahamas  14.3  19.7  13.8  8.9  12.6  8.6 3.9  17.6  22.5  16.8  7.1 Barbados  8.4  9.2  6.1  4.3  3.8  4.0  3.1  7.4  11.7  8.4  3.2 Belize  4.6  8.2  10.1  9.2  8.6  8.0  9.2  8.0  7.7  7.4  7.2 Bolivia 3.4 1.7  5.8  5.6  5.0  4.5  3.3  2.5  3.7  4.2  4.7 Brazil  3.2  4.1  3.0  1.3  0.7  2.2  2.7  0.9  0.6  0.8  1.7 Chile  4.8  2.0  2.4  2.0  2.3  3.9  3.7 1.4 0.3  0.6  0.9 Colombia  3.3  5.3  6.6  4.5  3.4  4.1  4.4  3.3  3.8  3.9  3.9 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 148 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Latin America and the Caribbean (continued)  2.9  3.1  3.3  2.0  1.6  2.5  1.7 0.2 0.0  0.4  1.4 Costa Rica  4.8  4.7  3.4  2.1  3.6  3.2  2.3  2.6  3.2  3.0  2.7 Dominica . . .  5.4  4.7  7.7  8.9  44.9  26.7  18.8  28.0  18.5  9.7 Dominican Republic  4.1  3.2  1.8  1.1  0.2  1.4  1.4  1.9  2.1  2.2  2.7 Ecuador  1.0  0.7  2.2 1.1  0.1  1.2 0.0 0.5 1.9 2.0 1.4 El Salvador  6.9  5.4  3.2  2.3  1.9  4.7  2.1  1.5  4.1  3.4  4.8 Grenada . . .  11.6  12.5  11.0  14.4  15.9  15.9  17.2  23.4  15.8  11.9 Guatemala  4.2  3.3  1.2 1.0 1.1 0.8 2.4 5.0 2.3 1.7  0.6 Guyana  9.9  6.7  3.4 1.5  4.9  29.2  34.2  13.5  11.2  3.7 11.2 Haiti  3.9  5.1  1.8  3.2  4.2  4.4  1.7 5.5  0.9 0.0  0.4 Honduras  9.5  6.9  4.7  3.1  1.2  5.8  1.4 2.8  2.2  2.4  3.6 Jamaica  9.5  8.0  3.0  0.3  2.7  1.6  2.0  0.8  4.1  3.5  2.7 Mexico  2.5  1.9  2.7  2.3  1.8  2.1  0.3 2.5 1.8 1.0  0.9 Nicaragua  12.6  8.0  9.9  8.5  7.2  1.9 6.0 3.3 0.9  0.6  4.2 Panama  9.0  13.4  9.0  7.8  5.9  7.6  5.0  0.6  3.9  3.7  2.5 Paraguay 1.6  0.1  0.4 3.6 3.1 0.0  0.6 1.6 0.7 0.0 0.1 Peru  5.1  4.5  5.0  2.6  1.3  1.7  1.5 0.5  0.4  0.7  1.8 St. Kitts and Nevis . . . 0.1  8.7  12.7  11.2  5.7  2.1  8.1  9.9  8.7  7.9 St. Lucia . . .  2.5 0.0  6.5  1.0 2.2 4.8  16.3  19.8  6.8 1.7 St. Vincent and the Grenadines . . .  26.1  15.3  13.9  11.6  12.0  9.6  13.7  15.9  12.9  8.9 Suriname  3.8  7.9  16.4  5.1 2.2  3.4  12.1 11.4  1.5  2.6  2.7 Trinidad and Tobago 20.4 15.0 8.2  3.5 6.3 6.8 4.4  1.8 5.6 5.9 4.4 Uruguay  3.2  3.0  0.3 0.7 0.0  0.5 1.4  1.4  2.2  1.5  2.4 Venezuela 1.8 2.4  5.0  1.4 6.1 8.8 8.4  3.5  0.8  2.3 . . . Middle East and Central Asia 8.6 5.1  3.9  4.2  1.1 2.7 0.5  3.0 0.3 0.1  0.7 Afghanistan 1.4 6.6 3.8 9.0 7.6 12.2 11.7 10.7 10.0 8.3 3.7 Algeria 0.4  4.4  16.4  16.5  13.0  9.5  10.0  10.5  7.7  8.7  6.2 Armenia  7.3  7.8  2.7  1.0  1.5  6.9  7.2  4.6  6.7  6.6  5.8 Azerbaijan 16.6 13.9  0.4  3.6 4.1 12.8 9.1  0.9 1.1 0.5 0.3 Bahrain 7.4 4.6  2.4  4.6  4.1  6.5  2.1  9.6  4.0  4.2  5.1 Djibouti  30.8 23.9 29.2  1.0  4.8 14.2 13.0 2.9  2.0  0.7 2.8 Egypt  2.2  0.9  3.7  6.0  6.1  2.4  3.6  3.1  4.0  4.0  2.5 Georgia  5.6  10.2  11.8  12.5  8.1  6.8  5.5  12.3  11.5  8.0  5.6 Iran 5.8 2.8 0.4 3.2 3.3 5.9 0.6  0.7 1.2 1.2 1.2 Iraq 1.1 2.6  6.4  7.5  4.7 4.5 0.5  14.8 0.0  0.6  2.2 Jordan  10.2  7.1  9.0  9.7  10.6  6.9  2.1  8.1  8.3  4.0  2.6 Kazakhstan 0.8 2.8  3.3  5.9  3.1  0.1  4.0  3.6  1.0  1.5  2.8 Kuwait 40.3 33.4 3.5  4.6 8.0 14.1 16.4 0.8 8.6 8.2 3.6 Kyrgyz Republic  13.9  17.0  15.9  11.6  6.2  12.1  9.9  8.2  8.2  7.0  3.3 Lebanon1  28.0  28.8  19.9  23.5  26.3  28.2  26.5  14.3 . . . . . . . . . Libya1 0.0  78.4  54.3  24.6 8.0 1.8 2.3  11.4 3.9 0.2 3.0 Mauritania  17.2  22.2  15.5  11.0  10.0  13.8  10.5  11.6  11.3  11.6  2.6 Morocco  7.6  5.9  2.1  4.1  3.4  5.3  4.1  2.2  3.8  4.0  3.7 Oman 6.6 5.2  15.9  19.1  15.6  5.4  5.4  10.0  6.4  2.7  1.8 Pakistan  1.1  1.3  1.0  1.8  4.0  6.1  4.9  1.1  1.5  1.8  2.9 Qatar 30.4 24.0 8.5  5.5 4.0 9.1 2.4  3.4 7.1 7.9 5.8 Saudi Arabia 18.1 9.8  8.7  3.7 1.5 9.2 4.8  2.1 2.8 1.9  1.3 Somalia  13.6  8.3  8.3  9.3  9.7  7.5  10.5  13.3  12.2  11.9  12.4 Sudan  11.0  5.8  8.5  6.5  9.6  13.0  15.6  17.5  11.2  13.5  8.5 Syria2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tajikistan  10.4  3.4  6.1  4.2 2.2  5.0  2.3  2.3  2.2  2.1  2.0 Tunisia  9.7  9.8  9.7  9.3  10.3  11.1  8.4  6.8  9.5  9.4  8.8 Turkmenistan  7.3  6.1  15.6  20.2  10.4 5.5 1.3  0.5 0.8  0.1  2.7 United Arab Emirates 18.8 13.5 4.9 3.7 7.1 9.6 8.4 3.1 7.1 6.3 6.8 Uzbekistan 2.4 3.3 1.3 0.4 2.5  7.1  5.8  5.4  6.4  5.9  4.8 West Bank and Gaza  14.8  13.6  13.9  13.9  13.2  13.2  10.4  9.0  10.5  10.8  10.2 Yemen  3.1  0.7  6.2  2.9  0.2  2.0  3.9  2.4  8.5  7.8  6.5 Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued) (Percent of GDP) STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 149 Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2026 Sub-Saharan Africa  2.2  3.5  5.7  3.8  2.3  2.6  3.7  3.7  3.7  3.7  2.8 Angola 6.1  2.6  8.8  4.8  0.5 7.0 5.7  0.6 0.8 0.5  0.5 Benin  5.4  6.7  6.0  3.0  4.2  4.6  4.0  4.7  4.5  3.8  3.9 Botswana 8.9 15.4 7.8 7.7 5.3 0.6  7.6  10.3  4.5  3.3 0.3 Burkina Faso  10.0  7.2  7.6  6.1  5.0  4.1  3.3  3.7  4.5  4.8  5.9 Burundi  20.6  15.6  11.5  11.1  11.7  11.4  11.7  13.3  15.7  14.5  13.6 Cabo Verde  4.9  9.1  3.2  3.8  7.8  5.2  0.4  13.8  10.6  6.4  2.6 Cameroon  3.5  4.0  3.8  3.2  2.7  3.6  4.4  5.3  4.4  3.2  1.6 Central African Republic  2.9  13.3  9.1  5.3  7.8  8.0  4.9  7.9  6.8  5.9  5.5 Chad  9.1  8.9  13.8  10.4  7.1  1.4  4.9  8.8  6.6  6.3  4.5 Comoros  4.0  3.8  0.3  4.3  2.1  2.3  4.3  0.4  3.5  3.0  4.1 Democratic Republic of the Congo  9.5  4.8  3.9  4.1  3.3  3.6  4.2  4.0  3.4  3.4  3.4 Republic of Congo 10.8 1.0  39.0  48.7  3.3 1.5 2.3  3.8  0.2  2.1  1.4 C te d'Ivoire  1.0 1.0  0.4  0.9  2.0  3.6  2.7  3.6  3.6  3.4  2.4 Equatorial Guinea  2.4  4.3  16.4  13.0  5.8  5.4  6.3  8.4  3.6  4.4  18.0 Eritrea 2.3 17.3 20.8 15.3 24.0 15.4 12.1 10.7 13.9 13.5 10.4 Eswatini 10.8 11.6 13.0 7.9 6.2 1.3 4.3 7.0 4.9 2.0 4.8 Ethiopia  6.1  6.6  11.7  9.2  8.5  6.5  5.3  4.6  3.6  3.9  3.2 Gabon 7.3 7.6  5.6  10.4  7.1  3.3  1.8  5.1  0.3  0.2 1.1 The Gambia  6.7  7.3  9.9  9.2  7.4  9.5  5.3  5.5  12.0  12.6  7.7 Ghana  9.0  7.0  5.8  5.2  3.4  3.1  2.8  3.3  2.8  4.9  3.8 Guinea  12.5  12.9  12.9  31.9  6.7  20.3  13.7  12.1  13.2  12.4  10.3 Guinea-Bissau  4.3 0.5 1.8 1.4 0.3  3.6  8.6  10.1  6.5  5.4  3.6 Kenya  8.8  10.4  6.9  5.8  7.2  5.7  5.8  4.8  5.3  5.4  5.6 Lesotho  5.3  5.2  4.0  6.7  2.6  1.4  8.0  15.5  16.9  25.1  2.6 Liberia  29.7  49.4  35.2  26.6  28.9  22.3  19.6  18.1  19.2  20.7  20.6 Madagascar  6.5  0.3  1.6 0.5  0.4 0.7  2.2  6.5  5.0  4.4  3.6 Malawi  8.4  8.2  17.2  18.5  25.6  20.5  17.1  19.8  20.7  18.9  15.8 Mali  2.9  4.7  5.3  7.2  7.3  4.9  4.8  2.0  4.1  4.4  6.8 Mauritius  6.2  5.4  3.6  4.0  4.6  3.9  5.4  11.3  14.7  6.6  4.5 Mozambique  40.5  36.5  37.4  32.2  19.7  29.6  20.4  60.6  68.9  83.2  26.5 Namibia  4.2  11.1  12.8  16.0  4.2  3.3  1.7  0.6  3.4  2.9  0.2 Niger  11.3  12.1  15.3  11.4  11.4  12.6  12.3  13.3  17.0  10.7  6.3 Nigeria 3.7 0.2  3.1 0.7 2.8 0.9  3.8  3.7  2.2  1.8  0.8 Rwanda  7.5  11.3  12.6  15.2  9.5  10.4  12.4  12.2  12.5  11.4  7.6 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe  14.5  20.7  12.0  6.1  13.2  12.3  12.5  17.4  15.5  9.3  7.2 Senegal  8.3  7.0  5.7  4.2  7.3  8.8  7.8  11.0  12.8  11.7  4.5 Seychelles  11.9  23.1  18.6  20.6  20.1  18.4  17.0  29.1  36.9  34.9  20.9 Sierra Leone  14.9  9.3  24.1  9.4  21.8  18.6  22.2  15.0  14.1  14.9  11.3 South Africa  5.8  5.1  4.6  2.9  2.5  3.5  3.0 2.2  0.4  1.5  2.8 South Sudan  3.9 4.6 8.6 15.8  3.6 1.5  23.3  4.5  11.9 0.2  3.7 Tanzania  10.7  9.8  7.7  4.2  2.6  3.0  2.2  2.7  4.3  4.0  2.9 Togo  9.0  6.8  7.6  6.7  1.3  1.9  2.5  3.7  3.4  3.4  2.8 Uganda  5.7  6.5  6.1  2.8  4.8  5.7  5.7  9.1  8.4  5.7  7.7 Zambia  0.8 2.1  2.7  3.3  1.7  1.3 0.6 1.5 6.5 5.6 0.9 Zimbabwe1  13.2  11.6  7.6  3.6  1.7  8.3 4.4 4.7 4.4 1.7 0.6 1See country-specific notes for Lebanon, Libya, Turkey, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 2Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation. Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued) (Percent of GDP) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 150 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (Billions of US dollars) Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Advanced Economies Financial Account Balance 249.5 300.3 345.2 423.6 462.0 325.0 319.8  2.8 136.3 286.4 Direct Investment, Net 175.5 241.8 1.0  319.0 331.2  128.2  75.9 40.5 29.8 79.9 Portfolio Investment, Net  553.8 57.8 193.3 483.7 17.6 431.0 220.3 67.5  209.9  107.0 Financial Derivatives, Net 74.8 2.0  86.2 34.6 20.8 54.1 30.3 79.8 42.4 38.6 Other Investment, Net 400.1  141.3 10.8 45.6  152.0  159.5 78.9  494.0 144.1 150.3 Change in Reserves 153.2 140.0 226.6 178.5 244.5 127.6 66.2 303.5 129.9 124.6 United States Financial Account Balance  400.1  297.1  333.1  363.6  334.1  419.7  395.5  766.1  877.8  735.3 Direct Investment, Net 104.7 135.7  209.4  174.6 38.4  412.8  163.2  53.5  153.9  161.1 Portfolio Investment, Net  30.7  114.9  53.5  195.0  221.4 32.2  133.4  296.5  341.3  162.4 Financial Derivatives, Net 2.2  54.3  27.0 7.8 24.0  20.4  38.3  13.2  11.9  12.6 Other Investment, Net  473.2  259.9  37.0  4.0  173.4  23.7  65.3  409.4  370.7  399.1 Change in Reserves  3.1  3.6  6.3 2.1  1.7 5.0 4.7 6.5 0.0 0.0 Euro Area Financial Account Balance 379.1 368.7 319.2 308.8 395.4 354.3 239.4 337.9 . . . . . . Direct Investment, Net 9.9 88.6 281.1 119.7 54.4 164.0  80.6  137.2 . . . . . . Portfolio Investment, Net  65.8 84.4 91.4 542.2 407.6 239.9  52.5 548.0 . . . . . . Financial Derivatives, Net 2.0 49.7 126.3 13.4 25.8 47.5  3.1 11.1 . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 424.8 141.4  191.5  383.6  90.9  126.9 372.1  97.8 . . . . . . Change in Reserves 8.3 4.6 11.8 17.1  1.4 29.6 3.6 13.8 . . . . . . Germany Financial Account Balance 300.2 319.3 260.1 289.0 319.8 279.9 230.1 289.9 327.0 321.0 Direct Investment, Net 26.8 87.3 68.5 48.0 43.7 5.2 62.3 29.3 36.2 49.4 Portfolio Investment, Net 210.0 179.9 210.5 220.0 231.9 185.7 106.6 48.9 138.6 111.0 Financial Derivatives, Net 31.7 51.2 33.7 31.7 12.4 27.3 25.1 112.4 46.9 28.7 Other Investment, Net 30.6 4.3  50.2  12.5 33.3 61.2 36.7 99.5 105.3 131.8 Change in Reserves 1.1  3.4  2.5 1.9  1.4 0.5  0.6  0.1 0.0 0.0 France Financial Account Balance  19.2  10.3  0.8  18.6  36.1  27.6  32.3  71.1  59.3  52.7 Direct Investment, Net  13.9 47.2 7.9 41.8 11.1 67.5 4.7 19.5 25.8 29.6 Portfolio Investment, Net  79.3  23.8 43.2 0.2 30.3 11.1  104.1  35.1  27.5  23.7 Financial Derivatives, Net  22.3  31.8 14.5  17.6  1.4  30.5 4.1  48.0  30.4  19.7 Other Investment, Net 98.2  2.9  74.2  45.4  72.7  87.9 59.8  12.2  32.2  44.3 Change in Reserves  1.9 1.0 8.0 2.5  3.4 12.3 3.2 4.6 5.1 5.4 Italy Financial Account Balance 32.4 73.0 43.1 36.2 53.8 31.5 53.7 80.2 75.3 76.6 Direct Investment, Net 0.9 3.1 2.0  12.3 0.5  4.9 1.4 24.4  6.3  6.6 Portfolio Investment, Net  5.1  2.2 105.7 154.8 95.0 142.0  57.4 130.9  41.4  55.0 Financial Derivatives, Net 4.0  1.9 1.2  3.6  8.2  3.2 2.8  3.5  1.6  0.5 Other Investment, Net 30.5 75.2  66.5  101.4  36.5  105.5 103.2  76.2 124.6 138.8 Change in Reserves 2.0  1.3 0.6  1.3 3.0 3.1 3.6 4.6 0.0 0.0 Spain Financial Account Balance 41.2 22.8 31.8 39.2 40.0 39.3 27.9 13.0 37.1 53.6 Direct Investment, Net  14.1 14.2 33.4 12.4 14.1  15.8 11.2  2.6 4.4 4.4 Portfolio Investment, Net  85.0  8.8 12.0 64.9 37.1 28.3  56.8 49.1 37.1 39.6 Financial Derivatives, Net 1.4 1.3 4.2 2.8 8.7  0.9  9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other Investment, Net 138.0 10.9  23.3  50.1  24.0 25.1 82.0  33.6  4.3 9.6 Change in Reserves 0.9 5.2 5.5 9.1 4.1 2.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 151 Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Japan Financial Account Balance  4.3 58.9 180.9 266.8 168.3 182.9 227.0 168.3 191.2 177.6 Direct Investment, Net 144.7 118.6 133.3 137.5 154.9 133.6 215.8 106.9 160.0 170.7 Portfolio Investment, Net  280.6  42.2 131.5 276.5  50.6 92.2 87.1 36.1  4.5  27.3 Financial Derivatives, Net 58.1 34.0 17.7  16.1 30.4 0.9 3.3 8.6 8.6 8.6 Other Investment, Net 34.8  60.1  106.7  125.4 10.0  67.9  104.7 5.8 15.6 14.0 Change in Reserves 38.7 8.5 5.1  5.7 23.6 24.0 25.5 10.9 11.5 11.5 United Kingdom Financial Account Balance  127.4  141.6  158.2  163.3  87.5  113.5  105.8  109.0  124.4  136.0 Direct Investment, Net  11.2  176.1  106.0  297.4 46.1  23.9  51.6  43.4 31.2 26.7 Portfolio Investment, Net  284.6 15.9  230.1  203.8  126.2  359.8 42.1  54.2  169.5  181.2 Financial Derivatives, Net 63.4 31.2  128.6 29.3 13.3 11.2 11.3 13.6 5.5 5.9 Other Investment, Net 97.2  24.4 274.3 299.8  29.4 234.2  106.6  27.7  3.2 0.3 Change in Reserves 7.8 11.7 32.2 8.8 8.8 24.8  1.1 2.7 11.6 12.4 Canada Financial Account Balance  57.2  43.1  51.8  45.4  44.2  35.0  38.6  32.1  11.3  16.3 Direct Investment, Net  12.0 1.3 23.6 33.5 53.4 19.2 31.1 24.8 28.7 42.8 Portfolio Investment, Net  34.8  32.8  36.2  103.6  74.9 3.5  2.4  64.9  0.9  14.7 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net  15.2  16.9  47.8 19.1  23.5  56.1  65.9 8.7  39.1  44.4 Change in Reserves 4.7 5.3 8.6 5.6 0.8  1.5  1.3  0.7 0.0 0.0 Other Advanced Economies1 Financial Account Balance 376.0 297.2 297.6 322.5 302.8 334.2 318.7 352.6 463.3 468.9 Direct Investment, Net 31.2  6.1  102.5  80.8  163.0 16.0  71.5  4.1  39.4  3.4 Portfolio Investment, Net 139.6 175.9 337.2 242.9 151.4 363.1 308.1 262.1 237.8 258.5 Financial Derivatives, Net  33.5  22.3  11.9 3.4  5.5 32.2 22.9 3.5 17.6 17.0 Other Investment, Net 137.7 38.2  101.0 6.8 106.9  126.7 28.5  174.1 154.1 109.2 Change in Reserves 101.3 111.5 176.0 150.2 213.1 49.5 30.7 265.3 93.2 87.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies Financial Account Balance  26.7 13.5  306.0  406.5  245.8  225.5  158.3 145.6 266.9 146.6 Direct Investment, Net  484.0  428.5  346.4  258.7  312.3  374.9  359.5  342.5  402.4  440.8 Portfolio Investment, Net  148.3  88.4 129.5  54.9  206.4  95.4  67.6  28.0  110.0  157.5 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 62.8 405.5 469.3 383.1 102.3 121.3 94.6 418.5 214.5 217.6 Change in Reserves 542.3 112.4  565.0  469.4 166.4 119.4 171.1 85.4 546.4 503.5 Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued) (Billions of US dollars) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 152 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia Financial Account Balance 27.8 153.5 69.9  28.1  55.9  259.1  81.6 261.8 237.4 177.4 Direct Investment, Net  271.2  201.6  139.6  26.2  108.5  169.7  152.3  183.2  202.3  209.3 Portfolio Investment, Net  64.6  125.2 81.6 31.1  70.1  99.6  74.2  66.1  114.5  153.8 Financial Derivatives, Net  2.1 0.8 0.6  4.6 2.2 4.6  2.5 12.1 11.7 11.7 Other Investment, Net  83.3 281.5 458.3 353.0  79.9  18.4 47.3 318.7 97.6 121.7 Change in Reserves 445.5 196.4  331.5  382.4 200.1 24.9 100.2 180.4 445.6 407.7 Emerging and Developing Europe Financial Account Balance  66.6  29.1 65.5 3.9  19.2 99.3 63.4 16.4 50.1 43.3 Direct Investment, Net  15.4 0.5  22.0  45.4  28.8  25.9  46.9  23.9  41.0  51.4 Portfolio Investment, Net  38.0 23.2 55.0  7.6  34.6 13.1  3.5 23.6  11.8  8.9 Financial Derivatives, Net  0.9 5.8 5.0 0.4  2.5  2.9 1.5  4.6 0.2 5.4 Other Investment, Net  4.6 64.0 35.5 21.0 30.7 67.3 18.9 26.5 49.5 46.9 Change in Reserves  7.6  122.7  7.9 35.6 16.2 47.6 93.4  4.4 53.2 51.3 Latin America and the Caribbean Financial Account Balance  197.4  192.7  191.3  103.9  101.7  149.7  106.7 1.7 1.1  19.9 Direct Investment, Net  151.4  136.3  136.1  124.8  121.3  148.8  114.3  92.4  104.4  115.7 Portfolio Investment, Net  100.0  107.9  46.8  49.2  38.0  12.8 2.9  1.4 3.6 5.6 Financial Derivatives, Net 1.8 6.8 1.4  2.9 3.9 4.0 4.9 5.9 8.0 8.3 Other Investment, Net 39.7 5.0 18.8 51.9 36.2  5.8 32.3 78.5 65.1 59.2 Change in Reserves 12.5 39.8  28.6 21.0 17.1 13.7  32.3 11.1 28.9 22.6 Middle East and Central Asia Financial Account Balance 263.7 159.9  184.2  217.7  32.5 110.3 19.0  96.4 29.2 7.0 Direct Investment, Net  22.7  42.7  10.7  29.2  16.4  8.6  18.8  21.7  25.7  30.0 Portfolio Investment, Net 75.3 130.4 61.6  11.9  41.4 5.4 25.7 6.0 16.4 7.3 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 121.7 65.9  52.5  41.9 106.2 83.7 10.2 4.2 20.4 7.5 Change in Reserves 89.5 6.9  182.4  134.3  80.6 30.0 2.5  84.7 18.3 22.5 Sub-Saharan Africa Financial Account Balance  54.2  78.2  65.9  60.7  36.5  26.2  52.5  37.9  50.9  61.2 Direct Investment, Net  23.4  48.3  38.0  33.1  37.3  21.8  27.1  21.4  28.9  34.4 Portfolio Investment, Net  21.1  9.0  21.9  17.4  22.2  1.5  18.4 9.9  3.7  7.7 Financial Derivatives, Net  0.8  1.5  0.4 0.9 0.3  0.5 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 Other Investment, Net  10.7  10.9 9.2  0.8 9.2  5.4  14.1  9.5  18.1  17.6 Change in Reserves 2.4  7.9  14.6  9.3 13.6 3.2 7.3  17.0 0.5  0.7 Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued) (Billions of US dollars) STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 153 Projections 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel Financial Account Balance 308.8 187.5  179.5  177.9 29.6 194.6 71.5  73.2 55.2 44.9 Direct Investment, Net  2.5  28.5  9.7  17.5 10.2 14.2  4.5  9.5  14.6  16.2 Portfolio Investment, Net 76.6 138.0 67.6  9.7  34.0 9.3 19.8  5.6 30.9 18.2 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 156.8 95.5  17.9 3.7 130.9 128.4 44.4 34.3 30.7 30.9 Change in Reserves 77.8  17.1  219.6  154.4  77.5 42.4 11.9  92.7 7.9 11.7 Nonfuel Financial Account Balance  335.5  174.1  126.5  228.5  275.4  420.1  229.8 218.8 211.7 101.7 Direct Investment, Net  481.6  400.0  336.6  241.2  322.5  389.1  355.0  333.0  387.8  424.6 Portfolio Investment, Net  225.0  226.4 62.0  45.2  172.3  104.7  87.4  22.5  140.8  175.7 Financial Derivatives, Net  2.0 11.9 6.7  6.2 3.9 5.2 4.1 13.5 20.1 25.6 Other Investment, Net  94.0 310.1 487.1 379.4  28.5  7.1 50.2 384.2 183.8 186.8 Change in Reserves 464.5 129.6  345.4  315.1 243.9 77.0 159.2 178.2 538.6 491.8 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies Financial Account Balance  411.5  352.0  287.7  230.0  268.2  322.0  240.4  44.2  146.2  205.4 Direct Investment, Net  268.4  274.3  287.4  285.7  269.7  311.3  285.4  228.0  273.9  306.6 Portfolio Investment, Net  176.6  187.5  24.2  54.8  115.0  11.7  30.1  23.1  68.2  82.0 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net  40.8  4.8 40.6 29.4 4.8  9.6  40.7 27.5 33.0 45.7 Change in Reserves 73.2 105.6  14.3 94.1 108.0 11.8 118.0 182.2 160.0 129.7 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19 Financial Account Balance  55.4  34.8  45.5  59.2  41.6  35.3  43.9  22.4  30.9  49.7 Direct Investment, Net  25.7  23.3  25.2  26.3  25.6  27.4  27.2  18.7  22.7  29.0 Portfolio Investment, Net  11.8  4.4 1.2  8.6  29.4  12.8  11.1 5.2  11.1  12.4 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net  17.6  0.4  21.1  28.5 9.7  2.0 1.2 4.5  5.2  12.6 Change in Reserves  0.1  6.5  0.1 4.5 4.1 7.2  6.3  12.9 8.6 4.8 Memorandum World Financial Account Balance 222.9 313.8 39.2 17.1 216.2 99.5 161.5 142.9 403.2 433.0 Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries  national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available because of data constraints. 1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued) (Billions of US dollars) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 154 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (Percent of GDP) Projections Averages Average 2003 12 2007 14 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 26 Advanced Economies Net Lending and Borrowing  0.6  0.2 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.7 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.5 0.7 Current Account Balance  0.6  0.2 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.7 Savings 21.8 21.6 22.9 22.6 23.2 23.1 22.9 22.3 22.6 22.8 23.1 Investment 22.3 21.7 21.8 21.6 22.0 22.3 22.3 22.0 22.4 22.4 22.5 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0  0.1  0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 United States Net Lending and Borrowing  4.3  3.2  2.3  2.1  1.8  2.2  2.3  3.1  3.9  3.1  2.2 Current Account Balance  4.2  3.1  2.2  2.1  1.9  2.2  2.2  3.1  3.9  3.1  2.2 Savings 17.0 17.1 20.1 18.7 19.2 19.1 18.6 17.8 17.5 18.1 18.9 Investment 21.1 20.1 21.2 20.4 20.5 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.6 21.4 21.3 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Euro Area Net Lending and Borrowing 0.0 0.4 2.9 3.1 2.9 2.6 2.1 2.3 . . . . . . . . . Current Account Balance  0.1 0.3 2.7 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.3 2.3 2.8 2.7 2.8 Savings 22.7 22.6 23.8 24.3 24.9 25.2 25.3 24.4 24.9 25.2 25.7 Investment 22.0 21.3 20.4 20.7 21.3 21.8 22.3 21.4 21.7 22.0 22.5 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.0  0.2  0.3  0.2 0.0 . . . . . . . . . Germany Net Lending and Borrowing 5.4 6.4 8.6 8.6 7.7 7.4 7.1 7.0 7.6 7.0 6.9 Current Account Balance 5.4 6.4 8.6 8.5 7.8 7.4 7.1 7.1 7.6 7.0 6.9 Savings 25.7 26.8 28.3 28.5 28.6 29.0 28.5 27.4 29.1 28.7 29.1 Investment 20.3 20.4 19.7 20.0 20.8 21.6 21.4 20.4 21.5 21.7 22.2 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1  0.1 0.0 0.0  0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 France Net Lending and Borrowing  0.2  0.7  0.4  0.4  0.8  0.5  0.6  2.2  2.0  1.7  0.9 Current Account Balance  0.2  0.7  0.4  0.5  0.8  0.6  0.7  2.3  2.1  1.8  1.0 Savings 22.4 22.1 22.3 22.1 22.7 23.3 23.5 21.4 22.7 22.9 23.3 Investment 22.6 22.8 22.7 22.6 23.4 23.9 24.2 23.7 24.8 24.6 24.3 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Italy Net Lending and Borrowing  1.5  1.1 1.8 2.4 2.6 2.5 2.9 3.5 3.6 3.4 3.4 Current Account Balance  1.6  1.2 1.4 2.6 2.6 2.5 3.0 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.3 Savings 19.2 18.4 18.5 20.2 20.6 21.0 21.0 21.1 21.4 22.1 22.6 Investment 20.8 19.5 17.1 17.6 18.1 18.5 18.0 17.5 17.9 18.7 19.4 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.4  0.2 0.1 0.0  0.1  0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Spain Net Lending and Borrowing  4.9  2.7 2.7 3.4 3.0 2.4 2.5 1.0 2.5 3.4 2.5 Current Account Balance  5.4  3.1 2.0 3.2 2.8 1.9 2.1 0.7 1.0 1.9 1.7 Savings 20.5 19.2 21.0 21.9 22.2 22.4 22.9 20.9 21.3 23.1 23.2 Investment 25.9 22.3 19.0 18.8 19.4 20.5 20.8 20.2 20.3 21.2 21.5 Capital Account Balance 0.5 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.3 0.3 1.6 1.5 0.8 Japan Net Lending and Borrowing 3.0 2.3 3.0 3.8 4.1 3.5 3.6 3.3 3.6 3.1 3.2 Current Account Balance 3.1 2.3 3.1 4.0 4.1 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.6 3.2 3.3 Savings 27.9 26.6 28.2 28.8 29.3 29.1 29.4 28.8 29.0 28.1 27.8 Investment 24.8 24.2 25.2 24.8 25.2 25.6 25.8 25.5 25.4 24.9 24.5 Capital Account Balance  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1 0.0  0.1 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1 United Kingdom Net Lending and Borrowing  2.8  3.6  5.1  5.5  3.8  3.8  3.1  4.0  4.0  4.1  3.7 Current Account Balance  2.8  3.6  5.0  5.4  3.8  3.7  3.1  3.9  3.9  4.0  3.6 Savings 14.1 12.9 12.7 12.4 14.4 14.1 15.2 13.1 13.5 14.1 14.4 Investment 16.9 16.5 17.7 17.8 18.2 17.8 18.3 17.0 17.4 18.1 18.0 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.2 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1 STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 155 Projections Averages Average 2003 12 2007 14 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 26 Canada Net Lending and Borrowing  0.5  2.1  3.5  3.1  2.8  2.3  2.1  1.9  0.8  1.3  1.8 Current Account Balance  0.5  2.2  3.5  3.1  2.8  2.3  2.1  1.9  0.8  1.3  1.8 Savings 22.6 21.9 20.3 19.7 20.7 20.9 20.9 20.2 22.8 22.9 22.9 Investment 23.1 24.0 23.8 22.8 23.6 23.2 23.0 22.1 23.6 24.2 24.7 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other Advanced Economies1 Net Lending and Borrowing 4.0 4.1 5.1 5.1 4.7 4.7 4.8 5.5 5.6 5.4 4.8 Current Account Balance 4.0 4.2 5.5 5.1 4.7 4.5 4.8 5.5 5.6 5.4 4.8 Savings 30.4 30.5 31.0 30.4 30.7 30.3 30.1 31.3 31.6 31.2 30.8 Investment 26.1 26.1 25.2 25.2 25.7 25.8 25.2 25.4 25.5 25.4 25.6 Capital Account Balance 0.0  0.1  0.4 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 Emerging Market and Developing Economies Net Lending and Borrowing 2.6 1.7 0.0  0.2 0.0  0.1 0.2 0.7 0.7 0.4  0.1 Current Account Balance 2.5 1.6  0.2  0.3 0.0  0.2 0.1 0.6 0.5 0.2  0.2 Savings 31.6 32.7 31.6 31.2 31.7 32.5 32.5 33.2 33.6 33.3 32.8 Investment 29.4 31.4 32.3 31.6 32.0 32.9 32.6 32.9 33.2 33.4 33.3 Capital Account Balance 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Regional Groups Emerging and Developing Asia Net Lending and Borrowing 3.5 2.8 2.0 1.4 1.0  0.3 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.7 0.3 Current Account Balance 3.4 2.7 2.0 1.4 1.0  0.3 0.6 1.7 1.0 0.7 0.3 Savings 41.3 43.1 41.1 39.9 40.0 39.8 39.6 40.7 40.4 40.1 39.0 Investment 38.2 40.4 39.2 38.5 39.1 40.1 39.0 39.0 39.5 39.5 39.0 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe Net Lending and Borrowing  0.3  0.9 1.7 0.1  0.2 2.2 1.8 0.7 1.2 1.0 0.4 Current Account Balance  0.4  1.0 1.0  0.2  0.5 1.7 1.3 0.0 0.6 0.4 0.0 Savings 23.1 23.1 24.7 23.5 24.1 25.5 24.2 23.6 24.0 23.8 24.0 Investment 23.3 24.0 23.6 23.7 24.5 23.5 22.7 23.5 23.4 23.4 23.9 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.2 0.7 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.5 Latin America and the Caribbean Net Lending and Borrowing  0.2  1.6  3.2  2.0  1.6  2.4  1.7 0.2 0.0  0.4  1.1 Current Account Balance  0.3  1.7  3.3  2.0  1.6  2.5  1.7 0.2 0.0  0.4  1.1 Savings 20.9 20.2 16.4 16.6 16.3 16.9 17.2 17.4 18.3 18.3 18.2 Investment 21.2 22.0 21.0 18.3 18.2 19.4 18.9 17.6 18.4 18.9 19.5 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Middle East and Central Asia Net Lending and Borrowing 8.9 8.2  3.6  3.9  1.1 2.8 0.6  2.9 0.4 0.2  0.4 Current Account Balance 9.1 8.3  3.9  4.2  1.1 2.7 0.5  3.0 0.3 0.1  0.5 Savings 36.0 36.0 24.8 24.2 26.9 29.4 29.0 24.8 28.0 27.4 26.6 Investment 28.5 29.5 30.1 29.5 29.8 28.4 30.6 30.3 28.7 28.4 28.2 Capital Account Balance 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Sub-Saharan Africa Net Lending and Borrowing 1.7  0.4  5.3  3.4  1.9  2.2  3.3  3.3  3.2  3.2  2.7 Current Account Balance 0.4  1.2  5.7  3.8  2.3  2.6  3.7  3.7  3.7  3.7  3.1 Savings 21.5 20.9 17.6 18.5 18.9 19.4 19.8 18.4 18.6 19.2 20.6 Investment 21.3 22.3 23.0 21.8 21.2 21.9 23.6 22.1 22.2 22.9 23.6 Capital Account Balance 1.3 0.8 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued) (Percent of GDP) WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: MANAGING DIVERGENT RECOVERIES 156 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Projections Averages Average 2003 12 2007 14 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 26 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel Net Lending and Borrowing 11.8 10.2  3.8  2.9 1.1 5.2 2.0  2.7 1.4 1.1 0.4 Current Account Balance 12.0 10.4  3.9  3.0 1.1 5.2 2.0  2.8 1.4 1.1 0.3 Savings 38.6 37.7 24.3 24.9 27.8 31.9 31.4 26.6 30.2 29.5 28.3 Investment 28.0 29.2 31.5 28.1 28.9 28.5 31.7 32.6 30.0 29.8 29.3 Capital Account Balance 0.2 0.1  0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Nonfuel Net Lending and Borrowing 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.1  0.1  0.7 0.0 1.1 0.6 0.3  0.1 Current Account Balance 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.1  0.2  0.8  0.1 0.9 0.5 0.2  0.2 Savings 30.5 31.9 32.6 32.0 32.1 32.6 32.6 33.9 33.9 33.7 33.3 Investment 29.7 31.7 32.4 32.0 32.3 33.4 32.7 32.9 33.6 33.7 33.7 Capital Account Balance 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies Net Lending and Borrowing  1.1  2.0  2.0  1.5  1.5  2.0  1.3  0.3  1.0  1.2  1.4 Current Account Balance  1.4  2.3  2.4  1.6  1.7  2.2  1.5  0.5  1.3  1.5  1.6 Savings 23.6 23.6 22.4 22.4 22.6 22.8 22.8 22.7 22.7 22.9 23.5 Investment 25.1 25.8 24.8 24.1 24.4 25.0 24.4 23.3 24.1 24.4 25.1 Capital Account Balance 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2015 19 Net Lending and Borrowing  1.9  3.9  5.4  6.2  5.5  5.3  5.0  3.1  4.6  4.7  3.3 Current Account Balance  2.8  4.7  5.9  6.5  6.0  5.7  5.2  3.5  4.9  5.0  3.6 Savings 19.4 17.3 12.6 12.1 13.3 14.2 13.5 11.5 12.4 12.7 15.0 Investment 22.4 22.1 19.0 19.3 19.8 20.1 19.2 15.4 18.0 18.4 18.9 Capital Account Balance 0.9 0.8 0.5 0.3 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Memorandum World Net Lending and Borrowing 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 Current Account Balance 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 Savings 24.7 25.5 26.4 25.9 26.5 26.8 26.8 26.7 27.0 27.1 27.3 Investment 24.5 25.1 25.9 25.4 25.9 26.5 26.4 26.3 26.7 26.8 27.1 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries  national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries  national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to the current account balance (CAB) (S   I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability. 1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued) (Percent of GDP) STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | April 2021 157 Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario Projections Averages Averages 2003 12 2013 22 2019 2020 2021 2022 2019 22 2023 26 World Real GDP 4.2 3.1 2.8  3.3 6.0 4.4 2.4 3.4 Advanced Economies 1.7 1.8 1.6  4.7 5.1 3.6 1.4 1.6 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 6.6 4.1 3.6  2.2 6.7 5.0 3.2 4.6 Memorandum Potential Output Major Advanced Economies 1.7 1.2 1.4  1.4 2.8 2.2 1.2 1.4 World Trade, Volume1 5.6 2.8 0.9  8.5 8.4 6.5 1.6 3.8 Imports Advanced Economies 3.9 2.9 1.7  9.1 9.1 6.4 1.8 3.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.8 2.8  1.0  8.6 9.0 7.4 1.5 4.8 Exports Advanced Economies 4.5 2.6 1.3  9.5 7.9 6.4 1.3 3.3 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 8.3 3.1 0.5  5.7 7.6 6.0 2.0 4.6 Terms of Trade Advanced Economies  0.4 0.5 0.2 0.7 0.3 0.6 0.4 0.1 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 1.6  0.6  1.2  1.3 0.6 0.2  0.4  0.6 World Prices in US Dollars Manufactures 3.1  0.9 0.4  3.1 2.0 0.7 0.0 1.7 Oil 15.5  6.3  10.2  32.7 41.7  6.3  5.4  2.0 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 10.3  0.3 0.8 6.7 16.1  1.9 5.2 0.1 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies 2.0 1.3 1.4 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.3 1.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 6.4 4.8 5.1 5.1 4.9 4.4 4.9 3.9 Interest Rates Real Six-Month LIBOR2 0.2  0.7 0.5  0.5  1.5  1.4  0.7  1.1 World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3 1.4 0.1  0.2  0.3  0.8  0.7  0.5  0.4 Current Account Balances Advanced Economies  0.6 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2.5 0.2 0.1 0.6 0.5 0.2 0.4  0.2 Total External Debt Emerging Market and Developing Economies 28.3 30.7 30.5 32.6 31.5 30.9 31.4 29.9 Debt Service Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.2 11.0 11.0 11.4 11.0 10.8 11.0 10.7 1Data refer to trade in goods and services. 2London interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits minus percent change in US GDP deflator. 3GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Annual Percent Change Percent Percent of GDP International Monetary Fund | April 2021 159 World Economic Outlook Archives World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery Unemployment, Commodities, and Capital Flows April 2011 World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks September 2011 World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain April 2012 World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth October 2012 World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks April 2013 World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions October 2013 World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven April 2014 World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties October 2014 World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth Short- and Long-Term Factors April 2015 World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices October 2015 World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long April 2016 World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand Symptoms and Remedies October 2016 World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum? April 2017 World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges October 2017 World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change April 2018 World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth October 2018 World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery April 2019 World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers October 2019 World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown April 2020 World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent October 2020 World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries April 2021 I. Methodology Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios April 2011, Box 1.2 Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement October 2014, Box 3.3 Tariff Scenarios October 2016, Scenario Box World Growth Projections over the Medium Term October 2016, Box 1.1 Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices April 2019, Box 1.2 On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis April 2019, Box 3.3 Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices October 2019, Box 1.3 Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19 April 2020, Scenario Box Alternative Scenarios October 2020, Scenario Box Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights October 2020, Box 1.1 Scenario Box April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK SELECTED TOPICS 160 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries II. Historical Surveys The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs October 2012, Chapter 3 What Is the Effect of Recessions? October 2015, Box 1.1 III. Economic Growth Sources and Patterns The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand? April 2012, Box 1.2 How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance? October 2012, Box 1.3 Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last? October 2012, Chapter 4 Jobs and Growth: Can t Have One without the Other? October 2012, Box 4.1 Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe April 2013, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It? April 2013, Chapter 4 What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS? October 2013, Box 1.2 Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages October 2013, Chapter 3 Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the Caucasus and Central Asia October 2013, Box 3.1 Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy October 2013, Box 3.2 Saving and Economic Growth April 2014, Box 3.1 On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during, and after the Global Financial Crisis April 2014, Chapter 4 The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies April 2014, Box 4.1 The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011 October 2014, Box 1.2 Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers October 2014, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment October 2014, Chapter 3 The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies October 2014, Box 3.4 Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output April 2015, Chapter 3 Steady as She Goes Estimating Sustainable Output April 2015, Box 3.1 Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries  The Role of External Factors April 2016, Box 1.2 Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market Reforms in Advanced Economies April 2016, Chapter 3 Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated External Environment April 2017, Chapter 3 Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data April 2017, Box 2.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence over the Forecast Horizon October 2017, Box 1.3 Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality April 2018, Chapter 3 Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy? April 2018, Chapter 4 Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth April 2018, Box 1.3 Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies October 2018, Box 1.2 Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies October 2018, Box 1.3 The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown October 2018, Chapter 2 The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle October 2019, Box 1.4 Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can Structural Reforms Play? October 2019, Chapter 3 SELECTED TOPICS 161 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an Era of Low Rates and High Debt April 2020, Chapter 2 The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects October 2020, Chapter 2 An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns October 2020, Box 2.1 Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook April 2021, Box 1.1 After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage April 2021, Chapter 2 A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector April 2021, Box 2.1 IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets Commodity Market Developments and Prospects April 2011, Appendix 1.2 Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances April 2011, Chapter 3 Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production April 2011, Box 3.1 Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer? April 2011, Box 3.2 Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity April 2011, Box 3.3 Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends April 2011, Appendix 3.1 The Energy and Oil Empirical Models April 2011, Appendix 3.2 Commodity Market Developments and Prospects September 2011, Appendix 1.1 Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices September 2011, Box 1.4 Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy September 2011, Chapter 3 Commodity Market Review April 2012, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters April 2012, Chapter 4 Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries April 2012, Box 4.1 Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries April 2012, Box 4.2 Commodity Market Review October 2012, Chapter 1, Special Feature Unconventional Energy in the United States October 2012, Box 1.4 Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable? October 2012, Box 1.5 Commodity Market Review April 2013, Chapter 1, Special Feature The Dog That Didn t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? April 2013, Chapter 3 Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve? April 2013, Box 3.1 Commodity Market Review October 2013, Chapter 1, Special Feature Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience October 2013, Box 1.SF.1 Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread October 2013, Box 1.SF.2 Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting April 2014, Box 1.3 Commodity Prices and Forecasts April 2014, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas October 2014, Chapter 1, in the World Economy Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment April 2015, Chapter 1, in an Era of Low Oil Prices Special Feature The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply? April 2015, Box 1.1 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy October 2015, Chapter 1, Special Feature 162 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift October 2015, Chapter 1, Special Feature Box 1.SF.1 Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath of the Commodity Boom October 2015, Chapter 2 The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon October 2015, Box 2.1 Do Commodity Exporters  Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms? October 2015, Box 2.4 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the April 2016, Chapter 1, Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices Special Feature Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy October 2016, Chapter 3 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and October 2016, Chapter 1, Markets in the World Economy Special Feature How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation? October 2016, Box 3.3 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and April 2017, Chapter 1, Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts October 2017, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts April 2018, Chapter 1, Special Feature What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies? April 2018, Box 1.2 The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles April 2018, Box 1.SF.1 Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries October 2018, Box 1.4 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand October 2018, Chapter 1, Special Feature The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy October 2018, Box 1.SF.1 Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize October 2018, Chapter 3 Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies October 2018, Box 3.1 Commodity Special Feature April 2019, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts October 2019, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts April 2020, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts October 2020, Chapter 1, Special Feature What Is Happening with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019? October 2020, Chapter 1, Special Feature Box 1.SF.1 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts April 2021, Chapter 1, Special Feature V. Fiscal Policy Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances September 2011, Chapter 4 Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers? October 2012, Box 1.1 The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies October 2012, Box 1.2 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs October 2012, Chapter 3 The Great Divergence of Policies April 2013, Box 1.1 Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance April 2013, Box 1.2 Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment October 2014, Chapter 3 Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment October 2014, Box 3.2 SELECTED TOPICS 163 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies October 2014, Box 3.4 Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment October 2014, Box 3.5 Commodity Booms and Public Investment October 2015, Box 2.2 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant October 2017, Chapter 4 The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions October 2017, Box 4.1 Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes April 2018, Box 1.5 Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries October 2019, Box 2.4 VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds Financial Conditions Indices April 2011, Appendix 1.1 House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets April 2011, Box 1.1 International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking April 2011, Box 1.3 Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications September 2011, Box 1.2 Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession? September 2011, Box 1.3 Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging April 2012, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy October 2012, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature The Great Divergence of Policies April 2013, Box 1.1 Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening October 2013, Box 1.1 Credit Supply and Economic Growth April 2014, Box 1.1 Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies? April 2014, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates April 2014, Chapter 3 Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update October 2014, Box 1.1 U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets April 2016, Box 2.2 A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy October 2016, Box 3.5 Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained? October 2017, Box 1.2 The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery October 2018, Box 2.3 Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations October 2018, Box 3.2 Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy? April 2020, Box 2.1 Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help? April 2020, Chapter 3 Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings April 2020, Box 3.1 Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks? April 2020, Box 3.2 Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks: Assessment and Policy Options April 2020, Box 1.3 Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19 April 2021, Chapter 4 Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness April 2021, Box 4.1 VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies September 2011, Box 1.1 The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession April 2012, Box 1.1 Jobs and Growth: Can t Have One without the Other? October 2012, Box 4.1 Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment April 2016, Box 3.2 Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares April 2017, Chapter 3 164 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies October 2017, Box 1.1 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications October 2017, Chapter 2 Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level October 2017, Box 2.1 Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence October 2017, Box 2.2 Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence October 2017, Box 2.3 Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects April 2018, Chapter 2 Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus Advanced Economies April 2018, Box 2.1 Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates April 2018, Box 2.4 Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil April 2018, Box 3.3 The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility October 2018, Box 2.1 The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis: The Case of Industrial Robots October 2018, Box 2.2 Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies April 2019, Box 1.1 Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities April 2019, Box 1.3 Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in Advanced Economies October 2019, Chapter 2 Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities October 2019, Box 2.2 The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration April 2020, Chapter 4 Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation April 2020, Box 4.1 Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19 October 2020, Box 1.2 Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the COVID-19 Shock April 2021, Chapter 3 VIII. Exchange Rate Issues Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets April 2014, Box 1.4 Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected? October 2015, Chapter 3 The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade October 2015, Box 3.1 Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains October 2015, Box 3.2 Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies October 2017, Box 1.1 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications October 2017, Chapter 2 Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level October 2017, Box 2.1 Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence October 2017, Box 2.2 Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence October 2017, Box 2.3 IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery April 2011, Box 2.1 International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle? April 2011, Chapter 4 External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points September 2011, Box 1.5 The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area April 2013, Box 1.3 External Rebalancing in the Euro Area October 2013, Box 1.3 The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows October 2013, Chapter 4 Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions October 2013, Box 4.1 The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom October 2014, Box 1.SF.1 Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point? October 2014, Chapter 4 SELECTED TOPICS 165 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment October 2014, Box 4.1 A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area October 2014, Box 4.2 Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown April 2015, Box 1.2 Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits October 2015, Box 1.2 Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies October 2015, Box 1.3 Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown April 2016, Box 1.1 Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets April 2016, Chapter 2 Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries April 2016, Box 2.1 The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization April 2016, Box 3.3 Global Trade: What s behind the Slowdown? October 2016, Chapter 2 The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies  Trade Integration with China s Final Demand April 2017, Box 2.3 Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and Developing Economies April 2017, Box 2.4 Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters October 2017, Box 1.4 Remittances and Consumption Smoothing October 2017, Box 1.5 A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators April 2018, Box 1.6 The Rise of Services Trade April 2018, Box 3.2 Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries April 2018, Box 4.3 Global Trade Tensions October 2018, Scenario Box The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat? April 2019, Chapter 3 Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries April 2019, Box 3.2 Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia April 2019, Box 3.4 The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs April 2019, Chapter 4 Gross versus Value-Added Trade April 2019, Box 4.1 Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances April 2019, Box 4.2 Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role? April 2019, Box 4.3 The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S. China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models April 2019, Box 4.4 A No-Deal Brexit April 2019, Scenario Box Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production October 2019, Scenario Box 1.1 Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario October 2019, Scenario Box 1.2 The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018 October 2019, Box 1.2 X. Regional Issues East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe April 2012, Box 2.1 The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area April 2013, Box 1.3 Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions April 2018, Box 2.3 XI. Country-Specific Analyses Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan s Lost Decades? April 2011, Box 1.4 Where Is China s External Surplus Headed? April 2012, Box 1.3 The U.S. Home Owners  Loan Corporation April 2012, Box 3.1 Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland April 2012, Box 3.2 166 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries Abenomics: Risks after Early Success? October 2013, Box 1.4 Is China s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)? April 2014, Box 1.2 Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade October 2014, Box 3.1 Japanese Exports: What s the Holdup? October 2015, Box 3.3 The Japanese Experience with Deflation October 2016, Box 3.2 Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas April 2018, Box 2.2 Immigration and Wages in Germany April 2020, Box 4.2 The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean April 2020, Box 4.3 XII. Climate Change Issues The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? October 2017, Chapter 3 The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones October 2017, Box 3.1 The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis October 2017, Box 3.2 Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies October 2017, Box 3.3 Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets October 2017, Box 3.4 Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution October 2017, Box 3.5 Mitigating Climate Change October 2017, Box 3.6 The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies April 2019, Box 3.1 What s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions? October 2019, Box 1.SF.1 Mitigating Climate Change Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies October 2020, Chapter 3 Glossary October 2020, Box 3.1 Zooming in on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization October 2020, Box 3.2 Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters April 2021, Box 1.2 XIII. Special Topics Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up Human Development? October 2015, Box 2.3 Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms April 2016, Box 3.1 Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method April 2016, Box 3.4 A Global Rush for Land October 2016, Box 1.SF.1 Conflict, Growth, and Migration April 2017, Box 1.1 Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity April 2017, Box 1.2 Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Cases of Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa April 2017, Box 2.1 Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview April 2017, Box 3.1 The Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation April 2017, Box 3.2 Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World April 2017, Box 3.3 Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income April 2017, Box 3.4 Smartphones and Global Trade April 2018, Box 1.1 Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics? April 2018, Box 1.4 The Changing Service Content of Manufactures April 2018, Box 3.1 Patent Data and Concepts April 2018, Box 4.1 International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers April 2018, Box 4.2 Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation April 2018, Box 4.4 SELECTED TOPICS 167 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 Increasing Market Power October 2018, Box 1.1 Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts October 2018, Box 1.5 Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task October 2018, Box 1.6 The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects April 2019, Chapter 2 The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving April 2019, Box 2.1 Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power April 2019, Box 2.2 The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments, and Implications for the Global Outlook October 2019, Box 1.1 Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare October 2019, Box 2.1 The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures October 2019, Box 2.3 The Political Effects of Structural Reforms October 2019, Box 3.1 The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms October 2019, Box 3.2 The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate Growth Differentials in Advanced Economies April 2020, Box 2.2 Social Unrest during COVID-19 October 2020, Box 1.4 The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the United States October 2020, Box 2.2 Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure April 2021, Box 2.2 Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle April 2021, Chapter 1, Annex 1.SF.1 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 169 IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK, APRIL 2021 E xecutive Directors broadly agreed with the assessment of the global economic outlook, risks, and policy priorities. They welcomed the better-than-anticipated performance in the second half of 2020, which helped to dampen the sharp drop in global growth. Directors acknowledged that the synchronized, extraordinary policy support deployed across economies has played a critical role in helping mitigate the crisis and foster the conditions for recovery. However, they agreed that the shock may have persistent effects. Medium-term output losses in emerging market and developing economies in general are likely to be larger than those in advanced econo- mies compared to pre-pandemic projections, although emerging market economies as a whole will continue to grow faster than advanced economies. Directors noted that the crisis has also likely worsened inequali- ties within countries, with young people, women, and those with lower levels of education being hit harder. Directors noted that uncertainties around the baseline projections remain large. The economic recovery depends heavily on the path of the health crisis, including the effective deployment of vaccines and treatments and the potential evolution of the virus. Other factors include the effectiveness of policy actions in forestalling economic scarring, developments in financial conditions and commodity prices, and the ability of economies to adjust to the shock. The impact of additional fiscal support and whether pent up sav- ings built up during the pandemic translate into sharp increases in demand pose an upside risk. Directors emphasized that accelerating vaccina- tions and distributing vaccines at affordable cost to all countries remains the key priority. The macroeconomic policy responses will need to be tailored by country, depending on the stage of the epidemic locally, the strength of their recovery, available policy space, and the structural characteristics of their economies. Prioritizing health spending, providing well-targeted fiscal support, and maintaining accommodative monetary policy as warranted, while monitoring financial stability risks, remain key while the pandemic continues. As the recov- ery progresses, policymakers would need to emphasize measures that limit scarring from the crisis, shrink inequality, and boost productive capacity (such as pub- lic investment). The transition from support measures would need to be managed carefully to avoid sudden cliffs that could derail the recovery. Particular attention to reallocation in labor markets will be important. The IMF s tailored policy advice will be crucial. Directors stressed that until the pandemic is brought under control globally, fiscal policy must remain flexible and supportive of health systems, the worst-affected households and viable firms, and the economic recovery. The need and scope for fiscal support varies across econ- omies, depending on the effect of the pandemic and the ability of countries to access low-cost borrowing. The targeting of measures must be enhanced and tailored to countries  administrative capacity, and fiscal transpar- ency and governance practices should be improved. Directors stressed the need to balance the risks from large and growing public and private debt with those from premature withdrawal of fiscal support, which could slow the recovery. Credible medium-term fiscal frameworks can help set a path for rebuilding fiscal buffers at a pace contingent on the strength of the recovery. Enhancing debt transparency and man- agement will also be important, and some countries may require debt relief or other treatment. Directors agreed that fiscal policies should enable a green, digital, and inclusive transformation of the economy, while long-standing weaknesses in public finances should be tackled once the recovery is firmly in place. Policies should reduce gaps in access to quality public services, such as social protection, more and better health care, and education. Strengthening tax capacity, gradually expanding the base for corporate and personal income taxes and ensuring a more progressive tax system, along The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board s discussion of the Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on March 25, 2021. 170 International Monetary Fund | April 2021 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Managing Divergent Recoveries with improvements in spending efficiency, can help mobilize additional resources for basic services and for the Sustainable Development Goals. Directors agreed that decisive policy action eased financial conditions and helped contain financial stability risks. They noted, however, that the support measures may also have unintended consequences. An extended period of extremely easy financial conditions could result in stretched valuations that may worsen financial vulnerabilities and put growth at risk. A multispeed recovery between advanced and emerging market economies poses a risk that financial condi- tions in emerging market and developing economies may tighten markedly, especially if advanced econo- mies move toward policy normalization and rates rise rapidly. In this context, clear guidance from advanced economy central banks, together with sound policies in emerging markets, will be important in prevent- ing financial disruption in those economies. Some Directors also noted that emerging market economies may need to resort to policy tools considered in the Integrated Policy Framework. Directors noted that in many economies the corporate sector is overindebted and weakened, especially smaller firms. Directors agreed that ongoing support remains necessary to complete the recovery. Most Directors noted the need to prevent financial vulnerabilities from turning into legacy issues by tightening selected mac- roprudential policy tools to tackle pockets of elevated vulnerabilities, while avoiding a broad tightening of financial conditions. Some Directors also emphasized the need to further develop tools targeting nonbank financial institutions. Directors highlighted that emerging market and developing economies with market access should take advantage of easy financing conditions while they can. They agreed that corporate balance sheet repair is a priority, and they noted staff s analysis that firms facing temporary liquidity risks may need policy support while nonviable firms would need resolution. Direc- tors observed that the ability of banks to lend will be crucial for the success of the recovery. Directors emphasized the importance of continued international cooperation to overcome the pandemic and strengthen the recovery. In addition to ramping up production and ensuring access to vaccines world- wide, ensuring that financially constrained countries have adequate access to international liquidity will be important. Collective solutions are also essential in the areas of climate change, international tax policy, and international trade. The IMF will continue to play a critical role. MORE FROM THE IMF ON INEQUALITY SINCE THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC MAY JULY OCT DEC JAN APR 2020 2021 NOV RESEARCH DEPARTMENT Enhancing Access to Opportunities G20 Note The IMF analyzes inequality trends and supports countries in designing policies to tackle inequality. The following include selected cross-country publications on inequality since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. MONETARY AND CAPITAL MARKETS DEPARTMENT The Promise of Fintech: Financial Inclusion in the Post COVID-19 Era Departmental Paper EUROPEAN DEPARTMENT A ordable Rental Housing: Making It Part of Europe s Recovery Departmental Paper ASIA AND PACIFIC DEPARTMENT COVID-19 and Inequality in Asia: Risks of Social Unrest? October 2020 Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Paci c FISCAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT Tax Policy for Inclusive Growth After the Pandemic Special Series Notes on COVID-19 INSTITUTE FOR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT How to Achieve Inclusive Growth Book MIDDLE EAST AND CENTRAL ASIA DEPARTMENT Economic Governance Reforms to Support Inclusive Growth in the Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia Departmental Paper To learn more, visit IMF.org/Inequality WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK APRIL 2021 IN THIS ISSUE: CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies CHAPTER 2 After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage CHAPTER 3 Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the COVID-19 Shock CHAPTER 4 Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19 