2025
OCT
WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
Global Economy in Flux, 
Prospects Remain Dim
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
2025
OCT
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
Global Economy in Flux,  
Prospects Remain Dim
©2025 International Monetary Fund
 
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
 
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
IMF Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and 
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some 
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional 
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial 
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. | 
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80	
ISBN 979-8-22902-394-8 (English Paper)
	
979-8-22902-402-0 (English ePub)
	
979-8-22902-400-6 (English Web PDF)
Disclaimer: The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff pub-
lished twice a year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and 
has benefited from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their 
discussion of the report on September 29, 2025. The views expressed in this publica-
tion are those of the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s 
Executive Directors or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2025. World Economic Outlook: 
Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim. Washington, DC. October.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail:
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@IMF.org
bookstore.IMF.org
elibrary.IMF.org
Errata
November 7, 2025
This web version of the WEO has been updated to reflect the following changes to the version published online on October 14, 2025: 
- Chapter 1, Commodity Special Feature, page 35: “Vida Maver” was added to the contributor list footnote. 
- Chapter 2, section titled “The Contribution of Policy Frameworks to Macroeconomic Stabilization,” page 62: “Easterly and others 
(1993)” was added to the first sentence. The full reference was added to the reference list on page 72.
- Chapter 2, Figure 2.3.1, panel 2, page 70: “(Percent)” was corrected to “(Percentage points).”
- Chapter 3, Figure 3.10, Note, sixth sentence, page 87: “above-average distance” was corrected to “below-average distance.”
- Statistical Appendix, Table A2, page 125: The data for the first 12 columns for the Czech Republic and Norway were corrected.
December 3, 2025
The web version of the WEO was further updated to reflect the following changes to the version published online on November 7, 2025: 
- Chapter 1, Appendix Table 1.1.6, page 47: The reference year in the unit statement was changed from 2017 to 2021. 
- Statistical Appendix, Table B9, page 13: The 2025–26 values for Zimbabwe were corrected.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
iii
Assumptions and Conventions	
vii
Further Information	
ix
Data	
x
Preface	
xi
Foreword	
xii
Executive Summary	
xv
Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies	
1
A New Global Economic Landscape Slowly Takes Shape	
1
Recent Developments: Resilience Giving Way to Warning Signs	
3
Policy Mix: Loose Fiscal and Divergent Monetary	
9
The Outlook: Dim Prospects	
10
Risks to the Outlook: Still Tilted to the Downside	
20
Policies: Bringing Confidence, Predictability, and Sustainability	
22
Box 1.1. Trade Reallocation in Response to Tariffs: Will This Time Be Different?	
27
Box 1.2. Risk Assessment Surrounding the Baseline Projection	
30
Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and Commodity-Driven  
Macroeconomic Fluctuations	
35
References	
48
Chapter 2. Emerging Market Resilience: Good Luck or Good Policies?	
51
Introduction	
51
Emerging Market Resilience to Risk-Off Episodes	
55
The Evolution of Policy Frameworks in Emerging Markets	
57
The Contribution of Policy Frameworks to Macroeconomic Stabilization	
62
How to Deal with Future Risk-Off Shocks: Evidence from Model Simulations	
63
Conclusions and Policy Implications	
66
Box 2.1. IMF Arrangements and Emerging Market Resilience	
68
Box 2.2. Milestones in Developing Monetary Policy Frameworks	
69
Box 2.3. Macroeconomic Effects of Undermining Central Bank Independence	
70
References	
71
Chapter 3. Industrial Policy: Managing Trade-Offs to Promote Growth and Resilience	
75
Introduction	
75
The Return of Industrial Policy	
77
Industrial Policy for Infant Industry Protection	
80
Lessons from Key Industrial Policies, Past and Present	
82
Industrial Policy and Sector Performance	
86
Cross-Sector Spillovers and Aggregate Effects	
88
Conclusions and Policy Implications	
90
Box 3.1. Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on Misallocation	
91
CONTENTS
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
iv
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Box 3.2. Support or Distort: Evaluating National State Aid in Europe	
92
Box 3.3. A Comparison between Industrial and Structural Policies	
93
References	
94
Statistical Appendix	
97
Assumptions	
97
What’s New	
97
Data and Conventions	
97
Country Notes	
99
Classification of Economies	
101
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook  
Classification	
101
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in  
Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2024	
103
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup	
104
Table C. European Union	
104
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source  
of Export Earnings	
105
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position,  
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification	
106
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods	
108
Table G. Key Data Documentation	
109
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for Selected Economies	
119
List of Tables	
123
Output (Tables A1–A4)	
124
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)	
131
Financial Policies (Table A8)	
136
Foreign Trade (Table A9)	
137
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)	
139
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)	
146
Flow of Funds (Table A14)	
150
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)	
153
World Economic Outlook Selected Topics	
155
IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, September 2025	
165
Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections	
12
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at  
Market Exchange Rate Weights	
14
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
42
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
43
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
44
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
45
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
46
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output	
47
contents
v
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
contents
Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing  
and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of  
Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of  
Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria:  
External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term  
Baseline Scenario: Selected Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. US Effective Tariff Rates by Country	
2
Figure 1.2. Overall, Economic Policy, and Trade Policy Uncertainty	
2
Figure 1.3. Contributions to Quarterly GDP Growth	
4
Figure 1.4. Consumer and Business Confidence	
4
Figure 1.5. Impulse Responses to a Tariff-Uncertainty Shock	
5
Figure 1.6. Global Inflation Trends	
6
Figure 1.7. Impact of Tariffs on Prices	
7
Figure 1.8. Tariffs, US Dollar, and Prices	
8
Figure 1.9. Fiscal Policy	
9
Figure 1.10. Global Assumptions	
10
Figure 1.11. Changes in GDP Growth and Inflation	
16
Figure 1.12. World Trade	
17
Figure 1.13. Current Account and International Investment Positions	
17
Figure 1.14. Projected Change in Current Account Balance	
18
Figure 1.15. Medium-Term Growth Outlook	
18
Figure 1.16. Official Development Assistance, Revenues, and Interest Burden	
19
Figure 1.17. Migrant Stock and Remittances	
19
Figure 1.1.1. Exports by Destination Country Type and Tariff Episode	
27
Figure 1.1.2. Change in Exports by Destination Region and Tariff Episode	
28
Figure 1.1.3. Change in China’s Exports by Destination Region and Tariff Episode in  
Selected Sectors	
29
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
vi
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Figure 1.2.1. Forecast Uncertainty around Global Growth and Inflation Projections	
30
Figure 1.2.2. Impact of Scenario A on GDP	
32
Figure 1.2.3. Impact of Scenario A in the United States, China, and the Euro Area	
33
Figure 1.2.4. Impact of Scenario B on GDP	
33
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments	
35
Figure 1.SF.2. Size and Network-Adjusted Value-Added Share across Country Groups	
38
Figure 1.SF.3. Importance of Interconnectedness over Size	
38
Figure 1.SF.4. Model-Based Consumption Response to a 1 Percent Terms-of-Trade  
Price Shock	
39
Figure 1.SF.5. Model-Based Impulse Responses to a 1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Shock	
40
Figure 1.SF.6. Monetary Policy Mistake Distribution, 2018	
41
Figure 2.1. Changes in External Conditions and Policy Frameworks	
52
Figure 2.2. Dates and Features of Risk-Off Episodes	
56
Figure 2.3. Effects of Risk-Off Shocks	
56
Figure 2.4. Monetary Policy Reaction Function	
57
Figure 2.5. Central Bank Independence and Autonomy	
58
Figure 2.6. Use of Foreign Exchange Interventions in Response to  
Uncovered Interest Parity Deviations	
60
Figure 2.7. Strength of Fiscal Frameworks	
60
Figure 2.8. Cyclicality of Government Expenditures	
61
Figure 2.9. Fiscal Policy and Debt Sustainability	
61
Figure 2.10. Factors Contributing to Emerging Markets’ Resilience during Risk-Off Episodes	
62
Figure 2.11. Policy Trade-Offs in Response to Risk-Off Shocks	
64
Figure 2.12. Probability and Severity of Sudden Stops	
64
Figure 2.13. Costs of Delaying Monetary Tightening for Emerging Markets with  
Weak Policy Frameworks	
65
Figure 2.14. Effects of Foreign Exchange Interventions	
66
Figure 2.1.1. IMF Precautionary Arrangements and Their Role during Risk-Off Episodes	
68
Figure 2.3.1. Effects of Politically Motivated Transitions	
70
Figure 3.1. Global Evolution of Industrial Policies	
76
Figure 3.2. Industrial Policy Interventions by Instrument and Estimated Fiscal Costs	
77
Figure 3.3. Motivation for Industrial Policies and Targeted Sectors	
79
Figure 3.4. Industrial Policy for Energy Security and Increasing Needs for Electricity	
79
Figure 3.5. Intertemporal Trade-Offs Depend on Learning Rate	
81
Figure 3.6. Key Sector Characteristics Determine the Long-Term Effects of Industrial Policy	
81
Figure 3.7. Decomposition of EU Electric Vehicle Price Decline	
83
Figure 3.8. No-IP and Reshoring Policies Accelerate Take-Up,  
but Domestic Production Impacts Differ	
84
Figure 3.9. Policy Options to Reduce Fossil Fuel Use through Access to  
Cheaper Clean Technologies Present Trade-Offs	
84
Figure 3.10. Industrial Policies and Medium-Term Performance of Targeted Sectors	
87
Figure 3.11. Downstream Impact of Energy Sector Industrial Policy	
88
Figure 3.12. Sectoral and Aggregate Effects of Industrial Policy  
in the Energy Sector	
89
Figure 3.13. Sectoral Effects and Aggregate Effects of Optimal and  
Uniform Industrial Policy	
89
Figure 3.1.1. China: Industrial Policy Support	
91
Figure 3.2.1. Effects of State Aid on Recipient and Nonrecipient Firms	
92
Figure 3.3.1. Industrial Policies versus Governance Reforms	
93
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
vii
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook 
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during 
August 1–August 29, 2025, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mech-
anism II, which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established 
policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for 
selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $68.92 a barrel 
in 2025 and $65.84 a barrel in 2026; that the three-month government bond yield for the United States will 
average 4.3 percent in 2025 and 3.7 percent in 2026, that for the euro area will average 2.0 percent in 2025 and 
2.1 percent in 2026, and that for Japan will average 0.4 percent in 2025 and 0.8 percent in 2026; and that the 
10-year government bond yield for the United States will average 4.3 percent in 2025 and 4.1 percent in 2026, 
that for the euro area will average 2.5 percent in 2025 and 2.6 percent in 2026, and that for Japan will average 
1.5 percent in 2025 and 1.7 percent in 2026. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and 
the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would, in any event, be involved in the pro-
jections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through September 30, 2025, 
but may not reflect the latest published data in all cases. For the date of the last data update for each economy, 
please refer to the notes provided in the online WEO database.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
	• . . .  to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
	• –  between years or months (for example, 2024–25 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered, 
including the beginning and ending years or months; and
	• /  between years or months (for example, 2024/25) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
	• “Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
	• “Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 
1 percentage point).
	• Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in 
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and 
government finance data.
	• For some countries, the figures for 2024 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please 
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments for each country.
What is new in this publication:
	• Data for Liechtenstein have been added to the database and are included in the advanced economies group 
composites.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
	• Tables and figures in this report that list their source as “IMF staff calculations” or “IMF staff estimates” draw 
on data from the WEO database.
	• When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
	• Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
viii
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
	• Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or 
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of 
the weighted group data.
	• The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on maps do not imply, on the part of 
the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is 
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities 
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
ix
Corrections and Revisions
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the 
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are 
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and 
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.
Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/555871.
Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the  
IMF eLibrary at eLibrary.IMF.org/WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at  
www.IMF.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly:
Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.
FURTHER INFORMATION
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
x
This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger com-
pilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series 
most frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histor-
ical data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context 
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each 
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural 
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF 
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a 
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International 
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their 
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a 
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are 
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF 
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and 
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail or email (telephone 
inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Email: DataHelp@IMF.org
DATA
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
xi
The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s 
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international 
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a 
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information 
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out 
in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, 
European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—
together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and 
the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of 
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Petya 
Koeva Brooks, Deputy Director, Research Department, and Deniz Igan, Division Chief, Research Department.
The primary contributors to this report are Shekhar Aiyar, Hippolyte Balima, Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi, 
Christian Bogmans, Marijn Arend Bolhuis, Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, Francesco Grigoli, Thomas Kroen, 
Toh Kuan, Rafael Machado Parente, Chiara Maggi, Vida Maver, Jorge Miranda Pinto, Jean-Marc Natal, 
Diaa Noureldin, Galip Kemal Ozhan, Andrea Paloschi, Andrea F. Presbitero, Yu Shi, Sebastian Wende, and 
Zhao Zhang.
Other contributors include Maryam Abdou, Gavin Asdorian, Pedro de Barros Gagliardi, Jared Bebee, 
Francis Cuadros Bloch, Luis Brandao-Marques, Thomas J. Carter, Wenbo Chen, Owen Desberg, Angela Espiritu, 
Ganchimeg Ganpurev, Sarah Garcia, Daniel Garcia-Macia, Bertrand Gruss, Gee Hee Hong, Adam Jakubik, 
Maximiliano Jerez Osses, Marcin Kolasa, Siddharth Kothari, Jungjin Lee, Weili Lin, Jesper Linde, Giulio Lisi, 
Barry Liu, Rui Mano, Roland Meeks, Joseph Moussa, Dirk Muir, Emory Oakes, Clarita Phillips, Rafael Portillo, 
Sofia Quinonez, Shrihari Ramachandra, Lorenzo Rotunno, Isabela Rozario, Ilgim Simnick, Monika Sztajerowska, 
Hedda Thorell, Nicholas Tong, Hasan Toprak, Riya Varghese, Simon Voigts, Xinyi Wang, Evgenia Weaver, 
Yarou Xu, and Dian Zhi.
Gemma Rose Diaz from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with 
production and editorial support from Michael Harrup, Kristina Harwood, Lucy Scott Morales, James Unwin, 
MPS Limited, and Absolute Service, Inc.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, as 
well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 29, 2025. However, estimates, 
projections, and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive 
Directors or to their national authorities.
PREFACE
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
xii
An Unchanged Outlook Masks Complex 
Forces as the Policy Landscape Shifts
In April of this year, the United States announced 
the imposition of sizable tariffs against most of its trad-
ing partners, in a major departure from trade policy 
rules and norms. Given the complexity and fluidity 
of the moment, as well as the lack of certainty about 
announced policies, the April 2025 World Economic 
Outlook (WEO) offered a range of estimates of the 
downward revision in global growth, from modest to 
significant, depending on the ultimate severity of the 
trade shock.
Six months later, where do we stand? The good 
news is that the negative impact on the global econ-
omy is at the modest end of the range. Thanks to the 
agility of the private sector, which front-loaded imports 
in the first half of the year and speedily reorganized 
supply chains to redirect trade flows, the negotiation of 
trade deals between various countries and the US and 
the overall restraint from the rest of the world, which 
by and large kept the trading system open, global 
growth is now projected at 3.2 percent this year and 
3.1 percent next year.
Should we conclude that the shock triggered by 
the tariff surge had no effect on global growth? That 
would be both premature and incorrect.
Premature because the US effective tariff rate 
remains high (at about 19 percent), and trade tensions 
continue to cast a shadow over the global economy, 
with trade policy uncertainty remaining high. The 
effect of these tensions could well increase over time as 
firms gradually pass the tariffs on to customers as trade 
is rerouted more permanently and the global econ-
omy gradually becomes less efficient. Past experience 
suggests that it may take a long time before the full 
picture emerges. 
Incorrect because other important forces, besides 
trade policy, are shaping a complex outlook. In 
the United States, stricter immigration policies are 
reducing the labor supplied by foreign-born workers, 
another negative supply shock. Yet, so far, this has been 
offset by a roughly equivalent decline in labor demand, 
coming from a cyclical cooling after many years of 
strong job growth. This leaves the labor market in a 
precarious balance, with a mostly unchanged unem-
ployment rate. Second, financial conditions remain 
very accommodative, with a dollar that has lost some 
of its strength. And third, we are witnessing a strong 
boom in artificial intelligence (AI)–related investment 
coupled with a modestly expansionary fiscal policy 
in 2026. These demand forces are supporting output 
while adding to the price pressures from the tariffs.
In the rest of the world, other drivers besides 
tariffs—both temporary and structural—are at play 
too. In China, the country hardest hit by US tariffs, 
growth is projected to decline only modestly, owing 
to a sharp depreciation of the real effective exchange 
rate, a front-loaded surge in exports toward Asian and 
European partners, and some fiscal expansion. In the 
euro area, fiscal expansion in Germany has played a 
role in boosting growth in 2025. Emerging market and 
developing economies have benefited from easier finan-
cial conditions, on the back of a depreciated dollar. 
They have also continued to demonstrate significant 
resilience, in part because of strong and improving 
policy frameworks, a theme explored in Chapter 2. 
Incorrect also because, despite the offsets from 
other drivers, the tariff shock is dimming lackluster 
growth prospects. Global growth is projected to slow 
in the second half of this year, with only a partial 
recovery next year. Compared with the projections in 
the October 2024 WEO, this results in a cumulative 
global output loss of about 0.2 percent by the end of 
2026. In the US, growth is revised down and inflation 
is revised up compared with last year’s projections, 
clearly suggesting a negative supply shock. 
Thus, despite a steady first half, the outlook remains 
insufficiently bright, with risks tilted to the downside. 
These are some of the risks that are key to the balance 
of the evolving outlook: 
First, the current AI boom presents some parallels 
with the dot-com boom of the late 1990s. Market 
optimism about a new technology—the internet 
then, AI now—is pushing up stock valuations, fueling 
FOREWORD
FOREWORD
xiii
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
a tech-centered investment boom, and sustaining 
consumption on the back of strong capital gains. This 
could push the neutral interest rate up. Should the 
AI boom continue unabated, the risk is that demand 
pressures accentuate further, requiring tighter policies. 
Indeed, between June 1999 and May 2000, the Federal 
Reserve needed to raise its policy rate by a cumulative 
175 basis points to contain inflationary pressures. 
But the risk is also that lofty profit expectations will 
ultimately be unmet—as often happens when new 
general-purpose technologies are introduced. A signif-
icant market repricing, explored in more detail in the 
October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report, could 
impact aggregate wealth and consumption and spill 
over to broader financial markets.
Second, China’s prospects remain weak. More than 
four years after the property bubble burst, the sector 
has still not been put on a firm footing. Real estate 
investment continues to shrink while the economy 
teeters on the verge of a debt-deflation cycle. Even 
more concerning, it is difficult to see how the strong 
contribution of manufacturing exports to the country’s 
growth can be sustained. The signs are mounting that 
large-scale subsidies to the manufacturing sector have 
reached their limit and are contributing to significant 
misallocation of resources in the economy. This is 
evident in the contrast between strong productivity 
gains in some key industrial sectors, such as electric 
vehicles and solar panels, and the absence of aggregate 
productivity gains. As documented in Chapter 3, while 
industrial policy is increasingly used by countries to 
reshape their economies, this often comes with many 
fiscal and hidden costs.
Third, countries need to seriously address the 
strains on their public finances. With lower growth 
prospects, higher real interest rates, more elevated 
debt levels, and new spending needs for some coun-
tries on items such as defense or national security, 
the fiscal equation is becoming more challenging to 
solve and leaves countries vulnerable, should a large 
external shock occur. All major advanced econo-
mies saw their spreads rise during the April sell-off, 
and only a handful of safe haven countries, such as 
Switzerland, experienced a pronounced fall in lon-
ger-term yields—reflecting broader fiscal concerns in 
core bond markets. Low-income countries are even 
more vulnerable, given reduced official aid flows. For 
a rising number of countries, the lack of job opportu-
nities could quickly translate into rising social unrest, 
especially among an unemployed and disenfranchised 
young population.
Fourth, we are witnessing increased pressure on 
policy-setting institutions such as central banks. 
Should these pressures succeed, many of the hard-won 
credibility gains achieved in policymaking over many 
decades could be lost. Trust in central banks and in 
their ability to deliver price stability allows inflation 
expectations to remain well anchored even when the 
economy is hit by large shocks, such as during the 
recent cost-of-living crisis, as previous WEO reports 
have documented. 
While downside risks dominate, all is not gloomy. A 
few important upside risks could quickly brighten the 
outlook. First, resolving and reducing policy uncer-
tainty would provide a significant lift to the global 
economy. The October 2025 WEO shows that a 
material decrease in global economic policy uncertainty 
as a result of clearer and more stable bilateral and 
multilateral trade agreements can raise global output 
by 0.4 percent in the very near term. Lowering tariffs 
based on these agreements adds even more upside, of 
about 0.3 percent. Second, AI, beyond its effects on 
investment, could well improve total factor produc-
tivity. This WEO report finds that, under modest 
assumptions, this factor could add another 0.4 percent 
to global output in the near term. 
This reiterates that policies can and should help 
restore confidence and predictability, which would 
improve growth prospects. For trade policy, the 
objective should be to update trade rules to reflect the 
changing nature of trade relations, looking to deepen 
trade relations where possible. 
Fiscal policy should aim to reduce fiscal vulnerabili-
ties gradually and credibly. Improving the efficiency of 
public spending is key and can help address crowding 
in private investment, as discussed in the October 
2025 Fiscal Monitor. Monetary policy should remain 
tailored and transparent. Preserving the independence 
of monetary policy institutions is a precondition for 
macroeconomic stability. Technocratic institutions 
should be allowed to focus on their core mandate and 
provided with the tools to do so, including in terms of 
data provision. 
Efforts to improve longer-term prospects must 
continue. While macroeconomic stability is a necessary 
precondition, governments should ensure that private 
entrepreneurs can innovate, thrive, and generate the 
growth of tomorrow. While it might be tempting to 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
xiv
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
implement sectoral industrial policies, the evidence 
suggests that their effectiveness can be very limited 
and the side effects considerable. The use of horizon-
tal policies should instead be preferred: investment in 
education, public research, public infrastructure, good 
governance, financial and macroeconomic stability, and 
a regulatory environment that balances carefully the 
need for flexibility and innovation in the private sector 
and the need to contain risks. 
Finally, work to strengthen the multilateral frame-
works and institutions that have helped deliver 
considerable gains over the past decades must continue. 
If anything, an important reason for global resilience 
so far is also that most countries have exercised 
restraint in trade policy retaliation, have sought to 
forge better trade deals, and are still operating under 
well-established global trading norms. The recent geo-
political tensions highlight how the need for an adap-
tive and pragmatic multilateral system is even greater 
than before. Because while it is easy to focus on the 
short-term costs and interests, cooperation in the face 
of global challenges remains the bedrock upon which to 
build a more prosperous and resilient global economy.
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas 
Economic Counsellor
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
xv
The rules of the global economy are in flux. Details 
of newly introduced policy measures are slowly coming 
into focus, and growth prospects are shifting along 
with them. After the United States introduced higher 
tariffs starting in February, subsequent deals and resets 
have tempered some extremes. But uncertainty about 
the stability and trajectory of the global economy 
remains acute. Meanwhile, substantial cuts to inter-
national development aid and new restrictions on 
immigration have been rolled out in some advanced 
economies. Several major economies have adopted a 
more stimulative fiscal stance, raising concerns about 
the sustainability of public finances and possible 
cross-border spillovers. The world’s economies, institu-
tions, and markets have been adjusting to a landscape 
marked by greater protectionism and fragmentation, 
with dim medium-term growth prospects and calling 
for a recalibration of macroeconomic policies.
At the onset of trade policy shifts and the surge in 
uncertainty, the April 2025 World Economic Outlook 
(WEO) revised the 2025 global growth projection 
downward by 0.5 percentage point to 2.8 percent. 
This was predicated on tariffs being supply shocks for 
tariff-imposing countries and demand shocks for the 
targeted, with uncertainty being a negative demand 
shock all around. By July, announcements that lowered 
tariffs from their April highs prompted a modest 
upward revision to 3.0 percent. Inflation projections, 
while little changed overall, went up for the United 
States and down for many other economies. 
After a resilient start, the global economy is showing 
signs of a moderate slowdown, as predicted. Incoming 
data in the first half of 2025 showed robust activity. 
Inflation in Asian economies was subdued, while it 
remained steady in the United States. This apparent 
resilience, however, seems to be largely attributable to 
temporary factors—such as front-loading of trade and 
investment and inventory management strategies—
rather than to fundamental strength. As these factors 
fade, weaker data are surfacing. The front-loading 
is unwinding, and labor markets are softening. 
Pass-through of tariffs to US consumer prices, pre-
viously muted, appears increasingly likely. Advanced 
economies, traditionally reliant on immigration, are 
seeing sharp declines in net labor inflows, with impli-
cations for potential output.
Global growth is projected to slow from 3.3 percent 
in 2024 to 3.2 percent in 2025 and to 3.1 percent 
in 2026. This is an improvement relative to the July 
WEO Update—but cumulatively 0.2 percentage point 
below forecasts made before the policy shifts in the 
October 2024 WEO, with the slowdown reflecting 
headwinds from uncertainty and protectionism, even 
though the tariff shock is smaller than originally 
announced. On an end-of-year basis, global growth is 
projected to slow down from 3.6 percent in 2024 to 
2.6 percent in 2025. Advanced economies are fore-
cast to grow about 1½ percent in 2025–26, with the 
United States slowing to 2.0 percent. Emerging market 
and developing economies are projected to moderate to 
just above 4.0 percent. Inflation is expected to decline 
to 4.2 percent globally in 2025 and to 3.7 percent in 
2026, with notable variation: above-target inflation in 
the United States—with risks tilted to the upside—
and subdued inflation in much of the rest of the 
world. World trade volume is forecast to grow at an 
average rate of 2.9 percent in 2025–26—boosted by 
front-loading in 2025 yet still much slower than the 
3.5 percent growth rate in 2024—with persistent trade 
fragmentation limiting gains.
Risks to the outlook remain tilted to the downside, 
as they were in previous WEO reports. Prolonged 
policy uncertainty could dampen consumption 
and investment. Further escalation of protectionist 
measures, including nontariff barriers, could suppress 
investment, disrupt supply chains, and stifle produc-
tivity growth. Larger-than-expected shocks to labor 
supply, notably from restrictive immigration policies, 
could reduce growth, especially in economies facing 
aging populations and skill shortages. Fiscal vulner-
abilities and financial market fragilities may interact 
with rising borrowing costs and increased rollover 
risks for sovereigns. An abrupt repricing of tech stocks 
could be triggered by disappointing results on earnings 
and productivity gains related to artificial intelligence 
(AI), marking an end to the AI investment boom and 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
xvi
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
the associated exuberance of financial markets, with 
the possibility of broader implications for macrofi-
nancial stability. Pressure on the independence of key 
economic institutions, such as central banks, could 
erode hard-earned policy credibility and undermine 
sound economic decision making, including as a 
result of reduced data reliability. Commodity price 
spikes—stemming from climate shocks or geopo-
litical tensions—pose additional risks, especially for 
low-income, commodity-importing countries. On the 
upside, a breakthrough in trade negotiations could 
lower tariffs and reduce uncertainty. Renewed reform 
momentum in an effort to navigate the intensifying 
challenges could give a boost to medium-term growth. 
Faster productivity growth because of AI could bring 
economy-wide gains. 
The task ahead is to restore confidence through 
credible, predictable, and sustainable policy actions. 
Policymakers should establish clear, transparent, and 
rules-based trade policy road maps to reduce uncer-
tainty and support investment and to reap the pro-
ductivity and growth benefits that more trade brings. 
Trade rules should be modernized for the digital age 
and offer opportunities for stronger multilateral coop-
eration. Pairing trade diplomacy with macroeconomic 
adjustment is crucial for correcting persistent external 
imbalances by addressing their underlying causes and 
securing lasting gains. Rebuilding fiscal buffers and 
safeguarding debt sustainability remain a priority. 
Medium-term fiscal consolidation should involve 
realistic, balanced plans that combine spending ratio-
nalization and revenue generation. Any new support 
measures should be temporary, well-targeted, and offset 
by clear savings. Monetary policy should be calibrated 
to balance price stability and growth risks, in line with 
central banks’ mandates. Preserving the independence 
of central banks remains critical for anchoring infla-
tion expectations and enabling them to achieve their 
mandates. As Chapter 2 shows, past actions to improve 
policy frameworks have served emerging market and 
developing economies well in increasing resilience 
to risk-off shocks. Countries should embrace reform 
without any further delay to enhance resilience as a 
new global economic landscape takes shape. Efforts 
on structural reforms—promoting labor mobility, 
encouraging workforce participation, investing in dig-
italization, and strengthening institutions—should be 
redoubled now to lift growth prospects. As Chapter 3 
demonstrates, industrial policy may have a role in 
improving resilience and growth, but full consideration 
should be given to opportunity costs and trade-offs 
involved in its use. For low-income countries, mobiliz-
ing domestic resources, including through governance 
and administrative reforms, is essential as external aid 
declines. In times of uncertainty, scenario planning and 
predesigned policy playbooks can improve prepared-
ness and credibility, ensuring that policy responses are 
both effective and timely.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
1
A New Global Economic Landscape 
Slowly Takes Shape
The year 2025 has been fluid and volatile, with 
much of the dynamics driven by a reordering of policy 
priorities in the United States and the adaptation of 
policies in the other economies to new realities. Trade 
news has dominated the headlines, and, along with 
them, perceived prospects for the global economy have 
fluctuated. As observed in the April 2025 World Eco-
nomic Outlook (WEO), a series of new tariff measures 
by the United States lifted tariff rates to levels not seen 
in a century. Countermeasures by US trading partners 
were limited, barely moving the effective tariff rate 
on US exports. A flurry of announcements followed, 
including trade deals between the United States and 
several of its trading partners and a reset to higher 
tariff rates for countries without a trade deal (see the 
WTO-IMF Tariff Tracker for a summary). As a whole, 
the announcements brought down the US effective 
tariff rates from their April highs, gravitating toward 
a range between 10 percent and 20 percent for most 
countries (Figure 1.1). Nonetheless, tariffs are very far 
from falling back to their 2024 levels. Trade policy 
uncertainty remains elevated in the absence of clear, 
transparent, and durable agreements among trading 
partners—and with attention starting to shift from 
the eventual level of tariffs to their impact on prices, 
investment, and consumption (Figure 1.2).
There have also been changes in other policy 
domains. On the international side, sizable cuts in 
development aid and more restrictive stances on 
immigration have been introduced. Official develop-
ment assistance dropped by 9 percent in 2024 and, 
based on announced cuts by major donors, a drop 
of similar magnitude is expected in 2025 (OECD 
2025). Low-income developing countries face the 
largest impact, although with different effects among 
members of this group. Meanwhile, net migration into 
several advanced economies that have been traditional 
recipients of migrant inflows has declined sharply. On 
the domestic side, in major economies—most notably, 
the United States—a shift toward a more stimula-
tive fiscal stance, including from changes in defense 
spending in some cases, has also raised concerns about 
the lack of adjustment toward more sustainable public 
finances and has broad cross-border spillovers. Mean-
while, progress on long-overdue growth-enhancing 
structural reforms continues to be stalled.
As the new landscape takes shape, the world is 
adapting. The evolution of WEO projections painted 
a picture of a significant, though not massive, impact 
of shifting policies on the economic outlook. The tariff 
shock in April and the associated uncertainty with 
which it unfolded prompted a downward revision of 
the global growth projection for 2025, by 0.5 percent-
age point to 2.8 percent, in the April 2025 WEO. 
In the July 2025 WEO Update, it was mainly the 
lowering of tariff rates and the implications thereof for 
uncertainty and financial conditions that drove a mod-
est 0.2 percentage point upward revision of the 2025 
global growth projection to 3.0 percent. Global infla-
tion projections were revised little in April and July, 
but revisions in different directions across countries 
offset each other. Specifically, inflation forecasts were 
revised upward in the United States but downward in 
many other jurisdictions, consistent with the expec-
tation that the shifting international trade landscape 
would imply a supply shock in the tariffing country 
and a demand shock in the tariffed countries.
To date, more protectionist trade measures have 
had a limited impact on economic activity and prices. 
Growth held up in the first half of the year, with year-
over-year quarterly annualized growth rates persisting 
at about 3½ percent. Inflation has shown more mixed 
signals. Globally, sequential headline and core inflation 
edged up. Relative to WEO projections, inflation read-
ings surprised on the upside in Mexico and the United 
Kingdom. By contrast, inflation in India, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, and Thailand surprised on the downside. 
In China, inflation developments were broadly in 
line with expectations, with consumer price inflation 
remaining at very low levels and producer price infla-
tion continuing to be negative. In the United States, 
headline inflation held steady, driven by moderating 
price increases in core services and with disinflationary 
dynamics in goods prices receding.
CHAPTER
1
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
2
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The unexpected resilience in activity and muted 
inflation response reflect—in addition to the fact that 
the tariff shock has turned out to be smaller than 
originally announced—a range of factors that provide 
temporary relief, rather than underlying strength in 
economic fundamentals. Households and businesses 
front-loaded their consumption and investment in 
anticipation of higher tariffs. This gave a temporary 
boost to global activity in early 2025. Trade flows 
started adjusting, with diversion to third countries cap-
tured in high-frequency data. At the same time, imple-
mentation delays in newly announced tariffs allowed 
firms to postpone price increases, as they waited for 
clarity on when and by how much tariffs on certain 
goods from certain countries would increase. Inventory 
buildup and its subsequent drawdown, presales, orders 
put on hold or goods placed in bonded warehouses, 
and infrequent pricing because of long-term contracts 
also slowed the pace of pass-through of rising costs 
(Bauer, Haltom, and Martin 2025). Healthy profit 
margins in the wake of the inflation surge following 
the COVID-19 pandemic provided buffers for 
suppliers in source countries and importers in desti-
nation countries to absorb the higher tariffs. Rather 
than appreciating, as happened in previous episodes 
of trade tensions, the US dollar depreciated, reflecting 
increased hedging demand by non-US investors and a 
potential market reassessment of the dollar’s bull run 
over the past decade (October 2025 Global Financial 
Stability Report). While a weaker dollar amplified the 
tariff shock, it also supported global trade, contributed 
to favorable global financial conditions, and eliminated 
inflationary pressure from exchange rate pass-through, 
hence providing policymakers (especially those in 
emerging market and developing economies) with 
room to support their economies.
There are increasing signs that the adverse effects of 
protectionist measures are starting to show. Patterns 
in net exports and inventories driven by front-loading 
behavior have largely reversed. Core inflation has risen 
in the United States, and unemployment has edged 
up. Inflation is stabilizing above central bank targets 
in several other countries, and inflation expectations 
are still fragile, worsening the trade-offs for monetary 
policymakers as uncertainty and tariffs start weighing 
on activity.
As the global economy slides into a more frag-
mented landscape, risks to the outlook increase. The 
tactics that keep activity seemingly resilient in the 
short term, such as trade diversion and rerouting, 
are costly. Suboptimal reallocation of productive 
resources, technological decoupling, and limitations 
on knowledge diffusion are bound to restrain growth 
over the longer term. More restrictive stances on the 
cross-border flow of labor add to pressure on coun-
tries already facing challenges from aging populations 
End 2024
April 2025 WEO
July 2025 WEO Update
October 2025 WEO
Figure 1.1.  US Effective Tariff Rates by Country
(Percent)
Sources: US International Trade Commission; WTO-IMF Tariff Tracker; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The effective tariff rate is a weighted average of announced statutory rates. 
MENA  = Middle East and North Africa; WEO = World Economic Outlook; WTO = World 
Trade Organization.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
China
India
Türkiye
Brazil
Japan
European Union
United Kingdom
Canada
Mexico
World
MENA
Sub-Saharan Africa
World Uncertainty Index (WUI)
EPU (right scale)
TPU (right scale)
Figure 1.2.  Overall, Economic Policy, and Trade Policy 
Uncertainty
(Index)
Sources: Ahir, Bloom, and Furceri 2022; Caldara and others 2020; Davis 2016; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: The uncertainty measures are news- and media-outlet-based indices that quantify 
media attention to global news related to overall uncertainty (WUI), economic policy 
uncertainty (EPU), and trade policy uncertainty (TPU).
0
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000
120,000
Jan.
2015
Jan.
17
Jan.
19
Jan.
21
Jan.
23
Aug.
25
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
3
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
(see Chapter 2 of the April 2025 WEO) and would 
entail output declines on a global scale over the longer 
term (Chapter 3 of the April 2025 WEO). Dim 
medium-term growth prospects amplify concerns 
about fiscal sustainability. The scaling back of interna-
tional aid worsens these dynamics for the most vulner-
able countries while eroding standards of living and, 
paradoxically, strengthening incentives for migration in 
source countries.
Recent Developments: Resilience Giving 
Way to Warning Signs
Slowing Activity
The global economy has shown resilience to the 
trade policy shocks, including because these shocks 
materialized on a smaller scale than expected at their 
onset, but the drag from shifting policies is becoming 
visible in more recent data. There have been several 
common drivers of growth patterns across countries 
but also some important idiosyncratic factors.
The last round of tariffs came in as the US economy 
started to show signs of a material slowdown. GDP 
grew at an annualized 3.8 percent in the second quar-
ter of 2025, but mainly because imports and inven-
tories fully reversed the outturn observed in the first 
quarter, which had seen a contraction of –0.6 percent. 
Investment slowed, with a reduction in spending on 
commercial and residential construction and broader 
weakness masked by a surge in spending on equip-
ment and intellectual property, including those related 
to AI. The jobs reports since July were much weaker 
than expected, with significant decline in the number 
of jobs added. The unemployment rate edged up to 
4.3 percent in August. Signs of slowing activity and 
a weakening labor market appeared in the context 
of ongoing shifts in labor supply. Net international 
migration flows plunged in the first half of 2025 and, 
if the current trends continue, it could imply about 
1.0–1.6 million fewer immigrants than in 2024 and 
2.5 million fewer than in 2023 (Duzhak and New-
Schmidt 2025).
Other major economies are showing signs of waning 
of the front-loading that drove stronger-than-expected 
outcomes in the first quarter of 2025. Growth in 
China in the second quarter slowed to 4.2 percent 
from 6.1 percent in the first quarter (based on staff 
seasonally adjusted estimates), with the contribution of 
net exports receding. This partly offset the acceleration 
in domestic demand, possibly driven by policy stimu-
lus. High-frequency indicators point to a deceleration 
in economic activity in July and August. In the 
euro area, GDP growth slowed to 0.5 percent, from 
2.3 percent in the first quarter. Declines in growth 
rates were recorded in Germany and Italy, as well as 
in Ireland, which had disproportionately contributed 
to euro area growth in the first quarter, with export 
performance driven by pharmaceutical sector transac-
tions, partly as a result of front-loading. In Japan, the 
economy grew at an annualized rate of 2.2 percent in 
the second quarter, accelerating from 0.3 percent in 
the first quarter. In addition to solid capital spending, 
this was propelled by strong exports, especially of cars. 
However, new export orders fell in July, for the first 
time since December, and export values dropped, led 
by sectors most affected by tariffs.
The composition of contributions to GDP growth 
in major economies indicates few signs of underlying 
strength in demand. It clearly illustrates the distortions 
in trade flows in the past few quarters (Figure 1.3). 
Importantly, consumption growth has been subdued 
in all key jurisdictions. And investment has weakened, 
notwithstanding bursts of activity before the tariff 
news in April. This is broadly in line with depressed 
consumer and business confidence (Figure 1.4).
Beyond China, emerging market and developing 
economies more broadly showed strength, some-
times because of particular domestic reasons, but 
recent signals point to a fragile outlook there as well. 
Growth for the group of emerging market economies 
excluding China was stronger than expected in the 
first half of 2025, thanks in part to record agricul-
tural output in Brazil, robust service sector expansion 
in India, and resilient domestic demand in Türkiye. 
The stronger-than-expected economic performance 
adds to a more general trend of resilience in emerging 
markets, which originates in improvements in domes-
tic institutions and favorable external conditions (see 
Chapter 2). However, external conditions are becom-
ing more challenging, and in some cases, domestic 
momentum is slowing. For instance, in Brazil, signs 
of moderation are appearing amid tight monetary and 
fiscal policies. Higher tariffs imposed by the United 
States are curtailing external demand, with profound 
implications for several large export-oriented econ-
omies, while heightened trade policy uncertainty is 
dampening firms’ appetite for investment. At the same 
time, constrained fiscal space is reducing governments’ 
ability to stimulate domestic demand where needed. 
Among the group of low-income countries, some of 
the world’s poorest economies continue to see feeble 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
4
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
growth—about 2 percentage points lower than other 
peers in this group—adversely affected by a dearth 
of external financing flows and cuts to international 
aid. Other fragile countries, caught up in internal 
or regional conflicts, are falling even more behind 
(Chabert and Powell 2025).
Renewed economic fears, especially in the United 
States, briefly set a risk-off tone in financial markets 
(October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report). 
Global equity indices declined in early August fol-
lowing the US jobs report, and US Treasury yields 
plunged. Still, these movements were reversed quickly. 
Equity prices rallied in one of the fastest recoveries on 
record. At least so far, markets have taken the changes 
in trade and fiscal policies mostly in stride, despite 
recent steepening of the US yield curve. Global finan-
cial conditions remain accommodative by historical 
standards. Much of the year’s equity market gains has 
come from a rally in artificial intelligence (AI) stocks. 
The stretched valuations and calm relative to the 
challenges raise the risk of market volatility and asset 
price correction should uncertainty start biting and 
Private consumption
Public consumption
Investment
Net exports
GDP growth
Figure 1.3.  Contributions to Quarterly GDP Growth
(Percent, quarter over quarter, annualized)
1. UnitedStates
2023:Q1
23:Q3
24:Q1
24:Q3
25:Q2
2023:Q1
23:Q3
24:Q1
24:Q3
25:Q2
2023:Q1
23:Q3
24:Q1
24:Q3
25:Q2
2023:Q1
23:Q3
24:Q1
24:Q3
25:Q2
2. Euro Area
3. Japan
4. China
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figures are calculated using seasonally adjusted series. Residuals are included in 
the investment contribution.
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
−8
−4
0
4
8
12
United States
China
Euro area
ROW
Figure 1.4.  Consumer and Business Confidence
(Index, OECD harmonized)
1. Consumer Confidence
Sources: OECD; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: An indicator above 100 signals a boost in confidence; below 100 indicates 
a pessimistic view. The rest of the world (ROW) represents the average value for 
data across 22 economies. OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development.
2. Business Confidence
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
106
Jan.
2014
Jan.
16
Jan.
18
Jan.
20
Jan.
22
Jan.
24
Jan.
2014
Jan.
16
Jan.
18
Jan.
20
Jan.
22
Jan.
24
Aug.
25
Aug.
25
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
106
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
5
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
economic indicators, including productivity gains from 
generative AI investments, start to disappoint. The 
decline in aggregate investment could be rather sharp, 
given that investment in data centers and AI was a 
significant contributor to investment growth recently.
Uncertainty Impact Still in the Pipeline
Several factors explain why the impact of higher 
uncertainty may have been delayed or mitigated. 
Uncertainty, acting as a negative demand shock, typ-
ically starts weighing on activity almost immediately. 
Its effect continues to build over time and eventually 
disappears as uncertainty lifts. Empirical estimates 
suggest that a one-standard-deviation increase in 
economic policy uncertainty leads to a 2 percent drop 
in investment, peaking about two years after the shock 
and fading in about three years (Londono, Ma, and 
Wilson 2025). Estimates for trade policy uncertainty 
range between 0.7 percent and 2 percent, peaking in 
the first couple of quarters and fading in the second 
year. So far, at the current juncture, the behavior of 
investment seems to be on the upper end of standard 
confidence bands.
There are two main channels through which the 
negative effects of uncertainty materialize. First, under 
the classic real-options mechanism (Bernanke 1983), 
firms defer irreversible projects when the outlook is 
clouded because waiting is cheaper than committing 
to a potentially costly mistake. Households display a 
similar pattern, postponing durable purchases while 
maintaining spending on essentials. A second chan-
nel operates through precautionary behavior. When 
perceived income risk increases, households save more, 
thereby softening consumption growth (Bansal and 
Yaron 2004).
Yet these need not translate into weaker output in the 
near term. Front-loading to avoid what potentially will 
be higher prices resulting from future tariffs is a clear 
force temporarily offsetting the wait-and-see and pre-
cautionary motives. At the same time, firms may choose 
to keep prices unchanged and absorb higher costs in 
margins to retain their customer base while waiting 
for uncertainty to lift. Strategic complementarities—
whereby pricing decisions of one firm strengthen the 
incentive for other firms to take similar action—may 
reinforce such short-term stickiness in prices.
The Brexit experience is a case in point. Measures of 
uncertainty rose sharply before the 2016 referendum. 
Business investment continued to grow in the period 
immediately following the UK’s withdrawal from the 
European Union and started to fall steadily only begin-
ning in 2018 (BOE 2019).
Tariff uncertainty moves activity mainly across 
time—front-loading provides a brief offset, but once it 
fades, uncertainty acts as a drag on demand. To illus-
trate the mechanisms in play, tariff-uncertainty shocks 
are examined in isolation from tariffs themselves in 
an open-economy New Keynesian model (Ghironi 
and Ozhan, forthcoming). Two exercises consider 
temporary increases in uncertainty about import 
tariffs (Figure 1.5). In the first exercise (solid lines), 
uncertainty rises on impact. Given a wider distribution 
of tariffs, agents try to avoid potentially larger price 
changes by front-loading imports, temporarily lifting 
output. Faced with uncertainty about costs, firms raise 
prices to protect margins, generating a small, short-
lived increase in consumer price inflation. Once the 
front-loading effect fades, uncertainty operates like a 
negative demand shock—activity softens and inflation 
eases as firms compress margins.
Output
Imports
Figure 1.5.  Impulse Responses to a Tariff-Uncertainty Shock
(Percent deviations from the stochastic steady state)
1. Output and Imports
2. Inflation
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
−0.15
−0.10
−0.05
0
0.05
0.10
Quarter
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Quarter
−0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Sources: Ghironi and Ozhan, forthcoming; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows impulse responses of selected variables for the tariff-imposing 
economy to a tariff-uncertainty shock. Solid lines show a shock that materializes in the 
first quarter (”realized uncertainty”), and dashed lines show a news shock announced 
in the first quarter that materializes in the fourth quarter. Inflation is annualized.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
6
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
In the second exercise (dashed lines), agents receive 
news today that tariff uncertainty is going to rise 
later—akin to pauses or deadline extensions that push 
uncertainty into the future. Front-loading of imports 
is similar, but now it is motivated by anticipated larger 
potential price changes in the future rather than an 
immediate increase in the variation of costs. Because 
the timing of uncertainty is known (for example, the 
expiration of a pause, the date for a bilateral negotia-
tion meeting), firms can plan: They build inventories 
and reprice slowly. Hence, when uncertainty is known 
to increase in the future, inflation increases in gradual 
increments and may look like it is more stubborn than 
when uncertainty increases right away (though less 
pronounced in magnitude).
Rising Prices in the United States?
To date, the impact of tariffs and associated rewiring 
of supply chains on inflationary pressures remains 
muted. In the tariffing country—the United States—
headline and core inflation have ticked up only 
slightly (Figure 1.6). A deeper look into core inflation, 
however, reveals a more visible climb in core goods 
prices in the United States, but not in other countries 
(blue line in Figure 1.6, panel 3). Notably, this climb 
occurred at a time of persistent services inflation.
The muted response to date could also mean 
delayed pass-through. Indeed, stockpiling and tariff 
pauses, among other factors such as trade diversion 
and rerouting, mean that the actual effective tariff 
rate—that is, the actual duty paid on imports at 
customs as a share of the value of imports—lagged 
the effective rate based on the announcements and 
calculated as a weighted average of statutory rates using 
pre-substitution trade weights (Figure 1.7, panel 1). An 
examination of certain categories of goods suggests that 
very little of what would be expected to pass through 
to consumer prices has actually passed through so 
far (Figure 1.7, panel 2). Household appliances, for 
instance, have reflected the cost of tariffs, but many 
categories, including food and clothing, have not. 
High-frequency retail pricing data indicate that, in 
categories with exposure to tariffs, the prices of both 
imported and domestic goods are affected (Cavallo, 
Llamas, and Vazquez 2025). This suggests broader 
pricing and supply-chain spillovers. Although firms in 
the United States enjoyed higher profitability after the 
pandemic shock, they may not be able to absorb the 
cost increases that result from the tariff hikes and the 
United States
Euro area
Other AEs
China
Other EMDEs
Figure 1.6.  Global Inflation Trends
(Percent, year over year)
1. Headline Inflation
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Jan.
22
Jan.
23
Jan.
24
Jan.
25
Aug.
25
2. Core Inflation
−3
0
3
6
9
12
15
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Jan.
22
Jan.
23
Jan.
24
Jan.
25
Aug.
25
3. Core Goods Inflation
−3
0
3
6
9
12
15
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Jan.
22
Jan.
23
Jan.
24
Jan.
25
Aug.
25
4. Services Inflation
−3
0
3
6
9
12
15
Jan.
2019
Jan.
20
Jan.
21
Jan.
22
Jan.
23
Jan.
24
Jan.
25
Aug.
25
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 1 and 2 plot the median of a sample of 57 economies that account for 
78 percent of the 2024 world GDP (in weighted purchasing-power-parity terms) in 
the World Economic Outlook. The bands depict the 25th to 75th percentiles of data 
across economies. “Core inflation” is the percent change in the consumer price index 
for goods and services, excluding food and energy (or the closest available measure). 
AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
7
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
rewiring of global value chains and may, at some point, 
start to pass on cost increases to consumers (see also 
the October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report for 
an analysis of implications of higher tariffs for corpo-
rate earnings and debt-servicing capacity).
One crucial point about the assessment of recent 
price developments is the movement of the US dollar. 
A well-established finding regarding tariffs is that 
the currency of a tariff-imposing country appreciates 
(Mundell 1960; Jeanne and Son 2024). On the one 
hand, with the currency appreciation, the direct impact 
of tariffs on prices through higher import prices 
would be somewhat mitigated. On the other hand, 
prolonged currency appreciation could offset the direct 
improvement in trade balances from tariffs—hence 
leaving trade balances mostly unchanged—and hamper 
economic activity. This so-called exchange rate offset 
has been largely absent in the current episode, with the 
US dollar (the currency of the tariff-imposing country) 
weakening markedly in April and May and staying 
mostly stable at the weaker level since then, unlike 
in the 2018–19 episode (Figure 1.8, panel 1). Inter-
estingly, the aggregate US ex-tariff import price has 
remained broadly stable since April 2025 (Figure 1.8, 
panel 2).
The relative lack of movement in US import prices 
is set in the context of the notable increase in the 
average effective tariff rate and the sharp deprecia-
tion of the US dollar during this time. In a standard 
setting, the dollar appreciation boosts the margin of 
exporters, especially if they invoice in dollars, as is 
common practice. Hence, they have room to absorb 
some of the tariffs without a deterioration in profit-
ability. And, if they are absorbing the tariffs, import 
prices decline. This time around, the depreciation of 
the dollar makes matters more challenging. Under 
dominant currency pricing, a weaker dollar directly 
reduces the margin of exporters, separately from the 
tariffs. Furthermore, the universal nature of the tariffs 
may make margin reduction less likely, as exporters, 
who know their competitors are also tariffed, will be 
reluctant to cut margins.
The lack of a decline in import prices this time—at 
least to date—indicates that exporters on the whole 
have not absorbed tariffs through markups or export 
price adjustment, leaving US firms and households to 
bear the burden. But the aggregate price movements 
may mask important variations in US sectoral import 
prices, considering the varying intensity of tariffs across 
goods, as well as factors such as demand elasticity and 
pricing power. For instance, the US import price of 
capital goods has increased significantly, consistent 
with recovering some of the margin lost to deprecia-
tion of the US dollar, whereas that of automobiles—
in one of the hardest-hit sectors—has seen only a 
moderate increase since April. For exporting countries, 
some sectors appear to be more sensitive to tariffs than 
others in terms of export prices. For instance, in Japan 
the export price of standard passenger cars bound for 
North America has plummeted more than 20 percent, 
while that of cars bound for the rest of the world has 
remained stable, where both are invoiced in US dollars 
(Figure 1.8, panel 3). A similar pattern is observed for 
Eﬀective tariﬀ rate
Actual tariﬀ rate
Direct
Indirect
PCE prices Feb.–Jul. 2025
Figure 1.7.  Impact of Tariffs on Prices
1. US Global Tariff Rate
(Percent)
Sources: Haver Analytics; US International Trade Commission; WTO-IMF Tariff Tracker; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, actual tariff rate is the actual duty paid on imports at customs as 
a share of the value of imports, and the effective tariff rate is a weighted average of 
announced statutory rates using pre-tariff (hence, pre-substitution) import weights. 
Actual rate may be biased downward if a product is misclassified or under-invoiced 
or if tariffs are prohibitively high. In panel 2, the full pass-through is estimated using 
country- and product-specific tariffs and direct and indirect import intensities from 
the input-output tables and personal consumption expenditure (PCE) bridge. The 
estimates assume that margins are unchanged and there are no offsetting effects 
from factors such as the exchange rate. app. = appliances; cl. = clothing; equip. = 
equipment; HH = household; inst. = instruments; WTO = World Trade Organization.
2. Inflation Pass-Through
(Percent)
Jan.
2025
Feb.
25
Mar.
25
Apr.
25
May
25
Jun.
25
Jul.
25
Aug.
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Core goods
HH app.
Musical inst.
Luggage
Men’s cl.
Other cl.
Women’s cl.
Glassware
Therapeutic app.
Sporting equip.
Motor vehicles
Furniture
Jewelry
Sports vehicles
Children’s cl.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
8
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Korea’s automobile export prices. In contrast, export 
prices of German cars sold to non-EU countries have 
remained relatively stable so far. Exporters may not be 
able to maintain lower prices for much longer, given 
margin pressures. When firms’ pricing decisions are 
based on beliefs about when competitors will be raising 
prices, the price increases tend to be gradual, rather 
than a one-off jump. That said, an appreciation of the 
dollar—which has been range-bound recently—may 
put the exchange rate offset back in action to mitigate 
the impact of tariffs on US consumer prices.
Evolving External Balances
Global trade activity was robust in the first quarter 
of 2025, driven by strong growth in US imports and 
in exports from Asia and the euro area because of 
front-loading in anticipation of higher tariffs in the 
United States. Some of this strength could be related 
to a weaker dollar (Boz and others 2020). Subsequent 
higher-frequency data show signs of deceleration in 
the second quarter. Goods exports to the United 
States from major European economies—particularly 
Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom—have 
fallen notably. Total euro area exports remain resil-
ient, however, supported by larger trade flows within 
Europe. In China, the decline in exports to the United 
States has been partly offset by higher exports to the 
euro area and countries in the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN), in part supported by the 
depreciation of the renminbi against most currencies 
(excluding the US dollar). Bilateral trade decoupling 
between the United States and China appears to be 
happening sooner when compared with the 2018–19 
tariff shock (see Box 1.1).
Along with changes in the global trade landscape 
and other policy shifts, current account balances for 
the world’s largest economies have also evolved. The 
US current account deficit was 4.6 percent of GDP in 
the first half of 2025, 1.9 percentage points wider than 
the 2013–24 average, mainly reflecting an increase in 
goods imports. The euro area current account surplus 
stood at 1.9 percent of GDP in the first half of 2025 
compared with 3 percent over the same period in 2024 
and 2.3 percent during 2013–24, largely as a result 
of an increase in the primary income deficit. Current 
account surpluses stood at 3.2 percent of GDP in 
China and 4.7 percent of GDP in Japan, which are 
larger than in the same period of 2024 and when com-
pared with the historical averages during 2013–24.
While witnessing some improvement in the first 
quarter of 2025, the net international investment 
position (NIIP) of the United States has generally 
seen a stronger rise in US liabilities in recent years 
2018 tariﬀ episode: NEER
2025 tariﬀ episode: NEER
2018 tariﬀ episode: TOT
2025 tariﬀ episode: TOT
2018 tariﬀ episode
2025 tariﬀ episode
Export to North America
Export to rest of the world
Figure 1.8.  Tariﬀs, US Dollar, and Prices
(Index)
1. US NEER and Terms of Trade
3. Japanese Export Price: Standard Passenger Cars
2. US Import Prices Excluding Fuels
Sources: Bank of Japan; Federal Reserve Board; US Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: In panels 1 and 2, week and month 0 for the 2018 tariff episode correspond to 
the  week and month of July 6, when the US imposed a 25 percent tariff on $34 billion 
in Chinese goods, and China implemented a 25 percent tariff on $34 billion in US 
goods. For the 2025 tariff episode, week and month 0 correspond to April 4, following 
the April 2 “Liberation Day” announcement. In panel 2, the import prices include 
the transaction value of the goods and the value of services performed to deliver the 
goods from the border of the exporting country to the border of the importing country, 
hence they include cost, insurance, and freight but not tariffs. In panel 3, the base 
year is 2020, and the exports are recorded at border values. NEER = nominal effective 
exchange rate; TOT = terms of trade.
90
92
94
96
98
100
102
104
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
98
99
100
101
102
−6
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Weeks
Months
Jun.
2024
Sep.
24
Dec.
24
Mar.
25
Jun.
25
Aug.
25
80
90
100
110
120
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
9
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
as the economy continues to attract record inflows 
of foreign direct investment (April 2025 WEO), as 
well as inflows into equities and US Treasuries. By 
contrast, the euro area’s and Japan’s NIIP continue to 
see assets building faster than liabilities. For China, 
low-frequency trends indicate relative stability in the 
NIIP.
Policy Mix: Loose Fiscal and Divergent 
Monetary
Against the backdrop of slowing global growth and 
varying domestic inflation developments, policy space 
is constrained and vulnerabilities are high.
Fiscal policy remains too loose in many of the 
largest advanced and developing economies. Even 
though 2025 projected primary deficits in most cases 
are lower than the record-setting deficits of 2020–21, 
when large fiscal stimulus packages were deployed to 
counter the pandemic shock, they remain sizably larger 
than prior to the pandemic, except in Brazil and India 
(Figure 1.9, panel 1). In China, the fiscal policy stance 
remains appropriately expansionary, given the weakness 
in domestic demand, but marks a continued departure 
from the stance that is needed to avoid rising debt to 
GDP over the medium term.
Stabilizing debt to GDP at its 2024 level requires 
significant consolidation for most countries. In other 
words, given the projected primary balances for 2025, 
debt ratios are set to rise, and in some cases—Brazil, 
China, France, and the United States—significantly 
so. Further, globally, the level of debt under an 
extreme adverse scenario would be even higher (see 
assessment based on the debt-at-risk framework in the 
October 2024 Fiscal Monitor). Spending pressures from 
aging populations, defense, and energy security add to 
the risks, especially in Europe.
The calculus of postpandemic debt sustainability is 
complicated by elevated debt ratios, worsening primary 
balances, higher interest rates, and a weakening growth 
outlook. As policy rates were hiked in light of the 
inflation surge in 2021–22, interest rates at the short 
end of the yield curve were suddenly much higher 
and contributed significantly to the rising cost of debt 
servicing. Since the end of 2023, mid-segment yields 
and those at the long end have also crept upward 
(Figure 1.9, panel 2).
The overall rising cost of borrowing is a reason for 
concern—particularly given the significant refinanc-
ing requirements, as a share of GDP, for some of the 
largest economies (Figure 1.9, panel 3). In addition, 
increased reliance on financing through Treasury 
bills—short-term debt securities with maturity of one 
year or less—tends to shorten average debt maturity 
over time and increasingly exposes governments to 
refinancing risks or fluctuations in short-term interest 
rates. Emerging markets with weaker credit ratings and 
2015–19
2020–21
2025 (projected)
2025 (DSPB)
United States
Euro area
Japan
United Kingdom
Figure 1.9.  Fiscal Policy
1. Primary Balance
(Percent of GDP)
3. 2024 Debt Maturity and Short-Maturity Debt Financing
(Percent)
2. Real Long-Term Interest Rates
(Percent, year over year)
Sources: Consensus Economics; Eurostat; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the debt-stabilizing primary balance (DSPB) is calculated as the 
primary balance required to stabilize the debt given projected effective interest rate on 
debt and GDP growth, and accounting for stock-flow adjustments. In panel 2, the real 
long-term interest rate is calculated as the nominal yield on 10-year government bonds 
minus 10-year-ahead expected inflation from Consensus Economics. In panel 3, bubble 
size and labels refer to countries’ refinancing requirements as a share of GDP. Country 
labels in the figure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) codes. 
−12
−9
−6
−3
0
3
6
USA
GBR
FRA
DEU
ITA
BRA
IND
CHN
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
2015:
Q1 
17:
Q1
19:
Q1
21:
Q1
23:
Q1
25:
Q2
Share of Treasury bill issuance in
gross borrowing (percent)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Average term to maturity of outstanding debt (years)
USA (30.9)
GBR (7.0)
FRA (12.2)
DEU (7.1)
ITA (18.1)
JPN (26.2)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
10
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
low-income economies face challenging conditions in 
bond markets (Chapter 1 of the October 2025 Global 
Financial Stability Report).
Globally, monetary policy’s shift from aggressive 
tightening to a more nuanced stance leaning toward 
easing or neutral continues. In some of these countries 
where the fiscal policy stance is loosening, the mone-
tary policy rate is expected to remain steady. But the 
high uncertainty could prompt fluctuations in interest 
rates. Concerns about excessive market volatility arising 
from sovereign refinancing risks make it a challenge for 
central banks to maintain both price and financial sta-
bility (Chapter 2 of the October 2024 Global Financial 
Stability Report).
At the same time, monetary policy stances are 
bound to become more divergent. While this reflects 
differing inflation outlooks and central banks’ reaction 
to domestic economic developments within their man-
date, it may lead to sharp movements in exchange rates 
as markets reassess relative currency values.
The Outlook: Dim Prospects
Looking past apparent resilience resulting from 
trade-related distortions in some of the incoming data 
and whipsawing growth forecasts from wild swings 
in trade policies, the outlook for the global economy 
continues to point to dim prospects, both in the short 
and the long term.
Global Assumptions
The baseline forecasts are predicated on several pro-
jections for global commodity prices, interest rates, and 
fiscal and trade policies (Figure 1.10). Box 1.2 assesses 
the impact on growth and inflation of plausible devia-
tions from the baseline assumptions.
	• Commodity price projections: Prices of fuel commod-
ities are projected to decline in 2025 by 7.9 percent 
and in 2026 by 3.7 percent. This is driven by a 
decline in oil prices, although at a slower pace than 
assumed in the April 2025 WEO. The oil futures 
curve suggests that the petroleum spot price index 
is expected to average $68.90 a barrel in 2025 and 
decrease to $67.30 by 2030. Barring the temporary 
spike related to the Israel-Iran war in mid-June, 
prices have traded in the $60–$70 range estab-
lished since the start of the accelerated production 
schedule of OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries plus selected nonmember coun-
tries, including Russia) in April. Nonfuel commodity 
prices are projected to increase by 7.4 percent in 
2025 and by 4.1 percent in 2026. This implies a 
slightly lower path than assumed in April, driven 
by lower projected food and beverage prices, with 
Energy
Food and beverages
United States
Euro area
Japan
Figure 1.10.  Global Assumptions
1. Energy and Food Prices
(Index, 2024:Q4 = 100)
3. Fiscal Policy Projections
(Percentage points, change in ﬁscal balance)
2. Monetary Policy Projections
(Percent, quarterly average)
Source: IMF staﬀ calculations.
Note: In panels 1 and 2, solid lines denote projections from the October 2025 World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) and dashed lines those from the April 2025 WEO. In panel 3, 
the ﬁscal balance used is the general government structural primary balance in percent 
of potential GDP. The structural primary balance is the cyclically adjusted primary 
balance excluding net interest payments and corrected for a broader range of 
noncyclical factors such as changes in asset and commodity prices.
2024:
Q4
25:
Q4
26:
Q4
27:
Q4
28:
Q4
29:
Q4
2024:
Q4
25:
Q2
25:
Q4
26:
Q2
26:
Q4
2024
25
26
27
28
2024
25
26
27
28
Advanced economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−0.6
−0.3
0
0.3
0.6
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
11
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
wheat, rice, coffee, and cocoa prices retreating faster 
from their historical highs than previously forecast.
	• Monetary policy projections: Central banks in major 
jurisdictions are projected to take different paths in 
their policy rate decisions, reflecting differences in the 
extent of inflationary pressures. In the United States, 
the federal funds rate is projected to be reduced along 
a slightly more front-loaded path than expected in 
the April WEO, dropping to 3.50–3.75 percent at 
the end of 2025, still reaching its terminal range of 
2.75–3.0 percent around the end of 2028. In the 
euro area, policy rates are expected to hold steady at 
2 percent, which is broadly the same as that projected 
in April. In Japan, policy rates are expected to be 
lifted, along broadly the same path as that assumed 
in April, gradually rising over the medium term 
toward a neutral setting of about 1.5 percent, consis-
tent with keeping inflation and inflation expectations 
anchored at the Bank of Japan’s 2 percent target.
	• Fiscal policy projections: Advanced economies as a 
group are expected to maintain a broadly neutral 
fiscal policy stance, which marks a significant depar-
ture from the tighter fiscal policy stance assumed 
in the April 2025 WEO. In the United States, the 
general government fiscal-balance-to-GDP ratio is 
expected to deteriorate by 0.5 percentage point in 
2026, largely reflecting the passage of the One Big 
Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) and despite an offset of 
about 0.7 percentage point of GDP from projected 
tariff revenues. The fiscal balance is projected to 
worsen in the euro area—including a 0.8 per-
centage point widening of the deficit in Germany 
resulting from increased spending on infrastructure 
and military capability. Under current policies, US 
public debt fails to stabilize, rising from 122 percent 
of GDP in 2024 to 143 percent of GDP in 2030, 
15 percentage points higher than projected in April. 
In the euro area, the debt-to-GDP ratio is expected 
to reach 92 percent in 2030, up from 87 percent in 
2024. By contrast, governments in emerging market 
and developing economies, on average, are projected 
to modestly tighten fiscal policy in 2026 by about 
0.2 percentage point of GDP, reversing the widening 
expected in 2025. In China, the deficit is expected 
to narrow slightly through 2030, following a wid-
ening of 1.2 percentage points in 2025. Public debt 
in emerging market and developing economies con-
tinues to rise, reaching 82 percent of GDP in 2030, 
compared with just under 70 percent in 2024.
	• Trade policy assumptions: Tariffs that have been 
announced and implemented as of the beginning of 
September are included in the baseline. These mea-
sures are assumed to remain in effect indefinitely, 
even when they are explicitly stated to have an expi-
ration date, meaning that pauses on higher tariffs 
are assumed to remain in place past their expiration 
dates and higher rates are assumed not to take effect. 
Trade policy uncertainty is assumed to remain ele-
vated through 2025 and 2026, including on account 
of the additional pause of higher tariffs between 
China and the United States through November and 
because legal proceedings are currently underway 
in the United States concerning use of the Interna-
tional Emergency Economic Powers Act as a legal 
basis for the imposition of tariffs.
Growth Forecast
Global growth is projected to decelerate from 
3.3 percent in 2024 to 3.2 percent in 2025 and to 
3.1 percent in 2026 (Table 1.1). On a fourth-quarter-
to-fourth-quarter basis, growth is projected to decline 
from 3.6 percent in 2024 to 2.6 percent in 2025 and 
recover to 3.3 percent in 2026. At market exchange 
rates, world output is projected to grow by 2.6 percent 
in both 2025 and 2026, slowing down from 2.8 per-
cent in 2024 (Table 1.2).
The growth forecast is little changed from the July 
2025 WEO Update, reflecting gradual adaptation to 
trade tensions, but is decisively below the prepan-
demic average of 3.7 percent. Looking at sequential 
growth from the second half of 2025 into 2026 gives 
a clearer picture by removing the distortion from 
front-loading in the first half of 2025: The global 
economy is projected to grow at an annualized average 
rate of 3.0 percent over these six quarters, a slowdown 
of 0.6 percentage point from the 3.6 percent average 
rate in 2024. The forecast for 2025–26 is also lower, 
by a cumulative 0.2 percentage point, than projected 
in the October 2024 WEO, before the major shifts in 
policy stances in key jurisdictions. Given the fluidity 
of trade policy assumptions during 2025, compari-
sons of current forecasts with those in the April 2025 
WEO or in the July 2025 WEO Update may obscure 
the direction the world economy has traveled. Hence, 
the forecasts are discussed in comparison with those 
in the October 2024 WEO, which provides a clearer 
picture.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
12
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Projections
Difference from July  
2025 WEO Update1
Difference from April  
2025 WEO1
2024
2025
2026
2025
2026
2025
2026
World Output
3.3
3.2
3.1
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.1
Advanced Economies
1.8
1.6
1.6
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
United States 
2.8
2.0
2.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.4
Euro Area
0.9
1.2
1.1
0.2
–0.1
0.4
–0.1
Germany
–0.5
0.2
0.9
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
France
1.1
0.7
0.9
0.1
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
Italy
0.7
0.5
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
Spain
3.5
2.9
2.0
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
Japan 
0.1
1.1
0.6
0.4
0.1
0.5
0.0
United Kingdom
1.1
1.3
1.3
0.1
–0.1
0.2
–0.1
Canada
1.6
1.2
1.5
–0.4
–0.4
–0.2
–0.1
Other Advanced Economies2
2.3
1.8
2.0
0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.3
4.2
4.0
0.1
0.0
0.5
0.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.3
5.2
4.7
0.1
0.0
0.7
0.1
China
5.0
4.8
4.2
0.0
0.0
0.8
0.2
India3
6.5
6.6
6.2
0.2
–0.2
0.4
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.5
1.8
2.2
0.0
0.0
–0.3
0.1
Russia
4.3
0.6
1.0
–0.3
0.0
–0.9
0.1
Latin America and the Caribbean 
2.4
2.4
2.3
0.2
–0.1
0.4
–0.1
Brazil
3.4
2.4
1.9
0.1
–0.2
0.4
–0.1
Mexico
1.4
1.0
1.5
0.8
0.1
1.3
0.1
Middle East and Central Asia
2.6
3.5
3.8
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.3
Saudi Arabia
2.0
4.0
4.0
0.4
0.1
1.0
0.3
Sub-Saharan Africa 
4.1
4.1
4.4
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.2
Nigeria4
4.1
3.9
4.2
0.5
1.0
0.9
1.5
South Africa
0.5
1.1
1.2
0.1
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
2.8
2.6
2.6
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.2
European Union
1.1
1.4
1.4
0.1
0.0
0.2
–0.1
ASEAN-55
4.6
4.2
4.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.2
Middle East and North Africa
2.1
3.3
3.7
0.1
0.3
0.7
0.3
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.3
4.1
3.9
0.1
0.0
0.4
0.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.2
4.4
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.2
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
3.5
3.6
2.3
1.0
0.4
1.9
–0.2
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.1
3.1
1.3
0.7
0.3
1.2
–0.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.6
4.3
4.0
1.6
0.0
2.3
0.6
Exports
Advanced Economies
1.8
2.1
1.7
0.9
0.4
0.9
–0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.5
5.9
3.3
1.0
1.0
4.3
0.3
Commodity Prices
Oil6
–1.8
–12.9
–4.5
1.0
1.2
2.6
2.3
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import 
weights) 
3.7
7.4
4.1
–0.5
2.1
3.0
3.9
World Consumer Prices7
5.8
4.2
3.7
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.1
Advanced Economies8
2.6
2.5
2.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7
7.9
5.3
4.7
–0.1
0.2
–0.2
0.1
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during August 1, 2025–August 29, 2025. Economies are listed on 
the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1 Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2025 WEO Update, and April 2025 WEO forecasts. 
2 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3 For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a 
base year.
4 Nigeria’s national accounts data have been revised and rebased, with 2019 as the new base year. The rebasing provides an updated current view of the 
economy and the revisions increased the level of GDP by 40.8 percent in 2019.
5 Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
6 Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $79.17 in 2024; 
the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $68.92 in 2025 and $65.84 in 2026.
7 Excludes Venezuela. See the country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8 The assumed inflation rates for 2025 and 2026, respectively, are as follows: 2.1 percent and 1.9 percent for the euro area, 3.3 percent and 2.1 percent for 
Japan, and 2.7 percent and 2.4 percent for the United States.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
13
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Growth Forecast for Advanced Economies
For advanced economies, growth is projected to be 
1.6 percent in 2025 and 2026, both 0.2 percentage 
point lower than recorded in 2024 and projected in 
the October 2024 WEO.
	• In the United States, growth is projected to slow 
to 2.0 percent in 2025 and remain steady at 
2.1 percent in 2026, broadly the same as in July 
and an improvement relative to April on account 
of lower effective tariff rates, a fiscal boost from 
the passage of the OBBBA, and easing financial 
conditions. This projection marks a significant 
slowdown from 2024 as well as a cumulative 
downward revision of 0.1 percentage point relative 
to the October 2024 WEO and 0.7 percentage 
point relative to the January 2025 WEO Update. 
The downward revision is mainly a result of greater 
policy uncertainty, higher trade barriers, and lower 
growth in both the labor force and employment.
	• Growth in the euro area is expected to pick up mod-
estly to 1.2 percent in 2025 and to 1.1 percent in 
2026. While an improvement relative to April and 
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (continued)
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Q4 over Q49
Projections
Difference from July  
2025 WEO Update1
Difference from April  
2025 WEO1
2024
2025
2026
2025
2026
2025
2026
World Output
3.6
2.6
3.3
–0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
Advanced Economies
1.9
1.3
1.8
–0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
United States 
2.4
1.9
2.0
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.3
Euro Area
1.3
0.7
1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
Germany
–0.2
0.3
1.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.0
Italy
0.6
1.0
0.1
0.3
–0.9
0.2
–0.8
Spain
3.7
2.5
1.8
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.1
Japan 
1.3
0.2
1.1
0.4
0.3
0.6
–0.2
United Kingdom
1.5
1.4
1.4
–0.1
0.2
–0.3
0.5
Canada
2.3
0.5
2.3
–0.6
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
Other Advanced Economies2
2.1
1.2
2.8
–1.0
1.1
–1.0
1.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.9
3.7
4.4
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.4
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.9
4.5
5.3
0.0
0.1
0.5
0.6
China
5.4
3.7
5.0
–0.1
0.3
0.5
0.8
India3
7.4
6.0
6.2
–0.4
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.4
1.3
2.3
–0.2
0.3
–0.5
0.3
Russia
4.5
–0.5
0.5
–0.4
0.0
–0.9
–0.3
Latin America and the Caribbean 
2.4
2.1
2.6
0.2
–0.2
0.5
–0.2
Brazil
3.3
2.4
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.1
Mexico
0.4
1.5
1.7
1.2
–0.5
1.7
–0.3
Middle East and Central Asia
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
4.4
4.0
4.0
0.4
0.1
1.5
0.3
Sub-Saharan Africa 
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria4
4.0
3.9
4.3
–0.1
0.1
0.2
1.5
South Africa
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.1
0.1
0.7
–0.6
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
3.0
2.2
2.8
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.3
European Union
1.6
1.0
1.7
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
ASEAN-55
4.8
4.9
4.5
0.9
–0.5
1.3
0.2
Middle East and North Africa
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.9
3.7
4.4
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.4
Low-Income Developing Countries
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil6
–10.1
–8.3
–2.2
3.0
–1.5
5.8
–1.5
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import 
weights) 
8.3
7.1
1.2
0.5
1.7
5.9
0.8
World Consumer Prices7
4.9
3.6
3.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
Advanced Economies8
2.4
2.4
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7
6.7
4.4
3.7
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.1
9 For world output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
For emerging market and developing economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 85 percent of annual emerging market and 
developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
14
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
July, this is a cumulative downward revision of 0.4 
percentage point compared with the October 2024 
WEO. Elevated uncertainty on multiple fronts and 
higher tariffs are the main drivers. Recovering pri-
vate consumption from higher real wages and fiscal 
easing in Germany in 2026 provide only a partial 
offset, whereas strong performance in Ireland lifts 
growth in 2025. The euro area economy is expected 
to grow at potential in 2026.
	• Forecasts for other advanced economies also mark 
significant downward revisions compared with those 
in the October 2024 WEO, largely a reflection 
of the shifting international trade landscape. In 
Canada, the growth forecast for 2025 is 1.2 percent, 
and for 2026 it is 1.5 percent—cumulatively 
1.7 percentage points below the October 2024 
projection. In Japan, growth is expected to accelerate 
from 0.1 percent in 2024 to 1.1 percent in 2025 
and moderate to 0.6 percent in 2026. These dynam-
ics are driven by an expected pickup in real wage 
growth supporting private consumption, despite 
headwinds from elevated trade policy uncertainty 
and softening external demand. This constitutes 
a cumulative downward revision of 0.2 percent-
age point relative to October 2024. In the United 
Kingdom, growth in 2025 and 2026 is expected 
to be 1.3 percent, revised, on a cumulative basis, 
slightly upward relative to April. While this reflects 
strong activity in the first half of 2025 and an 
improvement in the external environment, including 
through the UK-US trade deal announced in May, 
the projected growth in 2025–26 is still lower by a 
cumulative 0.4 percentage point compared with the 
forecast in October 2024.
Growth Forecast for Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies
For emerging market and developing economies, 
growth is projected to moderate from 4.3 percent 
in 2024 to 4.2 percent in 2025 and 4.0 percent 
in 2026. This is virtually unchanged from the July 
WEO Update and is a cumulative upward revision of 
0.6 percentage point from the April 2025 WEO. That 
said, it is lower than the forecast in October 2024 by 
a cumulative 0.2 percentage point, with low-income 
developing countries experiencing a larger downward 
revision than middle-income economies.
	• Growth in emerging and developing Asia is expected 
to decline from 5.3 percent in 2024 to 5.2 percent 
in 2025 and further to 4.7 percent in 2026. For 
quite a few countries in the region—particularly in 
ASEAN, among the most affected—the evolution of 
growth forecasts largely mimicked that of effective 
tariff rates. In China, the 2025 GDP growth forecast 
was revised downward by 0.6 percentage point in 
the April 2025 WEO, with the escalation of trade 
tensions between China and the United States, and 
then upward by 0.8 percentage point in the July 
WEO Update, following the pause on higher rates 
in May. Compared with the October 2024 WEO 
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Exchange Rate Weights
(Percent change)
Projections
Difference from July  
2025 WEO Update1
Difference from April  
2025 WEO1
2024
2025
2026
2025
2026
2025
2026
World Output
2.8
2.6
2.6
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.2
Advanced Economies
1.8
1.6
1.7
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.2
4.0
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.2
5.0
4.5
0.1
0.0
0.7
0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.4
1.9
2.3
0.0
0.1
–0.2
0.0
Latin America and the Caribbean 
2.2
2.3
2.2
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.0
Middle East and Central Asia
2.3
3.6
4.0
0.2
0.3
0.7
0.4
Sub-Saharan Africa 
3.9
4.0
4.2
0.2
–0.1
0.3
0.0
Memorandum
European Union
1.0
1.3
1.3
0.1
–0.1
0.3
–0.1
Middle East and North Africa
1.9
3.4
3.9
0.1
0.3
0.7
0.4
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.2
4.0
3.8
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.0
4.5
5.0
0.1
–0.1
0.3
–0.3
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, in which a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years is 
used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1 Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2025 WEO Update, and April 2025 WEO forecasts.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
15
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
projection, growth, at 4.8 percent, is expected 
to be 0.3 percentage point higher. Growth is 
expected to moderate in 2026 to 4.2 percent. A 
stronger-than-expected outturn in the past few quar-
ters, reflecting front-loading in international trade 
and relatively robust domestic consumption sup-
ported by fiscal expansion in 2025, more than offset 
the headwinds from higher uncertainty and tariffs. 
In India, growth is projected to be 6.6 percent in 
2025 and 6.2 percent in 2026. Compared with the 
July WEO Update, this is an upward revision for 
2025, with carryover from a strong first quarter 
more than offsetting the increase in the US effective 
tariff rate on imports from India since July, and a 
downward revision for 2026. Compared with the 
pre-tariff forecast in October 2024, growth is pro-
jected to be cumulatively 0.2 percentage point lower.
	• In Latin America and the Caribbean, growth is pro-
jected to remain stable at 2.4 percent in 2025 and 
fall slightly to 2.3 percent in 2026. The forecast for 
2025 is revised upward by 0.4 percentage point rela-
tive to April on account of lower tariff rates for most 
countries in the region and stronger-than-expected 
incoming data. The revision is driven largely by 
Mexico, which is expected to grow at 1.0 percent in 
2025, 1.3 percentage points higher than forecast in 
the April 2025 WEO. For Brazil, the projection for 
2025 is revised upward, but that for 2026 is revised 
downward, in part because of the higher tariff rate 
on the country’s exports to the United States. For 
the region as a whole, a forecast for this year and 
next that is cumulatively 0.5 percentage point lower 
than forecast in the October 2024 WEO reflects 
trade policy changes and uncertainty.
	• Growth in emerging and developing Europe is 
projected to decline substantially, from 3.5 percent 
in 2024 to 1.8 percent in 2025, and to recover 
modestly to 2.2 percent in 2026. This is driven 
mainly by a sharp drop in the growth forecast in 
Russia, from 4.3 percent in 2024 to 0.6 percent in 
2025 and to 1.0 percent in 2026. Growth for 2025 
is 0.9 percentage point lower than in the April 2025 
WEO forecast. The downward revision is largely a 
result of recent data releases that show a concentra-
tion of fiscal expenditures in the fourth quarter of 
2024, which pushed estimated GDP growth in 2024 
from 4.1 percent to 4.3 percent. The payback is 
incorporated in the 2025 projection. Growth projec-
tions for Türkiye are revised upward for both 2025 
and 2026, on account of stronger-than-expected 
outturns, and provide a partial offset. Still, for the 
region as a whole, the growth forecast is lower than 
projected in the October 2024 WEO by a cumula-
tive 0.7 percentage point.
	• Growth in the Middle East and Central Asia is 
projected to accelerate, from 2.6 percent in 2024 to 
3.5 percent in 2025 and to 3.8 percent in 2026, as 
the effects of disruptions to oil production and ship-
ping dissipate and the impacts of ongoing conflicts 
abate. Compared with April, the projection for 2025 
is revised upward by 0.5 percentage point. This 
largely reflects developments in Gulf Cooperation 
Council countries, in particular Saudi Arabia, where 
the unwinding of oil production cuts was faster 
than expected, and Egypt, where the outturn in the 
first half of 2025 was better than expected. Despite 
the region’s relatively smaller exposure to the new 
US tariff regime, compared with the October 2024 
WEO, its growth projection is cumulatively 0.8 per-
centage points lower for 2025 and 2026, as a result 
of the indirect effects of subdued world demand on 
commodity prices.
	• In sub-Saharan Africa, growth is expected to remain 
subdued, unchanged in 2025 from 4.1 percent in 
2024, before picking up to 4.4 percent in 2026. 
This is an upward revision relative to the April 2025 
WEO forecast by a cumulative 0.5 percentage point, 
but a downward revision of 0.1 percentage point 
compared with the October 2024 WEO. Whereas 
growth in Nigeria is revised upward on account of 
supportive domestic factors, including higher oil 
production, improved investor confidence, a sup-
portive fiscal stance in 2026, and given its limited 
exposure to higher US tariffs, many other economies 
see significant downward revisions because of the 
changing international trade and official aid land-
scape. Many low-income countries in sub-Saharan 
Africa benefited from preferential access to the US 
market under the African Growth and Opportunity 
Act, which expired in September. Halting this pref-
erential access is expected to have sizable negative 
effects, particularly on Lesotho and Madagascar.
Inflation Forecast
Under the baseline, global headline inflation is 
projected to decline to 4.2 percent in 2025 and to 
3.7 percent in 2026. This path is virtually the same 
as depicted in the previous projections, but there is 
variation across countries and regions.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
16
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Inflation forecasts are revised upward in quite a 
few economies, relative to the October 2024 WEO, 
which serves as a pre-policy-shift benchmark. Among 
advanced economies, the most notable cases are 
the United Kingdom and the United States. In the 
United Kingdom, headline inflation, which started 
picking up in 2024, is expected to continue rising in 
2025 partly because of changes in regulated prices. 
This is projected to be temporary, with a loosening 
labor market and moderating wage growth eventu-
ally helping inflation return to target at the end of 
2026. In the United States, inflation is expected to 
pick up beginning in the second half of 2025, as the 
impact of tariffs is no longer absorbed within supply 
chains and instead passed on to consumers. Inflation 
then is expected to return to the Federal Reserve’s 
2 percent target during 2027. This forecast assumes 
only modest second-round effects, implying poten-
tial upside risks to US inflation in the baseline amid 
downside risks to employment. Among emerging 
market and developing economies, inflation forecasts 
for Brazil and Mexico are revised upward. For Brazil, 
the revision is more pronounced and in part reflects 
the stabilization of inflation expectations above target 
rates, reflecting credibility challenges associated with 
fiscal policy uncertainties last year, although relief 
from more recent currency appreciation is expected to 
arrive in late 2025 and in 2026. For Mexico, volatile 
categories such as food and more-persistent-than-
expected services inflation contribute to the upward 
revision.
For several other economies, inflation forecasts 
are revised downward, compared with the October 
2024 WEO. In much of emerging and developing 
Asia, that is the case. This is largely a reflection of 
lower-than-expected outturns, with food, energy, and 
administrative prices playing a significant role (for 
example, in China, India, and Thailand).
Taken together with the GDP growth forecasts, the 
picture varies across countries. US growth in 2025, 
forecast at 2.0 percent, is lower than the 2.2 per-
cent projected in the October 2024 WEO. Inflation 
in 2025, forecast at 2.7 percent, is higher than the 
1.9 percent projected in the October 2024 WEO. 
Relative to forecasts prior to the policy shifts, the 
US economy is expected to slow more sharply in 
2025 than was projected a year ago (Figure 1.11). 
Meanwhile, inflation is expected to remain largely 
unchanged and elevated, compared with the notable 
decline projected in October 2024. This combination 
of a sharper growth slowdown and a slower pace in 
disinflation in the United States contrasts with the less 
sharp growth slowdown and muted inflation in China. 
Elsewhere, in most cases, a pickup in growth is no lon-
ger expected or is projected to be much weaker, while 
inflation is still expected to decline at about the same 
pace as before. This is broadly in line with what would 
be anticipated from the introduction of higher US 
tariffs, with small deviations in the inflation outlook 
attributable to idiosyncratic offsetting factors.
World Trade Outlook and Global Imbalances
World trade is expected to decline modestly over 
the five-year forecast horizon (Figure 1.12). Compared 
with the April 2025 WEO, world trade volume is 
expected to grow faster in 2025 but more slowly in 
2026. This reflects the front-loading patterns observed. 
Trade volume growth at an average rate of 2.9 percent 
in 2025–26, even with the temporary boost from 
October 2025 WEO
October 2024 WEO
Figure 1.11.  Changes in GDP Growth and Inﬂation
(Percentage points)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1. 2025 Growth Minus 2024 Growth
2. 2025 Inflation Minus 2024 Inflation
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
United States
Euro area
Other AEs
China
Other EMDEs
United States
Euro area
Other AEs
China
Other EMDEs
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
17
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
front-loading in 2025, is lower than projected in the 
October 2024 WEO, which envisioned an average 
growth rate of 3.3 percent.
Global current account imbalances in 2025 are 
expected to exceed those in the October 2024 WEO 
and to narrow thereafter (Figure 1.13). Among the 
three largest contributors to the overall balance (China, 
Germany, United States), preemptive trade ahead 
of prospective tariffs widens the US deficit and the 
surplus for China, before unwinding as pull-forward 
behavior dissipates (Figure 1.14).
The narrowing of global imbalances works through 
three main channels. The first is trade policy shifts. 
In the United States, the rise in import costs and 
greater uncertainty dampen investment, softening 
import demand. At the same time, tariffs on interme-
diate inputs act as a tax on US manufacturers, raising 
production costs for exports of final products and 
US products that compete against imports—leaving 
the net effects on the current account ambiguous. 
Further, even as higher tariff receipts are likely to lift 
public savings, decreasing private savings are likely to 
offset this increase. Overall, the impact on the current 
account of this channel is likely to be limited, con-
sistent with both model-based and empirical analysis 
(2025 External Sector Report).
Second, exchange rate movements are an additional 
channel of external adjustment. Higher unilateral 
tariffs would normally be associated with a stronger 
currency for the tariffing country, helping with the 
absorption of the tariff shock. The recent depreciation 
of the US dollar, instead, enhances export price com-
petitiveness and restrains import-intensive consump-
tion—possibly helping to narrow US external deficits. 
A weaker dollar also tends to ease global financial 
2000
05
10
15
20
25
30
2000
05
10
15
20
25
30
World
US
EU
Japan
China
India
Figure 1.12.  World Trade
(Percent of GDP)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Shaded area represents forecasts. European Union (EU) data include both 
intra- and extra-EU trades.
1. Exports of Goods and Services
2. Imports of Goods and Services
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
European creditors
United States
European debtors
China
Japan
Others
Oil exporters
Overall balance (right scale)
Figure 1.13.  Current Account and International Investment 
Positions
(Percent of global GDP)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: “European creditors” are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, 
Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, and Switzerland. “European 
debtors” are Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. “Oil exporters” are Algeria, 
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, 
United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.
1. Global Current Account Balance
2. Global International Investment Position
2005 07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
2005 07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
30
30
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
18
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
conditions, providing some near-term global demand, 
but this is likely to be eroded by higher inflation in 
the United States relative to the rest of the world and 
the associated adjustment in the real effective exchange 
rate.
Last but not least, fiscal changes have accompanied 
trade developments. China and Germany have recently 
announced and expanded spending measures to boost 
domestic demand, which will lower net savings and 
reduce external surpluses. In the United States, the 
OBBBA is expected to widen the fiscal deficit over the 
medium term relative to projections in previous WEO 
reports, despite back-loaded spending cuts and sizable 
tariff receipts. This weighs on public saving and so 
tends to widen the current account deficit—or at least 
temper any narrowing from other channels.
Medium-Term Outlook
A more fragmented international economic land-
scape adds to the challenges many countries are facing 
in lifting medium-term growth prospects, including 
from aging populations and subdued productivity 
growth. In the absence of durable structural reforms, 
growth forecasts over the five-year WEO horizon 
remain mediocre. World output is projected to expand 
at an average annual pace of 3.2 percent in 2027–30, 
a persistently lackluster performance compared with 
the prepandemic (2000–19) historical average of 
3.7 percent.
Relative to October 2019, prior to the sequence 
of shocks that hit the world economy (the pandemic, 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the inflation surge, and 
now the protectionist trade policies), the medium-term 
outlook today is decidedly weaker. Medium-term 
growth prospects are dimming for about two-thirds of 
the world economy (measured by purchasing power 
parity), and the decline is more pronounced for emerg-
ing market and middle-income economies (Figure 1.15, 
panel 1).
Despite the heterogeneity in medium-term growth 
revisions (Figure 1.15, panel 2), particularly within 
the group of low-income developing countries, the 
stronger downward revisions for emerging market and 
developing economies portend challenges to the pace 
of global income convergence (see also the October 
2023 WEO and the April 2024 WEO). The world’s 
poorest economies, including those suffering from 
prolonged conflict, are particularly at risk of seeing 
their growth momentum decelerate and their per 
capita income gap relative to advanced economies 
October 2025 WEO
October 2024 WEO
Figure 1.14.  Projected Change in Current Account Balance
(Percentage points)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each data point shows difference from previous year of current account balance 
in percent of GDP series in respective WEOs. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
2025 26
27
28
29 2025 26
27
28
29 2025 26
27
28
29
China
United States
Germany
−0.6
−0.3
0
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
AEs
EMMIEs
LIDCs
Interquartile range
GDP-weighted average
Simple average
Figure 1.15.  Medium-Term Growth Outlook
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, bubble sizes are based on 2030 GDP at purchasing power parity in 
October 2025 WEO. In panel 2, the medium-term growth revisions are defined as 2030 
real GDP growth from October 2025 WEO minus 2024 growth from October 2019 
WEO. AEs = advanced economies; EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income 
economies; LIDCs = low-income developing countries; WEO = World Economic 
Outlook.
1. Projected GDP Growth Deceleration
(Percent, five-year-ahead GDP growth)
2. Medium-Term Growth Revisions
(Percentage points)
0
2
4
6
8
10
AEs
EMMIEs
LIDCs
2030 growth projections (Oct. 2025 WEO)
−1.5
−1.2
−0.9
−0.6
−0.3
0
0.3
0.6
0
2
4
6
8
10
2024 growth projections (Oct. 2019 WEO)
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
19
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
widen. This comes amid a significant decline in 
financing flows to these economies, including as 
a result of cuts in grants and concessional lending 
(Chabert and Powell 2025) and significantly higher 
reliance on commercial creditors for external financing 
(IMF 2025a; October 2025 Global Financial Stability 
Report). Official development assistance constitutes a 
significant share of gross national income in some of 
the most vulnerable countries in the Middle East and 
in Africa (Figure 1.16, panel 1). It affects sectors from 
health and education to energy. Based on tracking of 
donor announcements, countries such as Afghanistan, 
the Central African Republic, and Somalia may be 
hit hardest by aid cuts in proportion to their gross 
national income (Huckstep and others 2025). The 
direct short-term macroeconomic impact of aid cuts 
may not be large and will ultimately depend on 
details of the cuts and the response of governments in 
recipient countries. The options for governments to 
make up for loss of aid may be limited as debt service 
burdens climb and government revenues stagnate 
(Figure 1.16, panel 2). The effects will become visible 
over time as likely deterioration in energy access and 
human capital accumulation reduce potential output, 
on top of the humanitarian costs involved. Declining 
official development assistance could also heighten 
geopolitical instability, migration pressures, and secu-
rity risks in fragile regions, and recipient countries may 
increasingly rely on a patchwork of smaller, less coordi-
nated, and potentially less accountable donors.
Immigration is another aspect of recent policy 
shifts that has implications for medium-term growth 
in both low-income countries and advanced econo-
mies. The global stock of international migrants is 
estimated at 285 million as of 2022, with 168 million 
participating in the labor force (ILO 2025). About a 
quarter of those international migrants in the labor 
force are in North America—primarily the United 
States—and another quarter are in western Europe. 
On average, roughly 15 percent of advanced econ-
omies’ populations are immigrants, while emigrants 
constitute a significant portion of populations in 
emerging Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, 
and the Middle East and North Africa (Figure 1.17). 
Crucially, remittances—which alleviate poverty and 
under some circumstances modestly but permanently 
Net ODA
Debt service
Revenue
Figure 1.16.  Official Development Assistance, Revenues, and 
Interest Burden
(Percent)
1. ODA in Percent of GNI in 2023
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; World Bank, World 
Development Indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, data labels in the figure use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes. In panel 2, net ODA and debt service are weighted 
by and shown as percentages of GNI, and revenue is weighted by and shown as 
percentage of GDP. Revenue excludes grants. GNI = gross national income; LIDCs = 
low-income developing countries; ODA = official development assistance.
2. ODA, Debt Service, and Revenue of LIDCs
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
SYR
CAF
SSD
SOM
YEM
BDI
AFG
MOZ
GMB
LBR
MWI
RWA
GNB
TCD
MDG
NER
BFA
SLE
MLI
TGO
COD
UGA
ETH
SDN
0
5
10
15
20
2000
04
08
12
16
20
23
Immigration
Emigration
Remittances
Figure 1.17.  Migrant Stock and Remittances
(Percent)
Sources: United Nations, International Migrant Stock 2024; World Bank, World 
Development Indicators 2025; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Immigrants are expressed as a percentage of the destination population, 
emigrants of the origin population, and remittances as a percentage of GDP in US 
dollars. AEs = advanced economies; Dev. Asia = developing Asia; Em. Europe = 
emerging Europe; EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income economies; 
LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; LIDCs = low-income developing countries; 
ME&CA = Middle East and Central Asia; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.
0
3
6
9
12
15
AEs
EMMIEs
LIDCs
Dev.
Asia
LAC
ME&CA
Em.
Europe
SSA
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
20
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
raise GDP (Francois and others 2022)—are a signifi-
cant resource for many of these source countries. That 
said, output costs of more restrictive policies on the 
cross-border flow of labor may also be sizable in the 
destination countries. In the United States, the new 
immigration policies could reduce the country’s GDP 
by 0.3 percent to 0.7 percent a year (Edelberg, Veuger, 
and Watson 2025; Mayda and Peri 2025). A decline 
in labor supply, especially of immigrant labor, which 
tends to be associated with business dynamism and 
innovation, would also lower potential output. When 
compounded with the negative supply shock imposed 
by tariff measures, this implies that labor market slack 
may not increase much and that the disinflationary 
momentum the US economy has recently experienced 
may vanish sooner rather than later. Certain sectors of 
the economy where immigrants form a large portion 
of the labor force, such as construction, hospitality, 
personal services, and farm work, could experience 
stronger inflationary pressures than others. Then, 
further decreases in the monetary policy rate would 
need to proceed cautiously, depending critically on 
incoming data.
Risks to the Outlook: Still Tilted to the 
Downside
Risks to the outlook remain tilted to the downside, 
as in the July 2025 WEO Update.
Downside Risks
Prolonged trade policy uncertainty and ratcheting up 
of protectionist trade measures. Further increases in trade 
policy uncertainty would weigh on firms’ investment 
decisions and worsen the growth outlook. It would 
also hamper their ability to optimize inventories, 
potentially leading to short-term output volatility—the 
front-loading of imports followed by payback periods. 
Further increases in tariffs could weigh negatively on 
activity in countries directly impacted by the trade 
measures. While other countries may benefit from 
tariff-induced trade diversion, especially if their exports 
embed a rising share of domestic value added, the 
aggregate impact is likely to depress global output 
over the medium term given the disruption to supply 
chains (April 2025 WEO). The rise in protectionist 
measures both through tariffs and nontariff measures 
(including export controls on new technologies) could 
lead to further disruption and fragmentation of supply 
chains, reversing some of the efficiency gains of the 
past few decades from trade liberalization. Reliance 
on ad hoc bilateral deals for trade negotiations, which 
erode previous agreements and whose details and lon-
gevity remain unclear, would not meaningfully reduce 
trade policy uncertainty. If such deals are coupled with 
further discriminatory measures against third countries, 
they may generate additional negative spillovers and 
tit-for-tat dynamics. Over the medium term, more 
protectionist stances and fragmentation could also 
stunt global technological diffusion, further hurting 
growth prospects, especially of emerging market and 
developing economies. This could in turn give rise to 
domestic polarization and social unrest.
Shocks to labor supply. Further deterioration in labor 
supply from more stringent immigration policies in 
advanced economies could weigh on firms’ investment 
and hiring decisions, especially in economies where 
certain skills are in short supply and that have recently 
relied on immigration flows to ease labor market tight-
ness. This would act as a negative supply-side shock 
with direct bearing on the economy’s potential output 
capacity. Emerging pockets of labor market tightness—
as experienced in the aftermath of the COVID-19 
pandemic shock—could put upward pressure on the 
price of services and increase core inflation.
Fiscal vulnerabilities, financial market fragilities, 
and their interactions. In light of the recent surge in 
long-term sovereign bond yields in major advanced 
economies, abrupt market reactions to fiscal vulnera-
bilities could have an amplified impact. Rising fiscal 
worries may lead borrowing costs to increase further 
or, equivalently, could erode the “convenience yield” 
on the sovereign debt of some large advanced econo-
mies, given the sensitivity of government bond yields 
to changes in debt (Furceri, Goncalves, and Li 2025). 
In countries where a high share of the outstanding 
debt stock is rolled over annually, the rise in yields 
would increase debt-service costs and may reduce other 
critical spending, such as capital spending or sup-
port for shock-prone households. In addition, many 
low-income countries are reeling from the impact of 
reduced official aid flows, which increase their reliance 
on private creditors to meet their gross financing needs 
and add to their fiscal vulnerability. A repricing of core 
government bond yields could be amplified by matu-
rity mismatches and leverage among nonbank financial 
institutions and could ripple through to other assets, 
triggering disorderly price corrections where asset 
valuations are above fundamentals. To the extent that 
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
21
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
market repricing worsens balance sheets for households 
and firms, it could weigh down consumption and 
investment. The rapid rise of stablecoins, as alterna-
tives to traditional safe assets and bank deposits, may 
encourage currency substitution. And, in the event of a 
run on a given stablecoin, it may jeopardize the market 
for the assets that back it—such as short-term govern-
ment bonds or demand deposits—and pose systemic 
risks to the financial system (Chapter 1 of the October 
2025 Global Financial Stability Report).
Repricing of new technologies. Excessively optimistic 
growth expectations about AI could be revised in light 
of incoming data from early adopters and could trigger 
a market correction. Elevated valuations in tech and 
AI-linked sectors have been fueled by expectations of 
transformative productivity gains. If these gains fail 
to materialize, the resulting earnings disappointment 
could lead to a reassessment of the sustainability of 
AI-driven valuations and a drop in tech stock prices, 
with systemic implications. A potential bust of the 
AI boom could rival the dot-com crash of 2000–01 
in severity, especially considering the dominance of 
a few tech firms in market indices and involvement 
of less-regulated private credit loans funding much 
of the industry’s expansion. Such a correction could 
erode household wealth and dampen consumption. 
To the extent that the AI hype has led to excessive 
capital flows into a narrow set of firms and sectors, any 
unwinding of these positions could then entail a slow 
economic recovery hampered by capital misallocation. 
These vulnerabilities are compounded by constrained 
fiscal space, which may limit the effectiveness of policy 
responses.
Eroding good governance and institutional indepen-
dence. Intensification of political pressure on policy 
institutions safeguarded by a country’s constitution, 
statutes, and case law—for example, central banks, 
whose primacy of independence is upheld by both 
conventional wisdom and empirical evidence—could 
erode hard-won public confidence in their ability 
to fulfill their mandates. This could de-anchor the 
public’s inflation expectations. The evidence shows 
that political pressure on central banks tends to 
increase the intensity and persistence of inflationary 
pressures (Binder 2021; Drechsel 2025). Pressures 
on technocratic institutions mandated with data 
collection and dissemination could also erode the 
public’s and markets’ trust in statistics from official 
sources, significantly complicating the tasks of central 
banks and policymakers in making policy decisions, 
while diminishing transparency and hampering 
price discovery in financial markets. It also raises the 
likelihood of policy mistakes if political interference 
leads to compromise in data quality, reliability, and 
timeliness.
Renewed spikes in commodity prices arise as a result 
of climate shocks, regional conflicts, or broader geo-
political tensions. Escalation in regional conflicts 
could result in sustained increases in the prices of 
food, fuel, and other essential commodities, with 
commodity-importing nations particularly susceptible 
to heightened inflationary pressures amid constrained 
fiscal space. Moreover, extreme heat, prolonged 
drought, and other natural disasters—exacerbated 
by climate change—may adversely affect agricultural 
yields, sparking food supply shocks and amplifying 
food security challenges. These developments would 
disproportionately impact low-income countries, where 
households allocate a substantial share of their expen-
ditures to essential commodities.
Upside Risks
Breakthrough in trade negotiations, leading to lower 
tariffs and improved policy predictability. The potentially 
heavy costs associated with global trade fragmentation 
and dislocation of supply chains may spur break-
throughs in trade negotiations that reduce aggregate 
tariff rates as part of expanded agreements for regional 
or multilateral cooperation. In addition, restoring 
rules-based nondiscriminatory frameworks could 
measurably improve trade policy predictability and 
facilitate broad-based efficiency gains (see Box 1.2 for a 
discussion of the potential output gains from a return 
to a world of lower tariffs and reduced trade policy 
uncertainty). Strengthening cooperation in areas such 
as trade in services, streamlining business regulation, 
and fostering capital market integration could help 
unlock investment and boost productivity growth.
A faster pace of structural reforms. In an increasingly 
challenging global environment, both advanced and 
emerging market and developing economies could 
enhance domestic structural reform initiatives to 
prevent further declines in productivity and growth 
potential relative to their peers. Accelerating the pace 
of macrocritical structural reforms—such as those 
aimed at increasing labor force participation, reducing 
resource misallocation in labor and capital markets, or 
promoting business innovation—could contribute to 
stronger medium-term growth.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
22
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Artificial intelligence reigniting productivity growth. 
Faster AI adoption could help unleash strong pro-
ductivity gains as firms increase uptake of the various 
AI-based tools being developed and deployed at high 
speed. This may be accompanied by increased busi-
ness dynamism if the right policies are in place to 
enable high-productivity firms to continue to grow—
and allow unproductive ones to exit the market—
prompting an efficiency allocation of resources that 
supports aggregate productivity growth. Gains from 
AI could well exceed potential costs from their adverse 
effects on employment, especially if governments put 
in place adequate regulatory frameworks and offer 
supportive labor market programs aimed at upskilling 
and re-skilling workers at risk of displacement.
Policies: Bringing Confidence, 
Predictability, and Sustainability
Anchoring Trade in Predictable Rules
Removing trade policy uncertainty. Countries should 
set out and respect clear and transparent trade policy 
road maps to reduce volatility, stabilize expectations, 
and support investment. In periods of heightened 
uncertainty, pragmatic cooperation and predictable 
processes help limit costly precautionary adjustments 
and anchor confidence in a rules-based system.
Modernizing trade rules and cooperating to lower 
barriers. Policymakers should update trade rules to 
reflect the evolving structure of commerce—services, 
digital trade and data flows, complex subsidies, and 
supply-chain security—thereby improving predictabil-
ity and the conditions in which firms can compete 
fairly. Practical avenues include interoperable stan-
dards for data and services and trade and investment 
facilitation platforms. However, modernizing without 
overreach is essential: Trade rules should be targeted to 
clearly identified cross-border spillovers and calibrated 
to respect legitimate prudential objectives. Cooper-
ation across regional and multilateral platforms can 
keep trade regimes interoperable. Effective, trusted 
dispute-settlement mechanisms can increase credibility 
and, hence, uptake of new rules.
Countries should pursue bilateral, regional, and plu-
rilateral negotiations to lower barriers—tariffs, quotas, 
and behind-the-border frictions—aiming for agree-
ments that remain open to those willing to accept sim-
ilar obligations while avoiding raising barriers against 
third parties. Design options include open-accession 
clauses to promote inclusivity and minimize fragmenta-
tion and disciplinary measures that curb discriminatory 
procurement. Negotiations should aim to de-escalate 
tensions and prevent tariff hikes, with an emphasis 
on nondiscriminatory market opening. The objective 
should be to lower, not raise, trade and investment 
barriers and to limit discriminatory elements that risk 
negative third-country spillovers and renewed tensions. 
Managed trade provisions—such as purchase commit-
ments and quantitative restrictions—should be avoided 
because they lead to distortions and diversion and 
are unlikely to address external imbalances, which are 
driven by aggregate saving–investment dynamics.
Pairing trade diplomacy with macroeconomic adjust-
ment. To lock in these gains, trade diplomacy should 
be aligned with domestic policies that address the 
root causes of large external imbalances (Chapter 1 
of the 2025 External Sector Report). For Europe, this 
could include higher public infrastructure investment 
to raise potential growth and close the postpandemic 
productivity gap with the United States. For China, 
rebalancing toward household consumption—
including through fiscal measures with a greater focus 
on social spending and the property sector—and 
scaling back industrial policies would reduce external 
surpluses and alleviate domestic deflationary pressures. 
For the United States, credible fiscal consolidation 
would ease demand pressures and lower global interest 
rate spillovers. Aligning trade diplomacy with mac-
roeconomic measures can defuse persistent sources of 
friction.
Rebuilding Fiscal Buffers and Safeguarding Debt 
Sustainability
Restoring buffers. Fiscal policy space has significantly 
declined during the unprecedented series of shocks the 
global economy has endured in recent years. Addi-
tional spending demands are coming from population 
aging and the need to ensure national and economic 
security. More than ever, countries should implement 
credible medium-term fiscal consolidation—designed 
to rebuild buffers while protecting spending to support 
the vulnerable. With debt ratios already elevated and 
projected to rise further over coming decades under 
current policies, heavy debt burdens will likely weigh 
on growth, crowd out priority spending, and heighten 
rollover and interest rate risks. Separately, fiscal strat-
egies that rest on benign baselines or assume extraor-
dinary growth are themselves a source of fragility 
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
23
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
and should not anchor plans. Durable adjustment 
requires a balanced package drawn from a realistic set 
of available options—spending rationalization and 
revenue mobilization—rather than reliance on financial 
repression, monetary financing, or financial market 
complacency, given that these involve material macrof-
inancial risks.
Fiscal consolidation should prioritize measures 
that raise efficiency and crowd in private investment 
(October 2025 Fiscal Monitor). This entails broadening 
tax bases and strengthening revenue administration 
and reprioritizing expenditure toward high-multiplier 
uses—such as infrastructure, skills development, and 
well-targeted social protection. Automatic stabilizers 
should be allowed to operate fully over the cycle to 
support macroeconomic smoothing. Robust frame-
works and credible rules, well-resourced independent 
fiscal institutions, improved fiscal governance, and 
greater debt transparency are critical to fiscal adjust-
ment efforts (Acalin and others, forthcoming).
Where new discretionary support is warranted—for 
example, for households or firms severely affected by 
trade disruptions—it should be tightly targeted, trans-
parently costed, and explicitly temporary. Programs 
should include clear sunset clauses with a preset expi-
ration date and a preannounced step-down path. To 
safeguard adjustment, these offsetting measures should 
be specified before they are introduced, with explicit 
identification of savings from expenditure reprioriti-
zation or additional revenue, particularly where fiscal 
space is constrained.
Where debt is unsustainable, restructuring may be 
required, in addition to fiscal consolidation. Contin-
ued progress in operationalizing international sovereign 
debt resolution mechanisms—including the Group 
of Twenty (G20) Common Framework—and greater 
convergence of practices through the Global Sovereign 
Debt Roundtable can make necessary restructuring 
more timely, predictable, and less costly. 
Ensuring debt sustainability. Credibility is central 
to placing public debt on a clear downward path. 
Governments should publish medium-term fiscal 
frameworks with clear anchors, preannounced adjust-
ment paths, and contingency plans to manage shocks 
(IMF 2025b). Communication should include explicit 
guardrails against monetary financing to avoid the 
inflationary risks of fiscal dominance. Together, these 
elements reinforce market confidence, lower risk 
premiums, and help ensure that consolidation gains 
translate into durable debt sustainability.
Monetary Policy Priorities: Tailored, Transparent, 
Independent
Calibrating monetary policy to country circumstances. 
Central banks should calibrate monetary policy to pre-
serve price stability, with due consideration for where 
activity stands relative to potential output. In econo-
mies imposing or retaliating with tariffs, these mea-
sures operate as supply shocks—pushing up inflation, 
at least temporarily, while weighing on activity. Interest 
rate cuts should be contingent on clear evidence that 
inflation is durably low and stable. Tariffs targeted 
at particular industries also warrant close scrutiny, as 
they are analogous to sector-specific supply shocks for 
the imposing countries, steepen the Phillips curve, 
and alter the inflation-output trade-off (Chapter 2 of 
the October 2024 WEO). By contrast, in economies 
that have not imposed tariffs, the dominant impulse 
may be weaker demand; however, any reduction in 
policy rates should be considered cautiously and is not 
presumed. Resilient domestic demand can keep infla-
tionary pressures elevated. Only where disinflation is 
firmly established and slack has clearly widened would 
a gradual easing of the policy rate be appropriate. 
Clear central bank communication. In high-­
uncertainty environments, transparency boosts 
predictability for market participants. Central banks 
should articulate the reaction function (for example, 
data dependencies, balance of risks) and publish a 
small number of scenarios for inflation and economic 
activity, with concise explanations of the transmission 
mechanism. Messages should be tailored to dis-
tinct audiences, and information should be released 
promptly and with equal accessibility for all intended 
recipients. A predictable calendar and a consistent for-
mat across statements, minutes, and projections further 
facilitate learning about the reaction function over time 
(Bernanke 2024).
Independence and credibility as pillars of stability. 
Safeguarding central bank independence is essential 
for macrofinancial stability. Once credibility erodes, 
re-anchoring expectations usually requires a prolonged 
period of tight monetary policy and elevated interest 
rates—which is costlier than preventing credibility 
loss in the first place (Pastén and Reis 2021). These 
risks are amplified where fiscal dominance pres-
sures emerge—when elevated public financing needs 
encroach on monetary decisions. Seeking to influence 
the central bank to keep policy rates low or tolerating 
surprise inflation may appear to ease the near-term 
fiscal arithmetic, but it is eventually self-defeating. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
24
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Term and risk premiums widen and medium- to long-
term nominal yields rise because of higher expected 
inflation (and ultimately higher actual inflation), 
which offsets any initial interest savings and, in some 
cases, unsettles demand for sovereign debt (Leeper 
2023). Consistent with this observation, Box 2.3 in 
Chapter 2 documents 134 politically motivated central 
bank governor exits since 2000 and finds that such 
interference loosens policy, weakens currencies, and 
lifts inflation and inflation expectations, with some 
medium-term activity gains coming at the expense of 
significant deviations from price stability.
More broadly, macroeconomic performance rests 
on the quality and independence of institutions across 
the policy ecosystem—fiscal frameworks, financial 
supervision, competition and insolvency regimes, the 
judiciary, and, critically, national statistical systems. 
High-quality, timely, and professionally independent 
data are a public good: They reduce uncertainty and 
improve private sector planning and policy design. 
By contrast, weak data governance—gaps in coverage, 
opaque methodologies, infrequent publication, or 
politically influenced revisions—undermines account-
ability and blunts the effectiveness of policy.
Best practices combine legal and operational 
safeguards for central banks with strong support-
ing institutions. Key elements underpinned by the 
constitution, statutes, and case law include budgetary 
autonomy, the ability to set monetary policy free of 
interference, and the prohibition of short- and long-
term direct lending to government.
Tackling excessive exchange rate volatility. The 
asymmetric effects of tariffs on the imposing and the 
targeted economies can push monetary policy trade-
offs apart, even when business cycles are initially syn-
chronized. In most cases, exchange rates should move 
flexibly in line with market conditions to facilitate 
macroeconomic adjustment. If exchange rate move-
ments become disorderly, the IMF’s Integrated Policy 
Framework provides country-specific guidance; where 
appropriate—and alongside sound monetary and fiscal 
stances—temporary foreign exchange intervention or 
targeted capital flow measures may be warranted.
Preserving macrofinancial stability. Financial pol-
icies should prioritize containing liquidity risks in 
nonbank finance and preserving resilience in the core 
banking system. In line with Financial Stability Board 
guidance, private credit funds should limit stock 
creation and redemption frequency. Regulators should 
mandate liquidity tools and regular stress tests to 
ensure resilience in downturns. In the banking sector, 
fully implementing internationally agreed capital and 
liquidity standards and strengthening the financial 
sector safety net will help safeguard intermediation 
amid elevated uncertainty. A comprehensive, risk-based 
regulatory and supervisory framework for crypto assets 
will mitigate macrofinancial stability risks, including 
robust regulatory frameworks to accommodate the 
rapid rise in stablecoins (see Chapter 1 of the October 
2025 Global Financial Stability Report).
Policies for Severe Shock Mitigation
Amid elevated uncertainty, the wider use of scenario 
analysis can strengthen policy readiness and credibility. 
Authorities should develop a baseline and a small set 
of severe but plausible alternatives that jointly span 
macroeconomic and financial risks. Each scenario 
should be accompanied by an outline of plausible 
policy responses that would help frame private sector 
expectations. This could include, for monetary policy, 
alternative rate paths and, where relevant, balance 
sheet options and communication templates; for fiscal 
policy, calibrated use of automatic stabilizers and 
time-bound, targeted support; for financial stability, 
liquidity backstops and activation thresholds for avail-
able macroprudential buffers; and, where warranted by 
country circumstances, capital flow measures consistent 
with the IMF’s Integrated Policy Framework.
Policies with Medium-Term Impact
Given the mounting challenges, there is an urgent 
need to identify and implement measures that can 
sustainably lift medium-term growth prospects. Some 
countries are turning to industrial policies, but these 
come with opportunity costs and trade-offs—most 
notably, a large fiscal cost—at a time public finances 
are already stretched (see Chapter 3). Known as “ver-
tical” policies, these target public support to particular 
firms and sectors and should be used with care, with 
keen awareness of their opportunity costs and trade-
offs, balancing goals to expand production in certain 
sectors against fiscal costs, higher consumer prices, and 
resource misallocation. Consideration should be more 
prominently given to “horizontal” reforms that aim to 
improve the general business environment and apply 
uniformly across the economy. 
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
25
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Disciplined use of industrial policy. To maximize the 
effectiveness of industrial policy and limit its costs, 
governments must diagnose market failures clearly, 
identifying specific areas where intervention can yield 
the largest benefits. All policies should be embedded in 
a robust institutional and macroeconomic framework, 
ensuring coordination among agencies and maintain-
ing fiscal discipline, especially where debt is high and 
fiscal space limited. Governments should set explicit, 
measurable goals for industrial interventions, such as 
job creation, technological advancement, or increased 
domestic production, and should design policies to 
focus on areas with the highest potential for positive 
innovation spillovers and transformative impact (see 
also Chapter 2 of the April 2024 Fiscal Monitor). 
Strong governance is the key to successful implementa-
tion, with transparent selection processes, independent 
oversight, and accountability mechanisms reducing 
the risk of wasteful spending and corruption. Policies 
must include mechanisms for regular evaluation and 
recalibration. Governments should be prepared to scale 
back or discontinue ineffective measures. Policymakers 
should also carefully weigh the costs against potential 
benefits and be mindful of possible negative spillovers 
to other sectors or countries.
In the cross-border context, industrial policies 
should not be deployed to expand exports to com-
pensate for lost markets, as such responses are costly 
and risk exacerbating trade distortions. If support to 
affected firms is considered, it should be cautious, 
narrowly targeted, and time-bound, aimed at specific, 
well-diagnosed market failures—that is, cases with 
clearly identified externalities, known magnitude, and 
well-established key demand and supply elasticities. 
Where countries face strong pressures to protect the 
local economy—for example, trade diversion or surges 
in foreign direct investment—they should prioritize 
instruments found in international agreements and 
designed for that purpose, rather than resorting to ad 
hoc industrial policy.
Implementing structural reforms. With challenges on 
multiple fronts and persistently dim medium-term 
prospects, growth-enhancing reforms have more 
urgency than ever.
Population aging, rapid technological change, and 
shifting patterns of comparative advantage in skills are 
reshaping labor markets across advanced and emerging 
market economies. Comprehensive policy packages 
that raise labor utilization and potential growth are 
therefore central to easing macroeconomic trade-offs 
and safeguarding fiscal sustainability.
Labor market institutions should facilitate mobility 
and efficient matching. Modernized public employment 
services, digital job-matching platforms, and reloca-
tion assistance can speed reallocation from declining 
to expanding sectors. Portable benefits across jobs and 
contract types, along with affordable childcare and 
parental leave, can raise participation—especially among 
women—and smooth earnings risks during transitions. 
Migration policies calibrated to domestic skill shortages 
can also clear bottlenecks while protecting domestic 
workers (see Chapter 3 of the April 2025 WEO).
Pension and retirement systems should support 
longer, healthier working lives through flexibility 
and actuarially fair incentives. Gradual retirement—
through partial pensions and phased work schedules—
can keep older workers engaged while easing physical 
demands (see Chapter 2 of the April 2025 WEO). 
Evidence also suggests that voluntary part-time work 
at older ages can raise well-being and that enabling 
such options can support both participation and life 
satisfaction (Nikolova and Graham 2014).
Advances in digitalization and AI can lift produc-
tivity and expand potential growth, especially when 
paired with complementary investments in workforce 
skills, strong management, interoperable infrastructure, 
competitive markets, and sound data governance and 
cybersecurity (Gopinath 2023). Realizing these gains 
calls for diffusion-oriented policies that both enable 
adoption and protect workers: Support for the uptake 
of digital tools by small firms, management upgrading, 
and data interoperability should complement tradi-
tional R&D incentives.
Competition and product market reforms should 
foster entry and reduce barriers to reallocating 
resources toward high-productivity firms; where trade 
shocks are concentrated, time-bound, well-targeted 
adjustment assistance—training, relocation support, 
and wage insurance—should replace open-ended 
protection. Improving the overall business climate—
through infrastructure, education, and regulatory 
reform—can also amplify the impact of industrial 
policy.
For low-income countries facing challenges from 
cuts to international aid, strengthening capacity to 
mobilize domestic resources is crucial. This involves 
not only rationalization of public spending, increased 
transparency, and anti-corruption measures but also 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
26
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
administrative reforms to support provision of basic 
services. In parallel, to help vulnerable economies, 
donors should explore ways to mobilize more develop-
ment assistance—meeting and front-loading existing 
commitments, with priority on grants and highly 
concessional terms.
Addressing climate change efficiently. A well-designed 
mix of policies can drive low-carbon, resilient growth. 
Investing in technologies such as solar and wind and in 
energy-efficient systems can reduce carbon emissions 
and create new industries and jobs. Implementing 
carbon pricing mechanisms, such as carbon taxes or 
cap-and-trade systems, can incentivize businesses to 
reduce their carbon footprint. This can be comple-
mented by fiscal incentives like tax breaks or subsidies 
for green technologies. Providing technical assistance 
and financial support for adaptation projects, espe-
cially in low-income countries, can help them cope 
with the impacts of climate change. This assistance 
includes funding for infrastructure improvements and 
capacity-building initiatives. Transition from fossil fuels 
to renewables can enhance energy security by reducing 
dependence on imported fuels, create employment 
opportunities in the green energy sector, and improve 
the balance of payments by reducing energy impor-
tation costs. It can also enhance economic stability 
by reducing the volatility associated with fossil fuel 
markets.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
27
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The shift in US trade policy in 2025 differs 
notably from the changes during 2018–19. For 
instance, whereas the previous round of tariff 
increases was directed primarily at a single trading 
partner—China—the current period is characterized 
by broader-based tariff hikes affecting a wider range 
of countries, alongside a marked rise in trade policy 
uncertainty.1 This raises an important question: Has 
the distinct nature of the 2025 tariff shock led to dif-
ferent patterns of adjustment in bilateral trade between 
the United States and China, both with each other 
and with third-party countries, relative to the after-
math of 2018–19 tariff hikes? This box sheds some 
preliminary light on this question based on bilateral 
monthly trade flow data.
There is ample evidence of changes in international 
trade, foreign direct investment, and global value 
chains in response to the tariff increases of 2018–19 
and the rise in trade tensions (see, for example, 
Fajgelbaum and others 2024; Freund and others 2024; 
Gopinath and others 2025; Graziano and others 
2024). The bilateral US-China decoupling was accom-
panied by increased trade and investment ties with 
third countries. China’s exports to the United States 
fell by about 6 percent within two years (Figure 1.1.1). 
This was accompanied by a steady increase in exports 
to China’s substitutes (based on the degree of sub-
stitutability between that country’s products and 
Chinese varieties) and less of an increase in China’s 
complements.
Preliminary trade data for 2025 (marked in dashed 
lines) reveal early signs of further decoupling between 
The authors of this box are Adam Jakubik and Monika 
Sztajerowska.
1Tariff episodes also differ in tariff size, product scope, initial 
tariff levels, and the speed of implementation, among other ways. 
United States
ROW: substitutes
ROW: complements
China
ROW: substitutes
ROW: complements
Figure 1.1.1.  Exports by Destination Country Type 
and Tariff Episode
(Index, Feb. 2018 and Feb. 2025 = 100; solid = Feb. 2018 tariff 
episode, dashed = Feb. 2025 tariff episode)
90
115
95
100
105
110
1. Exports from China
−5
0
5
10
15
20
80
115
85
90
95
100
105
110
2. Exports from US
−5
0
5
10
15
20
Sources: Fajgelbaum and others 2024; Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: X-axis value 0 corresponds to the tariff start dates February 
2018 and February 2025, respectively. Each series is normalized to its 
respective date 0, at which the value equals 100. Countries are classified 
as substitutes or complements to China based on how their exports 
respond to tariffs on Chinese goods. Substitutes (complements) are 
countries whose exports increase (decrease) when Chinese exports are 
taxed, reflecting positive (negative) substitution elasticity with respect 
to China. See Fajgelbaum and others (2024) for details. Changes are 
calculated using 12-month rolling sums to smooth seasonal fluctuations. 
ROW = rest of the world.
Box 1.1. Trade Reallocation in Response to Tariffs: Will This Time Be Different? 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
28
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
the United States and China—similar to 2018–19 
(marked in solid lines). The decoupling also appears 
to have been happening sooner than it did in the 
previous episode. Meanwhile, there is an increase 
in Chinese exports to third countries. Differences 
between countries that may serve as China’s substitutes 
relative to those that are China’s complements are not 
yet obvious. Looking at the trade patterns through a 
geographic lens rather than through structural simi-
larities between different countries reveals some of the 
underlying differences between the two tariff episodes 
so far. In 2018–19, Asian and U.S.-Mexico-Canada 
Agreement (USMCA) countries—many of which 
fall into the China’s substitutes category—absorbed 
China’s falling exports to the United States 
(Figure 1.1.2, panel 1). Meanwhile, falling US exports 
to China were accompanied by increases in other des-
tinations, such as the European Union, together with 
stable exports to Canada and Mexico (Figure 1.1.2, 
panel 2). Early signals from the latest trade data point 
to potentially faster trade shifts this time. For example, 
Chinese exports to third-country markets—especially 
in Asia and Europe—increased more in February–
April 2025 than in February–April 2018. At the same 
time, Canada and Mexico have accounted for a small 
share of China’s change in exports since February 
2025 and have made a negative contribution to US 
export growth, in contrast to 2018–19. High tariffs 
on non-USMCA-compliant products and on steel and 
aluminum content on a value-added basis, combined 
with further tightening and enforcement of rules of 
origin, may be partially responsible, along with other 
factors.
It is too soon to assess the magnitude of a 
longer-term reallocation—which in 2018–19 picked 
up speed only after about 12 months. The extent of 
shifts may be different this time because threats of 
higher tariffs on exports to the United States have 
affected most countries since January 2025—unlike 
the China-specific changes to the US trade policy in 
the 2018 episode—and overall policy uncertainty is 
China
WH USMCA
WH non-USMCA
Asia-Pacific
Europe
Other
United States
WH USMCA
WH non-USMCA
Asia-Pacific
Europe
Other
Figure 1.1.2.  Change in Exports by Destination 
Region and Tariff Episode
(Billions of US dollars)
−50
250
0
50
100
150
200
1. Exports from China
Sources: Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars show the total change in exports within each tariff period 
(2018 and 2025, respectively). Segments indicate contributions from 
each destination market. Changes are calculated using 12-month 
rolling sums to smooth seasonal fluctuations. “Pre-tariff” refers to 
the change from t − 3 months to t = −1; “Post-tariff” refers to the 
change from t = 0 to t + 3 months; and “Post-tariff longer” refers to the 
change from t = 0 to t + 22 months (available for 2018 only). USMCA = 
U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement; WH = Western Hemisphere.
2018 tariﬀ episode
2025 tariﬀ episode
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
longer
−25
125
0
25
50
75
100
2. Exports from US
2018 tariﬀ episode
2025 tariﬀ episode
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
longer
Box 1.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
29
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
high, complicating firms’ reallocation decisions. In 
addition, further actions are being taken to reduce 
reallocation, including tighter rules of origin, customs 
enforcement of transshipment, duties applied on val-
ue-added content, and extended screening procedures 
for foreign direct investment.
Such shifts observed in gross trade data can also be 
induced by other factors, many of which are unre-
lated to trade policy, including broader changes in the 
countries’ competitiveness. At the aggregate level, the 
observed increase in Chinese exports to third countries 
is also not necessarily for the same products whose 
exports to the United States dropped. In addition, 
movements in exchange rates and relative prices may 
affect the degree of reallocation in real terms. This pre-
liminary analysis is, hence, illustrative, and will require 
further analysis to isolate the role of different factors 
once sufficient data become available. The pace and 
geography of reallocation will also depend on frictions, 
including policy choices by third countries. Model 
simulations of long-term reallocation (Rotunno and 
Ruta 2025) suggest that, once uncertainty is resolved, 
China’s exports to non-US markets could increase by 
4–6 percent in the baseline, with the extent and direc-
tion of diversion depending crucially on the distribu-
tion of tariffs and third-country policies.
While similar caveats apply to trends observed at 
the sectoral level, early evidence suggests that trade 
flows are already being redirected to Asia in several 
important sectors targeted by tariff increases, including 
automobiles and parts, and to Europe in steel and 
aluminum (Figure 1.1.3). In addition, there is some 
evidence that changes in third countries’ imports 
from China in a given sector, including to Asia, are 
correlated with the change in their exports in the same 
sector to other regions, including the United States 
and Europe. This may suggest that trade diversion to 
other markets is larger than what is captured in gross 
trade data and could be consistent with either trade 
reallocation, trade rerouting, or a combination of 
the two.
United States
Asia-Pacific
WH USMCA
Europe
WH non-USMCA
Other
Figure 1.1.3.  Change in China’s Exports by 
Destination Region and Tariff Episode in
Selected Sectors
(Billions of US dollars)
−5
10
0
5
1. Automobiles and Parts
Sources: Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars show the total change in exports within each tariff period 
(2018 and 2025, respectively). Segments indicate contributions from 
each destination market. Changes are calculated using 12-month 
rolling sums to smooth seasonal fluctuations. “Pre-tariff” refers to 
the change from t − 3 months to t = −1; “Post-tariff” refers to the 
change from t = 0 to t + 3 months; and “Post-tariff longer” refers to the 
change from t = 0 to t + 22 months (available for 2018 only). USMCA = 
U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement; WH = Western Hemisphere.
2018 tariﬀ episode
2025 tariﬀ episode
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
longer
−5
15
0
5
10
2. Steel and Aluminum
2018 tariﬀ episode
2025 tariﬀ episode
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Pre-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
Post-tariﬀ
longer
Box 1.1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
30
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
This box uses the IMF’s Group of Twenty (G20) 
model to derive confidence bands around the World 
Economic Outlook (WEO) baseline forecast and the 
IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF) 
model to analyze shocks that could materialize over 
the five-year WEO horizon. While the risk scenarios 
presented in the April 2025 WEO remain relevant, 
two new scenarios are also considered. Scenario A 
combines policies and shocks that result in a fall 
in global output and a narrowing in global imbal-
ances relative to the baseline. Policies and shocks 
in scenario B result in an increase in global output 
relative to the baseline but do not have strong impli-
cations for imbalances.
Confidence Bands
The G20 model is used to generate distributions 
around the baseline by drawing shocks recovered 
from the underlying historical data (Andrle and Hunt 
2020). The distribution is tilted to align with the 
growth-at-risk assessment presented in the October 
2025 Global Financial Stability Report. As in the 
previous assessment, growth distributions are skewed 
to the downside, with downside risks more likely than 
upside risks, and inflation distributions are skewed to 
the upside.
Panels 1 and 2 in Figure 1.2.1 show the distribu-
tions for US growth and headline inflation (90 percent 
confidence bands represented in the blue-shaded 
areas). Uncertainty about 2025 outcomes is lower, 
since data for the first half of the year are in. The 
probability of a recession occurring in 2026 is assessed 
at about 30 percent, somewhat smaller than the reces-
sion probability estimated in the April 2025 WEO; 
the risk that 2026 US headline inflation will rise above 
3 percent is similar (about 30 percent).1
That said, the probability of recession and inflation 
above 3 percent are larger than at the time of the 
October 2024 WEO (25 and 20 percent, respectively).
Panels 3 and 4 in Figure 1.2.1 show the distri-
butions for global growth and headline inflation. 
The authors of this box are Jared Bebee, Dirk Muir, and Rafael 
Portillo.
1The recession risk for 2026 is the probability that 2026 
annual growth will be below 0.8 percent, consistent with a 
shallow recession starting in the first quarter of 2026. The prob-
ability of a short-lived US recession (in 2025) was assessed to be 
about 37 percent at the time of the April 2025 WEO.
WEO baseline projection
Figure 1.2.1.  Forecast Uncertainty around 
Global Growth and Inflation Projections
(Percent)
1. US GDP Growth
2024
26
25
28
29
27
30
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Each shade of blue represents a 5 percentage point 
probability interval. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
−3
0
3
6
2. US Headline Inflation
2024
26
25
28
29
27
30
3. Global GDP Growth
2024
26
25
28
29
27
30
4. Global Headline Inflation
2024
26
25
28
29
27
30
−2
0
2
4
6
8
−2
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
Box 1.2. Risk Assessment Surrounding the Baseline Projection
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
31
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The probability that global growth in 2026 will 
fall below 2 percent is assessed at about 25 percent, 
slightly lower than in April. The probability that 2026 
global headline inflation will rise above 5 percent is 
broadly similar, at about 25 percent. In summary, 
downside risks to growth have receded slightly relative 
to April but remain elevated, while upside risks to 
inflation are broadly the same.
Scenarios
The GIMF model is used to assess risk scenarios. 
As in April, the version of the model has 10 regions, 
including China, the United States, and the euro 
area. The scenarios assume monetary policy responds 
endogenously, with floating exchange rates in most 
regions. In scenario A, China’s currency is managed 
through capital flow measures, with limited overall 
adjustment of the renminbi relative to the dollar. 
In scenario B, the renminbi adjusts as in a flexible 
exchange rate regime. Automatic stabilizers operate on 
the fiscal side. The model has been modified relative 
to April to allow higher pass-through to capture infla-
tion risks from tariffs and exchange rate movements.
Layers Considered in Scenario A
Higher tariffs and supply-chain disruptions. The sce-
nario assumes permanently higher US tariffs than in 
the baseline, starting at the end of 2025. The increase 
in tariffs is the higher of either the tariff increases 
announced in April or the tariff rates announced in 
the letters sent in June and July. Imports from China 
face the largest tariff hikes relative to the baseline, 
close to 30 percentage points, followed by emerging 
Asia, the euro area, and Japan, at about 10 percent-
age points. The effective tariff rate on US imports 
increases by 10 percentage points overall, with tariff 
revenue used to pay down public debt over the WEO 
horizon. The scenario also assumes that countries do 
not retaliate. In addition, the cumulative increase in 
tariffs in both the baseline and the scenario leads to 
a temporary disruption of global supply chains. Total 
factor productivity in sectors more involved in global 
trade (about 20 percent of global value added) falls by 
1 percent, globally, in 2026–27, before returning to 
baseline in 2028.
Higher inflation expectations. A confluence of factors 
(the post–COVID-19 inflation surge, tariffs, concerns 
about central bank independence) raises inflation 
expectations in many countries in 2026 and 2027. 
One-year-ahead inflation expectations increase by 
60 basis points in emerging markets currently facing 
inflation above target, 50 basis points in the United 
States, and about 25 basis points in other advanced 
economies, excluding Japan, and in the remaining 
emerging markets, excluding China.
Higher sovereign yields. A reassessment of the global 
economy’s capacity to absorb the historic increase in 
public debt leads to an increase in sovereign yields. 
Term premiums on public debt increase in all coun-
tries except China by 100 basis points, starting in 
2026 and lasting 10 years. The safe/neutral global real 
rate also increases gradually but permanently relative 
to baseline, by up to 50 basis points and affecting all 
countries equally. Fiscal policy does not adjust over the 
WEO horizon, but public debt is eventually stabilized 
at higher levels in most countries.
Tighter global financial conditions. The combined 
effect of shocks and policies considered in this scenario 
is amplified by additional tightening in global financial 
conditions. Corporate spreads increase in 2026 by 
50 basis points in advanced economies and China, and 
by 100 basis points in emerging markets, excluding 
China. The layer also includes a modest decline in 
equity prices in the US, reflecting in part a correction 
of AI stock valuations. The tightening lasts for two 
years.
Lower global demand for US assets. Lower foreign 
demand raises expected returns on US assets—a 
partial loss of the “exorbitant privilege” of the United 
States—by up to 80 basis points relative to baseline. 
The increase in the US external risk premium lasts for 
20 years.
Layers Considered in Scenario B
A return to low tariffs. Tariffs imposed since January 
2025 are permanently removed, reducing effective tar-
iff rates on US imports by about 15 percentage points 
relative to the current baseline. Imports from China 
see the largest decrease in effective tariff rates (about 
22 percentage points), followed by Japan, Europe, 
and emerging Asia (10–20 percentage points). Trading 
partners also remove tariffs on US exports, and US 
exports to China see a decrease in effective tariff rates 
of about 20 percentage points.
Reduced trade policy uncertainty. Agreements coming 
out of ongoing bilateral negotiations and multilateral 
Box 1.2 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
32
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
initiatives provide greater predictability in global trade 
arrangements, reducing economic uncertainty relative 
to the baseline. The decrease in uncertainty is equiva-
lent to a two-standard-deviation decrease in the global 
economic policy uncertainty measure in Davis (2016), 
or about the absolute size of the spike observed in 
2018–19.
Higher-than-expected benefits from AI. The benefits 
of artificial intelligence (AI) on global productivity and 
investment are moderately larger than in the current 
baseline. The layer features two components. First, 
several countries see a modest increase in investment 
in new AI-specific capital (information processing 
equipment, software intellectual property), most 
notably the United States and China. Second, global 
productivity increases as AI is gradually deployed to 
the broader economy. Global total factor productivity 
increases by about 0.8 percent over a 10-year period, 
at the lower range of existing estimates, with consider-
able cross-country variation. Countries more exposed 
to gains in automation and better prepared for AI 
adoption see larger productivity gains, drawing on the 
assessment in Cerutti and others (2025).
Impact on the World Economy
Figures 1.2.2 and 1.2.4 present the effects, for sce-
narios A and B, on the level of GDP during 2025–30 
and over the long term, for China, the United States, 
the euro area, and the world. The effects of higher 
sovereign yields and additional tightening in financial 
conditions are merged into a single layer. Figure 1.2.3 
shows the effects of scenario A on inflation, real inter-
est rates, and current account balances of these three 
regions, and the impact on the US dollar’s real effec-
tive exchange rate.2 The panels for current accounts 
and the dollar also show the contribution from higher 
tariffs and from lower demand for US assets.
In scenario A, higher tariffs reduce global goods 
demand and disrupt supply. Global activity decreases 
by 0.3 percent relative to baseline in 2026, with the 
effect building through 2028, and with a permanent 
loss in global GDP of one-half percent. China is most 
affected among tariff-facing regions because of the 
larger tariff hike and the limited adjustment assumed 
2The real interest rate presented in Figure 1.2.3, panel 2 is the 
sum of the one-year safe real rate and half the term premiums.
Higher tariﬀs and supply disruptions
Add inﬂation expectations shock
Add higher sovereign yields/ﬁnancial conditions
Add lower demand for US assets
Figure 1.2.2.  Impact of Scenario A on GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)
1. United States
−2.4
0.4
−2.0
−1.6
−1.2
−0.8
−0.4
0
−2.4
0.4
−2.0
−1.6
−1.2
−0.8
−0.4
0
−2.4
0.4
−2.0
−1.6
−1.2
−0.8
−0.4
0
−2.4
0.4
−2.0
−1.6
−1.2
−0.8
−0.4
0
2025
26
28
29
27
30
Long
term
2. Euro Area
2025
26
28
29
27
30
Long
term
3. China
2025
26
28
29
27
30
Long
term
4. World
2025
26
28
29
27
30
Long
term
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: “Long term” is at least 50 years ahead.
Box 1.2 (continued)
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
33
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
United States
Euro Area
China
Figure 1.2.3.  Impact of Scenario A in the
United States, China, and the Euro Area
1. Inflation
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
−1.2
1.2
−0.8
−0.4
0
0.4
0.8
2025
26
28
29
27
30
2. Real Interest Rate
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
−0.4
1.2
0
0.4
0.8
2025
26
28
29
27
30
3. Current Account in Percent of GDP
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
−2
3
−1
0
1
2
2025
26
28
29
27
30
4. US Dollar Real Effective Exchange Rate
(Percent deviation from baseline)
−6
9
−3
0
3
6
2025
26
28
29
27
30
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Dashed lines refer to tariff layer of scenario. Dotted line
in panel 4 refers to “lower demand for US assets” layer of
scenario.
Low tariﬀs
Add low uncertainty
Add AI-driven investment surge
Figure 1.2.4.  Impact of Scenario B on GDP
(Percent of GDP)
1. United States
−1
3
0
1
2
−1
3
0
1
2
−1
3
0
1
2
−1
3
0
1
2
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
2. Euro Area
3. China
4. World
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: “Long term” is at least 50 years ahead. AI = artificial 
intelligence.
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
2025
26
28
29
30
27
Long
term
Box 1.2 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
34
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
in the renminbi-to-dollar rate, which also results in 
a lower current account surplus than in the baseline. 
Higher tariffs reduce production efficiency in the 
United States and cause dollar appreciation that lowers 
demand for US exports. The United States experiences 
a moderate reduction in its current account deficit, in 
part because the decline in investment is larger than 
in other countries. The impact on the euro-area-wide 
current account is limited.
Higher tariffs also lead to a temporary 40 basis 
point surge in US inflation and a 20 basis point 
increase in policy rates in 2026. China experiences a 
sustained reduction in inflation of 40–50 basis points. 
Other regions, including the euro area, experience a 
modest increase in inflation of 10–20 basis points.
For countries facing shocks to inflation expecta-
tions, the resulting inflationary pressures elicit higher 
nominal and real policy rates. A faster response in 
prices relative to wages also contributes to a decrease 
in purchasing power, adding to the negative impact on 
aggregate demand. The impact is most pronounced in 
emerging markets facing higher-than-target infla-
tion and in the United States, which in 2026 sees 
an additional increase of 30 basis points in inflation 
and policy rates and a decrease in activity of about 
0.4 percent from this shock alone. The impact on the 
euro area is smaller and is negligible on China. Global 
GDP is reduced by 0.3 percent in 2026, and global 
inflation increases by 20 basis points. The impact on 
activity fades as inflation is stabilized.
In the sovereign yields and global financial conditions 
layer, the combination of higher real interest rates 
and corporate spreads reduces global investment by 
3 percent and GDP by 0.6 percent in 2026, relative 
to the baseline. In the short term, the hit is larger in 
emerging markets excluding China because corporate 
spreads widen more, and smaller in China as term 
premiums do not increase. The layer is also moderately 
disinflationary, with global inflation falling by about 
0.2 percentage point in 2026. The impact on the 
United States and the euro area is similar to the global 
average. Over the long term, all countries see a perma-
nent decrease in GDP, of about 1.5 percent.
The impact of lower global demand for US assets 
varies across regions. The United States experiences a 
combination of higher domestic real interest rates and 
a depreciation of the US dollar, which raises demand 
for US exports but compresses domestic absorption, 
lowers GDP somewhat, and reduces the US current 
account deficit sizably. As global asset demand shifts 
toward other regions, real interest rates outside the 
United States decrease, including in the euro area. 
Euro area GDP increases modestly, and its current 
account surplus is lowered as domestic absorption 
increases. China benefits more than other regions 
in the short term. Under the assumption that the 
exchange rate relative to the dollar is managed, the 
renminbi depreciates in real effective terms, supporting 
China’s external demand and limiting adjustment in 
its current account.
The combined effect from shocks in the scenario is 
a sizable decrease in world GDP in 2026, 1.2 percent 
lower than baseline, with activity declining further 
relative to baseline in 2027. The United States is hit 
harder than China and the euro area as it experiences 
a larger decrease in GDP, higher inflation, and higher 
real interest rates. Other countries, including emerg-
ing markets, experience a decrease broadly similar in 
magnitude to the one the world economy experiences. 
The impact on the US dollar’s real effective exchange 
rate is muted, reflecting the offsetting effect of various 
shocks, and global imbalances narrow.
In scenario B, the return to low tariffs helps sup-
port activity globally, with gains in all three large 
countries but largest in China in the short term. The 
United States sees a temporary reduction in inflation 
of about 60 basis points in 2026 and a 7 percent 
depreciation of the dollar relative to baseline as US 
demand for imports increase and the renminbi-dollar 
rate adjusts. Global activity is further supported in 
the short term by lower trade policy uncertainty, which 
benefits all countries and raises global investment by 
about 2 percent in 2026–27. Higher-than-expected 
benefits from AI raise global GDP by about 0.3 percent 
in 2026, with global investment increasing by an 
additional 1.5 percent over 2026–27. The increase in 
short-term activity and investment is somewhat larger 
in the United States and China than in the euro area, 
and with limited impact on inflation. The economic 
gains build over time as productivity rises.
The combined effect from layers in scenario B 
is an increase in global GDP of about 1 percent in 
2026 and about 2 percent over the long term, with 
the return to low tariffs explaining about 0.7 percent-
age point of the increase and higher-than-expected 
benefits from AI explaining 1.4 percentage points. 
Finally, global imbalances do not change much in this 
scenario, as the shocks considered generate relatively 
small cross-country variation and exchange rates play a 
larger role in global adjustment.
Box 1.2 (continued)
35
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Primary commodity prices declined by 2.6 percent 
between March and August 2025, with large gains in 
precious metals partly offsetting a broad-based decline 
in other commodity groups, including energy, base 
metals, and agriculture. In oil markets, strong global 
supply and tepid global demand growth have contrib-
uted to bringing prices down, despite ongoing geopo-
litical ructions. Tariffs drove some commodities lower, 
especially base metals. This Special Feature analyzes 
the importance of interlinkages between commodity 
sectors and the rest of the economy in understanding 
cyclical fluctuations following commodity price shocks.
Commodity Market Developments
Oil prices decreased 5.4 percent between March 2025 
and August 2025 as tepid global demand growth and 
strong supply growth from both OPEC+ and non-OPEC+ 
contributed to bringing prices down. Barring the tempo-
rary price spike in mid-June from the Israel-Iran war, 
oil prices have been range-bound, trading between 
$60 and $70 since the US announcement of tariffs 
in early April. The tariff announcements induced a 
decrease in global demand expectations and coincided 
with the start of an accelerated production schedule 
from OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Export-
ing Countries plus selected nonmember countries, 
including Russia). Bearish fundamentals are now 
mostly in focus: The International Energy Agency is 
forecasting 0.7 mb/d (million barrels per day) of global 
demand growth in 2025 and 1.4 mb/d of non-OPEC+ 
supply growth, while the latest OPEC+ production 
schedule gradually brought back 2.5 mb/d through 
September,1 one year ahead of schedule, with plans to 
further increase production. Talks to find a diplomatic 
solution to the war in Ukraine have stalled, increasing 
the risk of US secondary sanctions. US futures markets 
indicate that oil prices will average $68.90 per barrel 
The contributors to this Special Feature are Christian Bogmans, 
Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, Vida Maver, Jorge Miranda Pinto, 
Jean-Marc Natal (team lead), and Andrea Paloschi, with research 
assistance from Francis Cuadros Bloch, Ganchimeg Ganpurev, 
Maximiliano Jerez Osses, and Joseph Moussa. This Special Feature is 
based on Gomez-Gonzalez and others (2025).
12.2 mb/d of gradual unwinding of production cuts, combined 
with a 0.3 mb/d higher production quota for the United Arab 
Emirates.
in 2025, a 12.9 percent decline from the previous 
year, before decreasing to $65.80 in 2026 and steadily 
increasing to $67.30 through 2030 (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 2). Risks around this forecast are balanced. 
While potential Russian supply disruptions present an 
upside risk to prices, the risk of accelerated OPEC+ 
supply increases, combined with the tariff-induced 
cloudy global economic environment, continue to 
pressure prices downward. All the while, higher-cost 
producers set a loose price floor, with some US break-
even prices in the low to mid $60s.
Natural gas prices fell reflecting tariffs and ample 
supply. Title Transfer Facility (TTF) trading hub prices 
in Europe dropped 16.6 percent between March 2025 
and August 2025 to $11.0 per million British thermal 
units (MMBtu). Despite a temporary spike in June 
amid the Israel-Iran war, TTF prices fell on lower 
All commodities
Base metals
Food
Energy
April 2024 WEO
October 2024 WEO
April 2025 WEO
October 2025 WEO
Figure 1.SF.1.  Commodity Market Developments
1. Commodity Prices
(Index, 2016 = 100, US CPI adjusted)
0
400
100
200
300
2. Brent Crude Oil Price Forecasts
(US dollars per barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
60
90
70
80
2025
26
27
28
29
30
2015
17
19
21
23
25
16
18
20
22
24
26
27
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, Primary Commodity Price 
System; International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, latest actual CPI value is applied to forecasts, represented by the 
dashed portions of the graph lines. CPI = consumer price index; WEO = World 
Economic Outlook.
Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and  
Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
36
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
energy demand because of tariff-induced business 
uncertainty, weaker competing demand from Asia, and 
the approval of more flexible EU gas storage targets. 
Asian liquefied natural gas prices tracked the decreas-
ing trend in European prices, falling by 12.2 percent. 
US Henry Hub prices fell by 30 percent to $2.9 per 
MMBtu owing to trade-policy-induced demand uncer-
tainty and record-high domestic production. Futures 
markets suggest that TTF prices will average $12.1/
MMBtu in 2025, steadily decreasing to $8.4/MMBtu 
in 2030, reflecting ample global liquefied natural gas 
supply in the medium term, with US export capacity 
expected to almost double through 2027. Henry Hub 
prices are expected to fluctuate around $3.5/MMBtu 
between 2025 and 2030.
Safe haven demand lifted precious metals, whereas 
tariffs drove base metal prices lower. The IMF’s met-
als price index rose 6.8 percent between March and 
August 2025 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 1). Precious metals 
drove this increase, with gold increasing 12.8 percent, 
reaching record highs above $3,400/ounce as investors 
sought safe haven assets amid rising geopolitical uncer-
tainty and central banks increased gold reserves. US 
import tariffs had mixed effects on base metals. While 
US tariffs announced in early April pressured global 
prices downward, 50 percent tariffs on steel, alumi-
num, and copper triggered front-loading by the United 
States, providing some support to prices. Futures mar-
kets suggest modest increases of 0.3 percent in 2025 
and 3.0 percent in 2026.
China’s rare earth export controls trigger price spikes. 
Top producer China launched export licensing require-
ments for seven critical rare earth elements and their 
corresponding magnets in April, causing dramatic 
export slowdowns during April and May. Following a 
US-China trade agreement on June 11, Chinese mag-
net exports rebounded in June and had fully recovered 
by July, rising 5 percent year over year. Price impacts 
have persisted for key magnet materials however. Rare 
earth carbonate feedstock prices also jumped 30.2 
percent as reduced US raw material exports to China 
tightened global supplies of processed rare earths amid 
strengthening demand.
After a strong start to the year, agricultural com-
modities declined, thanks to ample supplies and the 
tariffs. From March to August 2025, the IMF’s 
food and beverages price index fell by 4.8 percent, 
led by sharp declines in coffee, cereal, and sugar 
prices. This reversed early-year gains, when coffee 
and cocoa prices surged because of bad weather 
in major exporters and tight global supply. Cereal 
prices dropped by 11.1 percent amid strong harvest 
prospects in major producing countries, such as the 
United States, Russia, Brazil, and Argentina. Coffee 
prices plunged by 16.7 percent, with the IMF Coffee 
Index retreating from its February historic high as 
supply prospects improved in top producer Brazil and 
as US tariff uncertainty grew. Despite this downward 
trend, prices surged briefly in August, following US 
tariffs on Brazil that caused trade disruptions. Mean-
while, corn prices fell 11.9 percent, pressured by 
Brazil’s large harvest in the second quarter and prom-
ising crop conditions in the United States. Upside 
risks to the food price outlook could stem from 
new export restrictions, which might raise global 
prices by tightening international supply—even as 
they put downward pressure on food prices in some 
exporting countries—and because of potential bad 
weather resulting from La Niña in the fourth quarter. 
Larger-than-expected harvests and higher tariffs pose 
the main downside risk.
Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic 
Fluctuations in Advanced and Emerging 
Markets: Does Size Matter?
Commodities play a central yet often underappreci-
ated role in shaping macroeconomic fluctuations across 
both advanced and emerging market and developing 
economies, with the latter generally experiencing 
greater macroeconomic volatility. In the context of 
today’s climate-related supply shocks and geopolitical 
and trade tensions, understanding the macroeconomic 
impact of commodity price fluctuations matters more 
than ever. And this requires looking beyond the sheer 
size of the commodity sector. Crucial to understand-
ing the effect of commodity price shocks on output 
and inflation is how interconnected the sector is with 
the rest of the economy and the rest of the world (for 
example, Baqaee and Farhi 2019; Bigio and La’O 
2020; Silva 2024; Silva and others 2024; Romero 
2025; Qiu and others 2025). These interlinkages shape 
the reallocation of labor and capital across sectors in 
response to a commodity price movement and play a 
critical role in driving fluctuations in real activity and 
inflation. The degree of interconnection between the 
commodity sector and the broader economy deter-
mines the extent of cyclical amplification and per-
sistence following a commodity price shock—and how 
monetary policy should respond.
37
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Relying on a mix of empirical analysis and gen-
eral equilibrium modeling, this Commodity Special 
Feature will seek to answer three questions: (1) How 
do commodity sectors’ linkages with the broader 
economy differ between emerging market and devel-
oping economies and advanced economies and across 
different commodities? (2) How do these linkages (up- 
and downstream) affect the propagation of commodity 
price shocks to the rest of the economy? and (3) How 
should monetary policy respond?
Size and Interconnectedness of Commodity 
Sectors in Advanced Economies and Emerging 
Market and Developing Economies
It is well established that, on average, emerging 
market and developing economies have much larger 
commodity sectors than advanced economies (for 
example, Kohn, Leibovici, and Tretvoll 2021).2 The 
average size, or Domar3 weight, of the commodity 
sectors in emerging market and developing economies 
is twice as large for metals, three times as large for 
energy, and almost four times as large for agriculture 
compared with advanced economies (see Online Annex 
Table SF.1.1 in Online Annex 1.1).4 But are commod-
ity sectors also more interconnected in emerging market 
and developing economies—and could this greater 
interconnectedness help explain their seemingly larger 
impact on economic fluctuations?
Answering this question requires examining their 
role within the broader production network—both 
upstream as suppliers to other sectors and downstream 
as purchasers of inputs. For example, an increase in 
copper prices encourages mining and extraction activ-
ities in countries that produce copper. This typically 
results in greater demand for industrial machinery, 
construction, transportation, and financial services, all 
inputs to the copper industry. Higher copper prices 
also affect a wide range of downstream industries. And 
this matters to the extent these industries may also 
ultimately influence the overall cost associated with 
copper extraction. For instance, higher copper prices 
will increase construction costs, which will in turn 
2In this Commodity Special Feature, the commodity sectors are 
broken down into energy (mining and petroleum products), metals 
(mining and fabricated metal products), and agricultural products.
3Domar weights are defined as the ratio of sectoral gross output to 
national GDP (Domar 1961).
4All online annexes are available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/
WEO.
increase industrial machinery’s production costs—an 
input to the production of copper. The degree of inter-
connectedness of the commodity sector is measured by 
its network-adjusted value-added share (NAVAS) (Silva 
and others 2024; Qiu and others 2025), or the sector’s 
total (direct and indirect) exposure to the economy’s 
factors of production (see Online Annex 1.1 for a 
formal definition).5
The commodity sector NAVAS is larger than its size 
(Domar weight) in both advanced and emerging mar-
ket economies, but the differences in NAVAS across 
both groups tend to be smaller than the differences 
in size.6 This suggests that its significance for macro-
economic fluctuations in advanced economies may be 
larger than it appears at first glance (Figure 1.SF.2). 
There is also a large overlap between the right tail of 
the distribution of the NAVAS in advanced economies 
and the left tail in emerging market and developing 
economies, meaning that commodity sectors in many 
advanced economies are more interconnected than in 
emerging market and developing economies and that 
commodity price shocks in these advanced economies 
may have a larger and more persistent effect on eco-
nomic activity (Figure 1.SF.2, panel 2).
Understanding Consumption Patterns Depends 
on Commodity Sector Interconnectedness, 
Not Size 
Figure 1.SF.3, panel 1, displays the relationship 
between the NAVAS (horizontal axis) and the cor-
relation between countries’ cyclical consumption and 
commodities’ terms of trade (commodity net export 
price index). As suggested in the previous section, 
countries with a more interconnected commodity sec-
tor (higher NAVAS) display stronger annual correlation 
between aggregate consumption and commodities 
terms of trade, and some advanced economies (for 
example, Australia, New Zealand, Canada) have larger 
NAVAS and co-movement than emerging market and 
5Online Annex 1.1 shows that varying the importance of the com-
modity sector as supplier of inputs to the rest of the economy has 
no impact on the NAVAS provided these sectors do not eventually 
feedback to the commodity sector’s upstream suppliers.
6The average commodity sector is three times larger (Domar 
weight) in emerging market and developing economies than in 
advanced economies, but its network-adjusted value-added share 
(NAVAS) is only 31 percent higher, with energy exhibiting the 
biggest difference across country groups and metals and agricultural 
products the smallest.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
38
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
developing economies (for example, Bulgaria, Hungary, 
Poland, South Africa).
Interestingly, and maybe counterintuitively, the cor-
relation is sometimes negative, even for commodity net 
exporters (for example South Africa); this point will be 
discussed further in the next subsection using a general 
equilibrium model.
Figure 1.SF.3, panel 2, confirms that interconnect-
edness (NAVAS) matters for the effect of commodity 
price shocks on consumption, even after controlling 
for the role of size (Domar weights). Coefficient esti-
mates at different horizons (based on local projection 
analysis; Jordà 2005) show that the NAVAS interaction 
coefficient—which measures the marginal impact of 
deeper interconnectedness on the response of con-
sumption to terms-of-trade changes—is substantially 
larger than the coefficient for the size interaction and is 
always significant.
Specific country examples tend to confirm this 
finding. For instance, although Thailand’s commodity 
sector is six times larger than Switzerland’s, their NAVAS 
values are almost identical (0.68 in Thailand and 0.65 in 
Switzerland), resulting in a very similar impact of terms-
of-trade shocks on consumption (see Figure 1.SF.3, 
AEs
EMs
Figure 1.SF.2.  Size and Network-Adjusted Value-Added 
Share across Country Groups
0
8
1
2
4
6
3
5
7
0
5
1
2
4
3
Frequency (number of countries)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Share (0 to 1)
Frequency (number of countries)
Share (0 to 1)
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Input-Output 
Tables, 2018; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The Domar weight is the ratio of the nominal value of the commodity sector 
gross output to GDP. NAVAS is the sum of commodity sector value-added (VA) share 
and commodity suppliers’ VA shares weighted by the Leontief inverse elements that 
capture downstream and upstream linkages of the commodity sector. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMs = emerging markets; NAVAS = network-adjusted value-added share.
1. Size across Country Groups
2. NAVAS across Country Groups
Commodity net exporter
Commodity net importer
Terms-of-trade shock × 2018 
commodity sector size
Terms-of-trade shock × 2018 
commodity sector NAVAS
Terms-of-trade shock
NZL
THA
KAZ
NOR
ZAF
CHE
VNM
AUS
CAN
BGR
POL
HUN
Figure 1.SF.3.  Importance of Interconnectedness over Size
−0.8
0.8
−0.6
−0.4
0
0.4
−0.2
0.2
0.6
−0.05
0
0.25
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.15
Correlation (Log C, Log P)
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.0
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Year 6
Network-adjusted value-added share (NAVAS)
Sources: Global Macro Database (Müller and others 2025); IMF, Commodity Terms of 
Trade Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the correlation between countries’ cyclical consumption and 
cyclical terms of trade, computed for 66 countries covering the period 1990–2023 with 
an annual frequency. The network-adjusted value-added share (NAVAS) used is from 
the year 2018. Sectoral value-added shares are measured using the ratio between 
gross output minus intermediate input usage and gross output. Terms of trade are 
measured by the Commodity Net Export Price Index, weighted by net exports as a 
share of GDP and deflated using the US consumer price index. Advanced economies 
are shown in blue, while emerging markets are shown in red. In addition, squares 
represent commodity net importers, while circles indicate commodity net exporters. 
Panel 2 presents consumption coefficient estimates from panel local projections at 
annual horizons, along with their respective standard deviations, in response to a 
one-standard-deviation terms-of-trade shock. The terms-of-trade shock is constructed 
following Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2018) using the residual of an autoregressive 
process of order one for each country’s log terms-of-trade index, deflated by US 
consumer price index. Estimates are shown for the direct terms-of-trade shock, its 
interaction with the NAVAS, and its interaction with the Domar weight in yellow, red, 
and blue, respectively. See Online Annex 1.1, Parts I and II for further details. Data 
labels in the figure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets.
1. Correlation between Consumption and Terms of Trade as a
Function of Interconnectedness; AEs versus EMs
2. Local Projections Impulse Response to Terms-of-Trade Shock
39
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
panel 1). Similarly, the Norwegian energy sector exhibits 
a NAVAS of 0.94, significantly larger than Vietnam’s 
(0.48), despite their similar size. And as expected, shocks 
to energy prices are more correlated with consumption 
in Norway than in Vietnam (Online Annex 1.1, Online 
Annex Figure 1.SF.1).
Model-Based Analysis
The small open economy dynamic stochastic 
general equilibrium model developed in Silva and 
others (2024) and Gomez-Gonzalez and others (2025) 
is employed to unpack the channels through which 
production network structure affects the transmission 
of commodity price shocks to the rest of the econ-
omy. In the model, households consume a final good 
produced with labor, commodities, and imported 
and domestic intermediate goods. Households save 
in foreign assets, which accumulate according to the 
small open economy’s successive current account 
surpluses or deficits. The real interest rate is given 
and fixed. Calibration uses the same Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development data 
featured in Figure 1.SF.2, covering 66 countries and 
44 sectors and is set to match each country’s sectoral 
final consumption shares, input-output shares, and 
the commodity sector’s net exports, all in 2018.7 Once 
calibrated, the model is used to run two experiments. 
First, it looks at the relationship between NAVAS and 
the co-movement between consumption and commod-
ity terms of trade. Model simulations (Figure 1.SF.4) 
show very similar results to raw data (Figure 1.SF.3, 
panel 1): The slope is positive (emerging market and 
developing economies tend to have higher NAVAS and 
higher correlation of cyclical consumption and terms-
of-trade shocks), and some advanced economies do 
display higher NAVAS and stronger co-movement than 
emerging market and developing economies. There is 
some variation in the correlation of consumption with 
commodity price shocks for the same level of intercon-
nectedness (NAVAS), which suggests a complex propa-
gation mechanism, which is analyzed further below.
7The model’s rich network structure and dynamic consump-
tion decision make it well equipped to study the transmission of 
commodity price shocks through factor prices and the valuation of 
debt. While it abstracts from factors such as unemployment and 
time-varying profit margins, these simplifications allow for a focused 
analysis of network propagation mechanisms. Because six commodity 
sectors are aggregated into one here, the benchmark calibration has 1 
commodity sector and 38 non-commodity sectors.
Second, the model is used to look under the hood 
and better understand the transmission mechanism of 
shocks to commodity prices. To emphasize the impor-
tance of the NAVAS in driving co-movements between 
commodity terms-of-trade shocks and consumption 
(Figure 1.SF.3, panel 1), the model is run for two 
commodity net exporters whose commodity sectors 
are of similar size (39 percent of GDP)—Kazakhstan 
and South Africa—but with the Kazakh commodity 
sector more strongly interconnected (NAVAS of 0.90 
versus 0.73 for South Africa). Figure 1.SF.5—which 
displays impulse response functions to a 1 percent 
commodity terms-of-trade shock—shows that the 
impact on aggregate consumption of a commodity 
price shock is positive and large in Kazakhstan but is 
negative in South Africa. Analysis of the transmission 
mechanism—which runs through both prices and 
wages—is essential to understanding this seemingly 
counterintuitive result.
Note first that real wages increase in both countries 
(nominal wages increase more than prices) because 
higher revenues in the commodity sector boost labor 
demand and real wages in equilibrium. However, the 
final impact of the shock on consumption does not 
depend only on labor income but also on the impact 
of the shock on households’ real wealth (net foreign 
HUN POL
BGR
KAZ
ZAF
THA
VNM
AUS
CAN
NZL NOR
CHE
Advanced economies
Emerging markets
Figure 1.SF.4.  Model-Based Consumption Response to a 
1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Price Shock
(Percent change)
−2.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Aggregate consumption response
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
NAVAS commodity sector
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: NAVAS is the network-adjusted value-added share of the commodity sector. 
Consumption response is the first-period reaction of real consumption to a 1 percent 
terms-of-trade shock. Data labels in the figure use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
40
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
assets denominated in units of real commodity goods).8 
In South Africa, the aggregate price index increases 
more than commodity prices on impact (more than 
1 percent; see Figure 1.SF.5, panel 1), leading to a 
decline in the real value of net foreign assets—a nega-
tive wealth shock from the perspective of South African 
consumers—and a decline in consumption.9
But what explains this larger increase in aggregate 
prices in South Africa? The key lies in the way factor 
price changes propagate and become diluted through 
the production network. In general equilibrium, any 
exogenous increase in commodity prices will be met 
by a commensurate increase in marginal costs in the 
8This relates to Drechsel and Tenreyro (2018) and Di Pace, Juve-
nal, and Petrella (2025), who show that increases in export prices 
have positive effects on net foreign asset position.
9The negative co-movement between consumption and commod-
ity terms-of-trade prices in South Africa aligns with the empirical 
evidence in Figure 1.SF.3.
commodity sector until excess profit is driven to zero. 
Because higher marginal costs stem from both factor 
prices (wages in the model) and intermediate input 
prices, a higher NAVAS implies greater interconnected-
ness of the commodity sector, a larger contribution of 
intermediate input prices to marginal cost fluctuations, 
and thus a smaller increase in wages required for any 
given rise in marginal costs. In low-NAVAS econo-
mies, such as South Africa, commodity price shocks 
feed more directly into factor costs—rather than being 
diluted along the supply chain via intermediate input 
prices—resulting in larger aggregate price increases.10 
Low-NAVAS countries will tend to see larger increases 
in aggregate prices, lower real net foreign assets, and 
therefore a smaller wealth effect.
To sum up, differences in commodity sector linkages 
as measured by the NAVAS drive the differences in 
macroeconomic responses to commodity price fluc-
tuations.11 On balance, the wealth effect could even 
be negative and could more than offset the positive 
income effect, leading to a drop in consumption, as 
in South Africa (Figures 1.SF.3, panel 1, and 1.SF.5), 
and this is true regardless of the size of the sector as 
measured by Domar weights.
Implications for Monetary Policy in Small Open 
Economies
While higher commodity prices typically exert 
upward pressure on inflation, their effect on consump-
tion varies with the commodity sector’s NAVAS—
amplifying or dampening the transmission, depending 
on the economy’s structure. This raises important 
questions about how monetary policy should respond 
to commodity price shocks.
Standard theory suggests that monetary policy 
should respond only to inflation occurring in sticky 
price sectors and should ignore fluctuations in 
10An increase in marginal costs in the commodity sector can arise 
either from small increments in intermediate input prices—driven by 
modest wage increases along the supply chain—or from a large direct 
increase in wages that takes place in all sectors simultaneously given 
perfect labor mobility across sectors. The latter exerts a stronger 
effect on aggregate prices.
11For more details see Gomez-Gonzalez and others (2025), in 
which the authors show how these effects change when the country 
is instead a commodity importer and when considering productivity 
shocks to the commodity sector. The authors also discuss the hetero-
geneity in energy, metals, and agricultural commodity linkages across 
groups of economies. Finally, the authors show that the relationship 
between NAVAS and the consumption response to terms-of-trade 
shocks is robust to denominating foreign assets in units of the 
importable goods instead of in units of the exportable goods.
Agg. price KAZ
Agg. price ZAF
Wage KAZ
Wage ZAF
Agg. consumption KAZ
Agg. consumption ZAF
Current account KAZ
Current account ZAF
Figure 1.SF.5.  Model-Based Impulse Responses to a 
1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Shock
(Percent change)
0
1.5
0.5
1.0
−0.1
0
0.4
0.1
0.3
0.2
1
2
3
4
6
8
5
7
9
11 12 13 14
16
18
15
17
19
10
20
1
2
3
4
6
8
5
7
9
11 12 13 14
16
18
15
17
19
10
20
Periods
Periods
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The figure illustrates the impact of a commodity price shock on two distinct 
exporting economies, both calibrated to start with an equal initial trade balance. The 
calibration is based on each economy’s input-output structure. Agg. = aggregate; 
KAZ = Kazakhstan; ZAF = South Africa.
1. Aggregate Price and Wage Reaction to a 1 Percent
Terms-of-Trade Shock
2. Aggregate Consumption and Current Account Reaction to a
1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Shock
41
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Commodity Special Feature 
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
commodity prices because these sectors display flexible 
prices that are not influenced much by monetary 
policy (Aoki 2001; Woodford 2003). However, while 
it is true that global commodity prices are flexible and 
highly responsive to shocks, the pass-through to domes-
tic commodity sectors is incomplete, and domestic 
commodity prices are stickier.12
The question then becomes how much weight pol-
icymakers should assign to commodity price fluctua-
tions in the conduct of monetary policy. As shown by 
Rubbo (2023), Domar weights may be a good guide 
in a closed economy.13 But relying on them to design 
monetary policy in small open economies, instead of 
the network-adjusted weight (NAW)—which depends 
on the NAVAS—would lead to welfare losses that are 
inversely proportional to the NAVAS (Qiu and others 
2025).14 The reason is that when the commodity sec-
tor’s NAVAS is low—meaning it relies more on foreign 
than on domestic factors of production (directly and 
indirectly)—there is no need to respond to commodity 
price fluctuations since they do not lead to commensu-
rate output gap fluctuations.
A small open economy policymaker following the 
prescription for a closed economy (adjusting mone-
tary policy guided by Domar weights) would typically 
be overestimating the importance of commodity price 
fluctuations in the conduct of monetary policy, and the 
degree of overreaction would be inversely proportional 
to the NAVAS. Using the data presented in Figure 
1.SF.2, Figure 1.SF.6 reports the distribution of the 
“policy mistake” made by relying on size instead of the 
NAW. The figure shows that both groups of econo-
mies would make monetary policy mistakes by over-
weighting the commodity sector by roughly a third.15 
12For more on incomplete pass-through, see, for example, Choi 
and others (2018) for oil (among many others), Miranda-Pinto and 
others (2024) for metals, and Hyun and Lee (2023) for agricultural 
products.
13Rubbo (2023) shows that—using sectoral (Domar) weights (and 
measures of sectoral price stickiness) to adjust the consumer price 
index (CPI)—a new CPI can be constructed. Stabilizing this new 
price index also closes the output gap and is therefore optimal from 
the point of view of monetary policy.
14The welfare losses from following a closed economy policy 
prescription in a small open economy environment are described by 
the monetary policy mistake (PM), defined as PM = k(1 – NAVAS) 
+ export intensity – expenditure switching. For more details, please 
refer to Online Annex 1.1, Part IV.
15For instance, the average size of the commodity sector in 
advanced economies is 13 percent, but because the average monetary 
policy mistake is 34 percent, the actual weight should be 8.6 percent. 
For emerging market and developing economies, the average size of 
the commodity sector is 39 percent, but given an average monetary 
policy mistake of 24 percent, the actual weight should be 30 percent.
Specifically, advanced economies tend to overestimate 
(by 32 percent, on average) the importance of the 
commodity sector in monetary policy design, compared 
with emerging market and developing economies (by 
27 percent, on average).
Conclusion
The macroeconomic impact of commodity price 
shocks depends less on the size of the commodity 
sector than on how interconnected it is with the rest 
of the economy. The network-adjusted value-added 
share (NAVAS) captures this interconnectedness and 
explains cross-country differences in how consumption 
responds to commodity price fluctuations.
For policymakers, the main takeaway is that mac-
roeconomic frameworks should be adapted to account 
for the structure of domestic production networks. In 
particular, central banks should account for production 
network structures when calibrating their response to 
commodity price movements. Doing so can reduce 
the risk of policy miscalibration and enhance macro-
economic stability across both advanced and emerging 
market economies, regardless of their net commodity 
trade position.
EMs
AEs
Figure 1.SF.6.  Monetary Policy Mistake Distribution, 2018
(Percent)
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Density
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Percent deviation optimal weight
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Underlying calculations, based on the work of Qiu and others (2025), illustrate the 
monetary policy errors that occur when the focus is solely on the size of the commodity 
sector. The horizontal axis represents the policy mistakes expressed as the difference 
between the Domar weight and network-adjusted weight as a proportion of the Domar 
weight. AEs = advanced economies. EMs = emerging markets.
Kernel density estimate of the monetary policy mistake in the commodity sector.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
42
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
Europe
1.9
1.5
1.6
7.8
6.2
4.6
2.5
1.9
1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Europe 
1.1
1.3
1.3
2.3
2.2
2.0
3.1
2.7
2.7
5.8
6.0
5.9
Euro Area4,5
0.9
1.2
1.1
2.4
2.1
1.9
2.6
2.3
2.2
6.4
6.4
6.3
Germany
–0.5
0.2
0.9
2.5
2.1
1.8
5.6
5.4
5.1
3.4
3.7
3.4
France
1.1
0.7
0.9
2.3
1.1
1.5
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
7.4
7.6
7.5
Italy
0.7
0.5
0.8
1.1
1.7
2.0
1.1
1.0
1.0
6.6
6.7
6.7
Spain
3.5
2.9
2.0
2.9
2.4
2.0
3.2
2.7
2.6
11.3
10.8
10.7
The Netherlands
1.1
1.4
1.2
3.2
2.9
2.4
9.1
9.5
9.3
3.7
3.8
4.0
Belgium
1.0
1.1
1.0
4.3
2.6
1.3
–0.9
–0.9
–0.9
5.7
6.1
6.2
Ireland
2.6
9.1
1.3
1.3
1.7
1.7
16.2
11.1
11.5
4.3
4.6
4.6
Austria
–1.0
0.3
0.8
2.9
3.6
2.3
2.4
1.8
2.2
5.2
5.7
5.6
Portugal 
1.9
1.9
2.1
2.7
2.2
2.1
2.1
1.8
1.9
6.5
6.4
6.3
Greece
2.3
2.0
2.0
3.0
3.1
2.5
–7.0
–5.8
–5.3
10.1
9.0
8.4
Finland
0.4
0.5
1.3
1.0
1.8
1.9
0.0
0.1
–0.1
8.4
9.0
8.7
Slovak Republic
2.1
0.9
1.7
3.2
4.2
3.3
–2.8
–2.9
–2.5
5.4
5.5
5.6
Croatia
3.9
3.1
2.7
4.0
4.4
2.8
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0
5.3
5.0
5.0
Lithuania
2.7
2.7
2.9
0.9
3.6
3.1
2.5
2.1
2.1
7.1
6.6
6.1
Slovenia
1.7
1.1
2.3
2.0
2.5
2.4
4.5
2.9
2.9
3.7
3.8
4.0
Luxembourg
0.4
1.2
2.1
2.3
2.3
2.2
6.9
12.2
12.4
5.8
6.1
6.2
Latvia
–0.4
1.0
2.2
1.3
3.8
2.6
–1.6
–2.1
–2.3
6.9
6.7
6.6
Estonia
–0.1
0.5
1.5
3.7
5.1
4.3
–1.2
–0.9
–2.2
7.5
7.9
7.4
Cyprus 
3.4
2.9
2.8
2.3
0.7
1.3
–8.4
–8.5
–9.1
4.9
4.5
4.7
Malta
6.8
3.9
3.9
2.4
2.4
2.0
5.5
5.1
4.4
3.1
2.5
2.5
United Kingdom
1.1
1.3
1.3
2.5
3.4
2.5
–2.7
–3.1
–3.0
4.3
4.7
4.7
Switzerland
1.4
0.9
1.3
1.1
0.1
0.6
7.7
7.0
7.0
2.4
2.9
3.1
Sweden
0.8
0.7
1.9
2.0
2.3
1.6
5.9
5.8
5.7
8.4
9.0
8.4
Czech Republic
1.2
2.3
2.0
2.4
2.5
2.3
1.7
0.6
0.4
2.6
2.5
2.4
Norway
2.1
1.2
1.6
3.1
2.4
2.4
16.7
16.2
15.9
4.0
4.3
4.2
Denmark
3.5
1.8
2.2
1.3
1.9
2.1
12.2
12.2
11.7
2.9
3.0
3.0
Iceland
–1.0
1.4
2.3
5.9
4.2
3.1
–2.6
–3.6
–1.1
3.4
3.9
4.0
Liechtenstein
1.5
1.0
1.5
1.1
0.1
0.6
14.6
13.2
12.9
2.7
2.7
2.7
Andorra
3.4
2.4
1.6
3.1
2.2
1.8
15.0
15.2
15.3
1.5
1.6
1.6
San Marino
0.7
1.0
1.3
1.2
2.0
2.0
18.3
17.5
17.8
4.4
4.4
4.5
Emerging and Developing Europe6
3.5
1.8
2.2
16.9
13.5
9.3
–0.1
–1.1
–1.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Russia
4.3
0.6
1.0
8.4
9.0
5.2
2.9
1.7
1.6
2.5
2.4
3.1
Türkiye
3.3
3.5
3.7
58.5
34.9
24.7
–0.8
–1.4
–1.3
8.7
8.3
8.3
Poland
2.9
3.2
3.1
3.7
3.8
2.8
0.0
–0.7
–0.8
2.9
2.9
3.1
Romania
0.8
1.0
1.4
5.6
7.3
6.7
–8.4
–8.0
–6.6
5.4
5.9
5.8
Ukraine7
2.9
2.0
4.5
6.5
12.6
7.6
–7.2
–16.5
–12.6
13.1
11.6
10.2
Hungary
0.5
0.6
2.1
3.7
4.5
3.5
2.2
1.2
0.9
4.5
4.3
4.2
Belarus
4.0
2.1
1.4
5.7
7.0
7.5
–3.2
–1.8
–3.1
3.0
2.9
2.9
Bulgaria
2.8
3.0
3.1
2.6
3.6
3.4
–1.6
–3.8
–3.2
4.2
3.5
3.4
Serbia
3.9
2.4
3.6
4.7
4.6
4.0
–4.7
–5.3
–5.3
8.6
8.6
8.6
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 
5 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices, except for Slovenia. 
6 Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.
7 See the country-specific note for Ukraine in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
43
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
Asia
4.6
4.5
4.1
2.1
1.6
2.1
2.6
2.9
2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Asia
1.6
1.6
1.4
2.6
2.5
2.1
5.3
5.0
4.7
2.9
3.0
3.0
Japan
0.1
1.1
0.6
2.7
3.3
2.1
4.8
3.9
3.6
2.6
2.6
2.6
Korea 
2.0
0.9
1.8
2.3
2.0
1.8
5.3
4.8
3.9
2.8
3.0
3.0
Australia
1.0
1.8
2.1
3.2
2.6
3.0
–1.9
–1.8
–1.7
4.0
4.2
4.3
Taiwan Province of China
4.8
3.7
2.1
2.2
1.7
1.6
14.1
13.8
13.1
3.4
3.4
3.4
Singapore
4.4
2.2
1.8
2.4
0.9
1.3
17.5
17.4
17.3
2.0
2.1
2.1
Hong Kong SAR
2.5
2.4
2.1
1.7
1.7
2.1
13.0
12.5
12.2
3.0
3.4
3.3
New Zealand
–0.6
0.8
2.2
2.9
2.7
2.1
–6.1
–4.7
–4.4
4.8
5.2
5.1
Macao SAR 
8.8
2.6
2.8
0.7
0.5
1.2
35.8
35.5
34.9
1.8
1.7
1.7
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.3
5.2
4.7
1.9
1.3
2.1
1.6
2.2
1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
China
5.0
4.8
4.2
0.2
0.0
0.7
2.3
3.3
2.8
5.1
5.1
5.1
India4
6.5
6.6
6.2
4.6
2.8
4.0
–0.6
–1.0
–1.4
4.9
4.9
4.9
Indonesia
5.0
4.9
4.9
2.3
1.8
2.9
–0.6
–1.1
–1.2
4.9
5.0
5.0
Thailand
2.5
2.0
1.6
0.4
0.2
0.7
2.5
1.7
1.3
1.0
1.0
1.0
Vietnam
7.1
6.5
5.6
3.6
3.4
3.2
6.6
4.0
2.4
2.2
2.3
2.5
Malaysia
5.1
4.5
4.0
1.8
1.6
2.2
1.4
1.5
1.8
3.2
3.0
3.0
Philippines
5.7
5.4
5.7
3.2
1.6
2.6
–4.0
–3.8
–3.5
3.8
3.9
3.9
Other Emerging and Developing Asia5
3.9
3.3
4.4
9.3
9.6
8.9
–0.2
0.1
–1.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
ASEAN-56
4.6
4.2
4.1
2.0
1.4
2.3
2.6
2.3
2.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Asia7
5.4
5.2
4.7
1.6
1.0
1.8
1.6
2.2
1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5 Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, 
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6 Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
7 Emerging Asia comprises China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
44
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and 
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
North America
2.6
1.8
2.0
3.1
2.8
2.5
–3.6
–3.6
–3.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
United States 
2.8
2.0
2.1
3.0
2.7
2.4
–4.0
–4.0
–3.6
4.0
4.2
4.1
Mexico
1.4
1.0
1.5
4.7
3.9
3.3
–0.9
–0.2
–0.3
2.7
2.9
3.1
Canada
1.6
1.2
1.5
2.4
2.0
2.0
–0.5
–1.4
–1.3
6.4
6.9
6.6
Puerto Rico4
3.2
–0.8
–0.1
2.0
1.4
2.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
5.6
6.4
6.0
South America5
2.3
2.7
2.2
23.6
9.8
5.8
–1.1
–1.6
–1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Brazil
3.4
2.4
1.9
4.4
5.2
4.0
–2.7
–2.5
–2.3
6.9
7.1
7.3
Argentina
–1.3
4.5
4.0
219.9
41.3
16.4
0.9
–1.2
–0.4
7.2
7.5
6.6
Colombia
1.6
2.5
2.3
6.6
4.9
3.5
–1.7
–2.3
–2.6
10.1
10.0
9.8
Chile
2.6
2.5
2.0
3.9
4.3
3.1
–1.5
–2.5
–2.2
8.5
8.6
8.3
Peru
3.3
2.9
2.7
2.4
1.7
1.9
2.2
1.8
1.2
6.4
6.5
6.5
Ecuador
–2.0
3.2
2.0
1.5
1.1
2.8
5.7
4.9
3.4
3.4
4.0
3.8
Venezuela
5.3
0.5
–3.0
49.0
269.9
682.1
4.9
4.2
2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Bolivia
0.7
0.6
. . .
5.1
20.8
. . .
–3.0
–3.4
. . .
5.0
5.1
. . .
Paraguay
4.2
4.4
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.7
–3.9
–3.5
–3.7
5.8
5.2
5.2
Uruguay
3.1
2.5
2.4
4.8
4.7
4.5
–1.0
–1.4
–1.5
8.2
7.9
8.0
Central America6
3.9
3.4
3.8
2.3
1.9
3.0
–0.4
–0.1
–1.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Caribbean7
12.1
3.6
8.2
6.2
6.1
6.4
2.6
–0.2
–0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Latin America and the Caribbean8
2.4
2.4
2.3
16.6
7.6
5.0
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9
4.0
3.0
2.6
2.2
1.8
1.9
–9.9
–10.4
–9.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. Aggregates exclude 
Venezuela.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5 See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6 Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, 
Nicaragua, and Panama.
7 The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8 Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and 
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9 Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as Anguilla and 
Montserrat, which are not IMF members.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
45
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and 
Unemployment 
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
Middle East and Central Asia
2.6
3.5
3.8
14.0
10.9
9.5
2.3
1.1
0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
2.7
3.2
3.5
8.5
10.0
10.0
4.5
2.8
2.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
2.0
4.0
4.0
1.7
2.1
2.0
–0.5
–2.1
–2.5
3.5
. . .
. . .
Iran 
3.7
0.6
1.1
32.5
42.4
41.6
3.2
1.8
2.0
7.6
9.2
9.2
United Arab Emirates
4.0
4.8
5.0
1.7
1.6
2.0
14.5
13.2
12.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kazakhstan
4.8
5.9
4.8
8.7
11.4
11.2
–1.7
–3.8
–4.0
4.7
4.6
4.6
Algeria
3.7
3.4
2.9
4.0
3.5
3.9
–1.1
–3.7
–3.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iraq
–0.2
0.5
3.6
2.6
1.5
2.5
–0.2
0.4
–1.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
2.4
2.9
6.1
1.2
0.1
2.6
17.4
10.8
10.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kuwait
–2.6
2.6
3.9
2.9
2.2
2.2
29.1
26.5
24.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Azerbaijan
4.1
3.0
2.5
2.2
5.7
4.5
6.3
4.3
2.3
5.4
5.3
5.3
Oman
1.7
2.9
4.0
0.6
0.9
1.5
2.9
–1.0
–0.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Turkmenistan
3.0
2.3
2.3
4.6
3.9
5.0
4.4
2.3
0.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Bahrain
2.6
2.9
3.3
0.9
0.3
0.8
4.8
3.5
3.8
6.2
. . .
. . .
Oil Importers5,6
2.4
4.0
4.4
23.6
12.2
8.8
–3.9
–3.2
–3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Egypt
2.4
4.3
4.5
33.3
20.4
11.8
–5.4
–5.1
–4.3
7.4
7.4
7.3
Pakistan7
2.5
2.7
3.6
23.4
4.5
6.0
–0.6
0.5
–0.4
8.3
8.0
7.5
Morocco
3.8
4.4
4.2
0.9
1.2
1.8
–1.2
–2.3
–2.6
13.3
13.1
12.7
Uzbekistan
6.5
6.8
6.0
9.6
9.1
7.3
–5.0
–2.4
–4.6
5.5
5.0
4.5
Tunisia
1.6
2.5
2.1
7.0
5.9
6.1
–1.7
–3.1
–3.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Sudan7
–23.4
3.2
9.5
185.7
87.2
54.6
–3.3
–3.1
–7.7
60.8
60.6
58.0
Jordan
2.5
2.7
2.9
1.6
2.2
2.6
–5.9
–5.5
–5.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Georgia
9.4
7.2
5.3
1.1
3.9
3.4
–4.4
–4.5
–4.6
13.9
13.9
13.9
Armenia
5.9
4.8
4.9
0.4
3.3
2.8
–4.6
–4.7
–4.7
13.9
13.5
13.3
Tajikistan
8.4
7.5
5.5
3.5
3.8
4.5
6.2
3.4
–0.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kyrgyz Republic
9.0
8.0
5.3
5.0
8.0
6.9
–25.3
–8.4
–7.7
4.0
4.0
4.0
Mauritania
6.3
4.0
4.3
2.5
2.5
3.5
–9.4
–7.2
–7.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
West Bank and Gaza7
–26.6
. . .
. . .
53.7
. . .
. . .
–21.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Caucasus and Central Asia 
5.5
5.6
4.7
6.7
8.6
8.0
–1.4
–2.0
–3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,  
and Pakistan6
2.1
3.2
3.7
15.2
11.2
9.8
2.9
1.6
1.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East and North Africa
2.1
3.3
3.7
14.2
12.2
10.3
3.2
1.7
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Israel8
1.0
2.5
3.9
3.1
3.2
2.2
2.8
2.8
3.0
3.0
2.9
3.2
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 Includes Libya and Yemen. Yemen does not currently export oil due to the internal conflict.
5 Includes Djibouti, Lebanon, and Somalia. See the country-specific note for Lebanon in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6 Excludes Afghanistan and Syria because of the uncertain political situation. See the country-specific notes in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7 See the country-specific notes for Pakistan, Sudan and West Bank and Gaza in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8 Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is shown for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
46
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
2024
2025
2026
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.1
4.1
4.4
20.3
13.1
10.9
–1.5
–1.7
–1.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
3.9
3.6
3.9
29.1
21.7
19.8
5.3
3.3
1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria5
4.1
3.9
4.2
31.4
23.0
22.0
6.8
5.7
3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Angola
4.4
2.1
2.1
28.2
21.6
16.3
5.4
0.9
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Gabon
3.4
1.9
2.6
1.2
1.4
2.5
4.0
1.8
–0.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Chad
3.5
3.3
3.6
5.1
4.0
3.6
1.0
–2.3
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Equatorial Guinea
0.9
–1.6
0.5
3.4
2.9
2.9
–3.3
–3.0
–3.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle-Income Countries6
3.1
3.3
3.5
6.3
5.0
4.5
–2.2
–1.9
–1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
0.5
1.1
1.2
4.4
3.4
3.7
–0.7
–0.9
–1.2
32.6
32.7
32.7
Kenya
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.5
4.0
5.2
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ghana
5.7
4.0
4.8
22.9
16.6
9.9
1.1
1.8
1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Côte d’Ivoire 
6.0
6.4
6.4
3.4
1.0
1.5
–4.2
–2.1
–1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Cameroon
3.5
3.8
4.1
4.5
3.7
3.3
–3.1
–3.4
–3.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Senegal
6.4
6.0
3.0
0.8
2.0
2.0
–12.5
–8.0
–5.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Zambia
4.0
5.8
6.4
15.0
14.2
9.2
–2.6
1.3
2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income Countries7
6.0
5.9
6.2
28.1
12.1
7.2
–5.3
–5.3
–4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ethiopia
8.1
7.2
7.1
21.0
13.0
9.4
–4.2
–2.9
–2.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tanzania
5.5
6.0
6.3
3.1
3.3
3.5
–2.6
–2.6
–2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Democratic Republic of the Congo
6.5
5.3
5.3
17.7
8.8
7.1
–3.9
–3.3
–2.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Uganda
6.3
6.4
7.6
3.3
3.8
4.3
–7.5
–5.0
–3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mali
4.7
5.0
5.4
3.2
3.5
2.0
–4.6
–4.6
–2.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Burkina Faso
4.8
4.0
4.8
4.2
1.3
2.4
–5.7
–1.6
–1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP. 
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4 Includes Republic of Congo and South Sudan.
5 See the country-specific note for Nigeria in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6 Includes Benin, Botswana, Cabo Verde, the Comoros, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Seychelles.
7 Includes Burundi, Central African Republic, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Togo, and 
Zimbabwe.
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
47
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 
(Annual percent change; in constant 2021 international dollars at purchasing power parity)
Average
Projections 
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
World
2.0
2.5
2.5
1.8
–3.9
5.7
2.8
2.4
2.3
2.7
2.2
Advanced Economies
0.8
2.2
1.9
1.5
–4.4
5.9
2.4
0.9
1.2
1.2
1.4
United States
0.7
1.8
2.4
2.1
–2.9
5.8
2.0
2.1
1.9
1.5
1.8
Euro Area1
0.4
2.5
1.6
1.4
–6.3
6.5
3.3
–0.1
0.6
0.8
0.9
Germany
1.2
2.6
1.0
0.9
–4.0
4.1
1.1
–1.8
–0.8
0.0
0.8
France
0.3
2.0
1.3
1.7
–7.9
6.4
2.3
1.3
0.8
0.4
0.6
Italy
–0.9
1.8
1.0
0.6
–8.6
9.7
5.2
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.9
Spain
0.0
2.6
1.8
1.1
–11.1
6.5
5.0
1.3
2.5
1.6
0.8
Japan
0.5
1.8
0.8
–0.2
–3.9
3.0
1.3
1.7
0.6
1.6
1.2
United Kingdom
0.4
2.0
0.8
1.1
–10.7
8.7
4.0
–0.6
–0.3
0.4
0.5
Canada
0.4
1.8
1.3
0.4
–6.1
5.3
2.5
–1.3
–1.3
0.1
1.6
Other Advanced Economies2
1.9
2.5
2.1
1.3
–2.1
5.9
1.9
0.6
1.7
1.3
1.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.6
3.2
3.3
2.5
–3.2
5.9
3.2
3.6
3.2
3.7
3.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.5
5.6
5.6
4.5
–1.4
7.1
4.1
5.5
4.7
4.7
4.2
China
8.4
6.3
6.4
5.7
2.2
8.5
3.2
5.5
5.1
5.0
4.4
India3
5.3
5.6
5.3
2.8
–6.7
8.8
6.8
8.2
5.6
5.7
5.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.1
3.7
3.5
2.4
–1.9
7.6
1.9
3.8
3.8
2.1
2.2
Russia
1.5
1.6
2.7
2.1
–2.5
6.2
–1.1
4.4
4.5
1.0
1.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
1.2
0.3
0.2
–0.9
–8.0
6.6
3.6
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.6
Brazil
1.2
0.7
1.1
0.6
–3.9
4.3
2.6
2.8
3.0
2.0
1.6
Mexico
0.2
0.9
1.0
–1.3
–9.1
5.4
2.9
2.4
0.6
0.2
0.8
Middle East and Central Asia
1.5
0.0
0.7
0.3
–4.5
2.9
4.1
0.4
0.5
6.0
2.0
Saudi Arabia
0.4
1.1
5.9
2.1
–8.3
9.2
7.2
–4.0
–2.6
2.0
1.9
Sub-Saharan Africa
1.8
0.0
0.5
0.4
–5.7
1.2
1.9
1.2
1.5
1.6
1.8
Nigeria
2.7
–1.6
–0.4
0.0
–8.3
–1.0
2.2
1.2
1.9
1.8
2.1
South Africa
0.6
–0.3
0.0
–1.3
–7.5
3.8
0.9
–0.5
–0.8
–0.3
–0.3
Memorandum
European Union
0.7
2.9
2.1
1.8
–5.7
6.7
3.5
0.0
0.8
1.2
1.3
ASEAN-54
3.6
4.0
3.8
3.2
–5.5
3.3
4.6
3.1
3.6
3.2
3.2
Middle East and North Africa
1.2
–0.6
0.2
–0.1
–4.7
3.0
4.4
0.4
–0.1
1.4
1.9
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.9
3.6
3.7
2.7
–2.9
6.6
3.5
4.0
3.6
3.5
3.3
Low-Income Developing Countries
2.8
1.7
2.0
2.3
–3.9
1.2
2.6
1.8
1.7
3.9
2.7
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 
1 Data are calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3 See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4 ASEAN-5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
48
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
References
Acalin, Julien, Virginia Alonso, Clara Arroyo, W. Raphael Lam, 
Leonardo Martinez, Anh Dinh Minh Nguyen, Francisco 
Roch, Galen Sher, and Alexandra Solovyeva. Forthcoming. 
“Fiscal Guardrails against High Debt and Looming Spending 
Pressures.” IMF Staff Discussion Note, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ahir, Hites, Nicholas Bloom, and Davide Furceri. 2022. “The 
World Uncertainty Index.” NBER Working Paper 29763, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Andrle, Michal, and Benjamin L. Hunt. 2020. “Model-Based 
Globally-Consistent Risk Assessment.” IMF Working Paper 
20/064, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aoki, Kosuke. 2001. “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to 
Relative-Price Changes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 48 
(1): 55–80.
Bank of England (BOE). 2019. Monetary Policy Report, 
Section 4. London.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run: 
A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing Puzzles.” Journal of 
Finance 59(4): 1481–1509.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2019. “The Macroeco-
nomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks: Beyond Hulten’s 
Theorem.” Econometrica 87 (4): 1155–203.
Bauer, R. Andrew, Renee Haltom, and Matthew Martin. 2025. 
“Why Businesses Say Tariffs Have a Delayed Effect on 
Inflation.” Regional Matters (blog), Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond, August 8.
Bernanke, Ben. 1983. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical 
Investment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (1): 85-106.
Bernanke, Ben. 2024. “Forecasting for Monetary Policy Making 
and Communication at the Bank of England: A Review.” 
Bank of England, London.
Bigio, Saki, and Jennifer La’O. 2020. “Distortions in Produc-
tion Networks.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (4): 
2187–253.
Binder, Carola Conces. 2021. “Political Pressure on Central 
Banks.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 53 (4): 715–44.
Boz, Emine, Camila Casas, Federico Diez, Gita Gopinath, 
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mikkel Plagborg-Moller. 
2020. “Dominant Currency Paradigm.” American Economic 
Review 110 (3): 677–719.
Caldara, Dario, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea 
Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo. 2020. “The Economic Effects 
of Trade Policy Uncertainty.” Journal of Monetary Economics 
109: 38–59.
Cavallo, Alberto, Paola Llamas, and Franco Vazquez. 2025. 
“Tracking the Short-Run Price Impact of U.S. Tariffs.” Har-
vard Business School Working Paper, Cambridge, MA.
Cerutti, Eugenio M., Antonio Garcia Pascual, Yosuke Kido, 
Longji Li, Giovanni Melina, Marina Mendes Tavares, and 
Philippe Wingender. 2025. “The Global Impact of AI: Mind 
the Gap.” IMF Working Paper 25/76, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Chabert, Guillaume, and Robert Powell. 2025. “Poorest Coun-
tries and Fragile States Are Increasingly Falling Behind.” IMF 
Blog, June 26.
Choi, Sangyup, Davide Furceri, Prakash Loungani, Saurabh 
Mishra, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2018. “Oil Prices and 
Inflation Dynamics: Evidence from Advanced and Develop-
ing Economies.” Journal of International Money and Finance 
82 (April): 71–96.
Davis, Steven J. 2016. “An Index of Global Economic Policy 
Uncertainty.” NBER Working Paper 22740, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Di Pace, Federico, Luciana Juvenal, and Ivan Petrella. 2025. 
“Terms-of-Trade Shocks Are Not All Alike.” American Eco-
nomic Journal: Macroeconomics 17 (2): 24–64.
Domar, Evsey D. 1961. “On the Measurement of Technological 
Change.” Economic Journal 71 (284): 709–29.
Drechsel, Thomas. 2025. “Political Pressure on the Fed.” Univer-
sity of Maryland, College Park, MD.
Drechsel, Thomas, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2018. “Commodity 
Booms and Busts in Emerging Economies.” Journal of Inter-
national Economics 112: 200–18.
Duzhak, Evgeniya, and Addie New-Schmidt. 2025. “Updated 
Estimates of Net International Migration.” SF Fed Blog, July 17.
Edelberg, Wendy, Stan Veuger, and Tara Watson. 2025. “Immi-
gration Policy and Its Macroeconomic Effects in the Second 
Trump Administration.” AEI Economic Perspectives, July 2.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Pinelopi Goldberg, Patrick Kennedy, Amit 
Khandelwal, and Daria Taglioni. 2024. “The US China Trade 
War and Global Reallocations.” American Economic Review: 
Insights 6 (2): 295–312.
Francois, John Nana, Nazneen Ahmad, Andrew Keinsley, and 
Akwasi Nti-Addae. 2022. “Heterogeneity in the Long-Run 
Remittance-Output Relationship: Theory and New Evi-
dence.” Economic Modelling 110: 105793.
Freund, Caroline, Aaditya Mattoo, Alen Mulabdic, and Michele 
Ruta. 2024. “Is US Trade Policy Reshaping Global Supply 
Chains?” Journal of International Economics, 152: 104007. 
Furceri, Davide, Carlos Goncalves, and Hongchi Li. 2025. “The 
Impact of Debt and Deficits on Long-Term Interest Rates in 
the US.” IMF Working Paper 25/142, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ghironi, Fabio, and Galip Kemal Ozhan. Forthcoming. “Interest 
Rate Uncertainty as a Policy Tool?” Journal of International 
Economics.
Gomez-Gonzalez, Patricia, Maximiliano Jerez-Osses, Vida 
Maver, Jorge Miranda-Pinto, and Jean-Marc Natal. 2025. 
“Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations: Does Size 
Matter?” IMF Working Paper 25/208, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC.
Gopinath, Gita. 2023. “Harnessing AI for Global Good.” 
Finance & Development 60(4).
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Andrea F. Presbitero, 
and Petia Topalova. 2025. “Changing Global Linkages: A 
New Cold War?” Journal of International Economics 153(C).
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
49
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Graziano, Alejandro G., Monika Sztajerowska, and Christian 
Volpe Martincus. 2024. “Trading Places: How Trade Policy Is 
Reshaping Multinational Firms’ Location.” CESifo Working 
Paper Series.
Huckstep, Sam, Laura Granito, Sara Casadevall Bellés, and Lee 
Crawfurd. 2025. “Charting the Fallout of Aid Cuts: Which 
Countries Will Be Hit Hardest, as Multiple Donors Cut 
Budgets?” Center for Global Development, June 12.
Hyun, Daniel, and Jacky Lee. 2023. “Variations in Pass-Through 
from Global Agricultural Commodity Prices to Domestic 
Food Inflation.” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper 
2023-24, Ottawa.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 2025. “Global 
Estimates on International Migrants in the Labour Force.” 
Geneva.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2025a. “Debt 
Vulnerabilities and Financing Challenges in Emerging 
Markets and Developing Economies—An Overview 
of Key Data.” IMF Policy Paper 25/002, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://doi.
org/10.5089/9798229002264.007.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2025b. “The 4th 
Financing for Development Conference—Contribution of 
the IMF to the International Financing for Development 
Agenda.” IMF Policy Paper 25/022, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://doi.
org/10.5089/9798229013208.007.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Jeongwon Son. 2024. “To What Extent Are 
Tariffs Offset by Exchange Rates?” Journal of International 
Money and Finance 142: 103015.
Jordà, Oscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse 
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review 
95 (1): 161–82.
Kohn, David, Fernando Leibovici, and Hakon Tretvoll. 2021. 
“Trade in Commodities and Business Cycle Volatility.” Ameri-
can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 13 (3): 173–208.
Leeper, Eric Michael. 2023. “Fiscal Dominance: How Worried 
Should We Be?” Mercatus Policy Brief Series. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.4665190.
Londono, Juan M., Sai Ma, and Beth Anne Wilson. 2025. 
“Costs of Rising Uncertainty.” FEDS Notes, April 24. https://
doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.3779.
Mayda, Anna Maria, and Giovanni Peri. 2025. “Immigration 
and Border Policies.” In The Economic Consequences of the 
Second Trump Administration: A Preliminary Assessment, edited 
by Gary Gensler, Simon Johnson, Ugo Panizza, and Beatrice 
Weder di Mauro, Chapter 6. Paris: Centre for Economic 
Policy Research.
Miranda-Pinto, Jorge, Andrea Pescatori, Martin Stuermer, and 
Xueliang Wang. 2024. “Beyond Energy: The Inflationary 
Effects of Metal Price Shocks in Production Networks.” 
IMF Working Paper 24/215, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Müller, Karsten, Chenzi Xu, Mohamed Lehbib, and Ziliang Chen, 
2025. “The Global Macro Database: A New International 
Macroeconomic Dataset.” NBER Working Paper 33714, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Mundell, Robert Alexander, 1960. “The Pure Theory of Interna-
tional Trade.” American Economic Review 50 (1): 67–110.
Nikolova, Milena, and Carol Graham. 2014. “Employment, Late-
Life Work, Retirement, and Well-Being in Europe and the 
United States.” IZA Journal of European Labor Studies 3 (1): 5.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2025. “Cuts in Official Development Assistance: 
OECD Projections for 2025 and the Near Term.” OECD 
Policy Briefs, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/8c530629-en.
Pastén, Ernesto, and Ricardo Reis. 2021. “Independence, 
Credibility, and Communication of Central Banking.” Banco 
Central de Chile, Santiago.
Qiu, Zhesheng, Yicheng Wang, Le Xu, and Francesco Zanetti. 
2025. “Monetary Policy in Open Economies with Production 
Networks.” CESifo Working Paper, Munich.
Romero, Damian. 2025. “Domestic Linkages and the Transmis-
sion of Commodity Price Shocks.” Journal of International 
Economics 153: 104041.
Rotunno, Lorenzo, and Michele Ruta. 2025. “Trade Partners’ 
Responses to US Tariffs.” IMF Working Paper 25/147, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Rubbo, Elisa. 2023. “Networks, Phillips Curves, and Monetary 
Policy.” Econometrica 91 (4): 1417–55.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe. 2018. “How 
Important Are Terms-of-Trade Shocks?” International Eco-
nomic Review 59 (1): 85–111.
Silva, Alvaro. 2024. “Inflation in Disaggregated Small Open 
Economies.” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research 
Department Working Paper 24-12, Boston, MA.
Silva, Alvaro, Petre Caraiani, Jorge Miranda-Pinto, and Juan 
Olaya-Agudelo. 2024. “Commodity Prices and Production 
Networks in Small Open Economies.” Journal of Economic 
Dynamics and Control 168: 104968.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Optimal Interest-Rate Smoothing.” 
Review of Economic Studies 70 (4): 861–86.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
51
Emerging markets have shown remarkable resilience to 
risk-off shocks in recent years. While favorable external 
conditions—good luck—contributed to this resilience, 
improvements in policy frameworks—good policies—
played a critical role in bolstering the capacity of emerging 
markets to withstand risk-off shocks. Evidence suggests 
that monetary policy implementation and credibility 
have improved, with central banks becoming less sensitive 
to fiscal pressures and relying less on foreign exchange 
interventions. Central banks also hold sway over domes-
tic borrowing conditions, although spillovers from US 
monetary policy remain influential. On the fiscal side, 
countercyclicality and responsiveness to sustainability 
concerns have increased, though borrowing costs remain 
elevated in high-debt environments. Looking ahead, 
emerging markets with strong frameworks are better posi-
tioned to navigate risk-off shocks because they benefit from 
easier policy trade-offs and face a lower risk and severity 
of capital flow reversals. In contrast, countries with weak 
frameworks should avoid delaying monetary tighten-
ing when sustained price pressures emerge, as doing so 
typically results in de-anchoring of inflation expectations 
and larger output losses. Foreign exchange interventions 
provide temporary relief, but they are costly. Strong policy 
frameworks lessen both reliance on—and the need for—
such measures. Given uneven cross-country progress and 
the erosion of fiscal buffers in some cases, continued efforts 
to strengthen policy frameworks, safeguard central bank 
independence, and rebuild fiscal space remain essential, 
as the external environment could deteriorate rapidly.
Introduction
Emerging markets have historically been vulnerable 
to global financial shocks, often experiencing signifi-
cant economic and financial instability during periods 
of heightened risk aversion—commonly referred to 
The authors of this chapter are Marijn A. Bolhuis, Francesco 
Grigoli (co-lead), Andrea Presbitero (co-lead), and Zhao Zhang, 
with contributions from Thomas J. Carter, Marcin Kolasa, Jesper 
Linde, Giulio Lisi, Rui Mano, Roland Meeks, and Hedda Thorell. 
Pedro Henrique de Barros Gagliardi and Weili Lin provided research 
assistance. The chapter benefited from comments by Anusha Chari, 
Enrique Mendoza, and internal seminar participants and reviewers.
as “risk-off” episodes (Caballero and Kamber 2019; 
Miranda-Agrippino and Rey 2020a). These shifts in 
the risk appetite of global investors have typically 
triggered capital outflows, leading to currency depre-
ciations that tightened financial conditions, owing to 
currency mismatches and increased borrowing costs 
(Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad 2020; Goldberg 
and Krogstrup 2023). As a result, risk-off shocks have 
been akin to supply shocks because they ultimately 
cause output losses and inflation surges, complicating 
policy trade-offs. These dynamics have defined the 
dilemma faced by emerging markets, which generally 
could not react to a shock leading to a capital outflow 
that depreciates the currency with monetary policy eas-
ing, because of price and financial stability concerns. 
Instead, policymakers often needed to tighten policies, 
exacerbating output losses and preventing currencies 
from depreciating, thereby fueling “fear of floating” 
(Ghosh, Ostry, and Qureshi 2017).
Recent experience marks a departure from this his-
torical pattern, with many emerging markets displaying 
remarkable resilience—both in terms of financial and 
economic conditions—to external shocks (Hardy, Igan, 
and Kharroubi 2024).1 Two hypotheses have emerged 
to explain this improved performance. One is simply 
that emerging markets got lucky: Steady growth in 
advanced economies, favorable terms of trade, and 
easier financial conditions after the global financial 
crisis helped mitigate external pressures (Figure 2.1, 
panel 1).2 Emerging markets also benefited from spill-
overs from China’s sustained growth and its increas-
ing integration in the global economy (Chapter 4 of 
the April 2024 World Economic Outlook). Moreover, 
despite rapid and sizable monetary tightening by major 
1For a more general assessment of emerging markets’ performance 
in sustaining expansions and recovering from downturns, see Kose 
and Prasad 2010; Cerra, Panizza, and Saxena 2013; Abiad and others 
2015; and Aizenman and others 2024, among others. Compared 
with this literature, the chapter focuses on emerging markets’ perfor-
mance in response to risk-off shocks.
2This chapter uses a sample of 26 emerging markets—covering 
about 88 percent of GDP of emerging markets and middle-income 
economies—and 30 advanced economies (see Online Annex 2.1). 
All online annexes are available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/
WEO.
CHAPTER
2
EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR  
GOOD POLICIES?
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
52
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
central banks, the postpandemic global financial envi-
ronment remained broadly accommodative, allowing 
many emerging market sovereign and corporate bond 
issuers to obtain long-term financing at historically 
low rates (Chapter 1 of the April 2025 Global Finan-
cial Stability Report).3 Finally, the relatively strong 
US recovery after the pandemic and the soft landing 
3By contrast, prior to the global financial crisis, emerging markets 
were more vulnerable to currency, banking, and sovereign default 
crises (Gourinchas and Obstfeld 2012).
following the Federal Reserve’s tightening cycle likely 
further dampened spillovers to emerging markets 
(Chen and Tillmann 2025).
Another, yet complementary, explanation is the 
“good policies” argument. This attributes resilience 
to adverse shifts in investor sentiment to changes in 
emerging markets’ monetary, macroprudential, and 
fiscal frameworks (Figure 2.1, panel 2). While dif-
ferent frameworks and exchange rate regimes may be 
appropriate according to country circumstances, the 
adoption of inflation targeting and greater exchange 
rate flexibility has enhanced emerging markets’ capac-
ity to absorb external shocks (Obstfeld, Ostry, and 
Qureshi 2019) and stabilize macroeconomic condi-
tions. As monetary policy frameworks matured, long-
term inflation expectations became better anchored, 
reducing the pass-through of currency depreciation 
to domestic prices and the persistence of inflation 
(Campa and Goldberg 2005; Bems and others 2021; 
Carrière-Swallow and others 2021). Meanwhile, tighter 
macroprudential policies contributed to reducing for-
eign exchange mismatches, allowing countries to move 
away from “original sin” (currency mismatch) and 
facilitating more countercyclical monetary responses 
to external shocks (Bergant and others 2024).4 And 
enhanced fiscal credibility—through, for example, 
the implementation of fiscal rules—lessened fiscal 
dominance concerns and supported a trend toward 
de-dollarization of debt, containing sovereign risk pre-
miums (Gomez-Gonzalez, Valencia, and Sánchez 2022; 
Apeti and others 2024). Stronger policy frameworks 
enabled better policies while also providing access 
to IMF precautionary instruments, which helped 
countries navigate recent shocks by containing capital 
outflows and limiting the rise in borrowing costs 
(Box 2.1).5
4Improvements in governance and institutional capacity, particu-
larly in debt management, have also contributed to greater resilience, 
supporting domestic borrowing at longer maturities and fostering 
the development of deeper local currency bond markets. An increase 
in the share of local currency debt and in domestic investors’ 
participation in emerging markets with strong policy frameworks 
have reduced the risks stemming from both “original sin” (currency 
mismatch) and “original sin redux” (nonresident outflows)—see 
Chapter 3 of the April 2025 Global Financial Stability Report. Sim-
ilarly, evidence suggests that advances in foreign exchange hedging 
instruments in some emerging markets have improved the currency 
composition of sovereign balance sheets (Alfaro, Calani, and Varela 
2021) and enhanced monetary policy transmission (Erel and others 
2023; Liang, Sampaio, and Sarkisyan 2024).
5Das, Gopinath, and Kalemli-Özcan (2022) show that preemptive 
capital flow measures can also lower external finance premiums in 
the aftermath of risk-off shocks, enabling countries’ continued access 
to international capital markets during troubled times.
EMs with inﬂation
targeting
(average number of
countries)
FX-related
macroprudential regulation
(average of cumulative
net tightening actions, right scale)
EMs with ﬁscal rules
(average number of
countries)
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
Figure 2.1.  Changes in External Conditions and Policy 
Frameworks
1. External Conditions during Risk-Off Episodes
(Percent)
−0.8
1.2
−0.4
0
0.4
0.8
−1.6
2.4
−0.8
0
0.8
1.6
Sources: Cobham 2025; Federal Reserve Board; IMF, Fiscal Rules Dataset; Gruss and 
Kebhaj 2019; Haver Analytics; IMF, Integrated Macroprudential Policy Database; and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: Risk-off episodes are identified using an extended version of the RORO Index 
of Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad (2023)—see Online Annex 2.2 for details. The 
FX-related macroprudential regulation metric is calculated as the cross-country average 
of the cumulative net tightening actions related to capital requirements for banks; 
limits on foreign currency lending and rules or recommendations on foreign currency 
loans; and limits on net or gross open FX positions, FX exposures and funding, and 
currency mismatch regulations. Countries are classified as inflation targeting regimes 
according to Cobham (2025). External conditions are calculated as the weighted change 
in real GDP for AEs, the commodity price–based terms of trade index for EMs, and the 
average of the US FCI-G index, measured six months following the start of a risk-off 
episode. The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC period is 2010–24. AEs = 
advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; FCI-G index = Financial Conditions 
Impulse on Growth index; FX = foreign exchange; GFC = global financial crisis; RORO 
Index = Risk-On Risk-Off Index.
AEs’ real GDP growth
(percent)
Commodity terms of trade
(percent, right scale) 
US ﬁnancial conditions
(standard deviations)
2. Policy Frameworks
0
20
4
8
12
16
0
1.8
0.3
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
53
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The severity of the COVID-19 shock and the 
postpandemic inflation surge put policy frameworks to 
the test. Many central banks in emerging markets—
especially those with stronger policy frameworks—
responded to postpandemic inflation with swifter and 
more forceful monetary tightening than in previous 
cycles and, in many cases, earlier than their advanced 
economy counterparts, pointing to increased monetary 
policy autonomy. In some cases, unconventional mon-
etary policy tools were also deployed (Acosta-Henao 
and others 2024; Chapter 4 of the April 2021 World 
Economic Outlook) without causing notable movements 
in exchange rates and capital flows. While concerns 
about capital outflows and currency stability remained 
relevant, policy decisions were more clearly driven by 
domestic inflation considerations than in the past, 
when tightening was often motivated by the need to 
defend exchange rates.6 In some cases, foreign exchange 
reserves were also deployed to counter excessive cur-
rency pressures, yet reserve buffers have remained at 
historically robust levels (Adrian, Natalucci, and Wu 
2024). The picture is more nuanced, however, when it 
comes to fiscal policies. The fiscal stance in emerging 
markets—measured as the primary-balance-to-GDP 
ratio—has been relatively restrained, marking a notable 
shift from past crises, when consolidation was often 
delayed. However, the presence of fiscal rules did not 
guarantee improvements in policy implementation—as 
unwarranted deviations from fiscal rules are common 
(Alonso and others, forthcoming)—leading to the 
buildup of debt vulnerabilities, especially in Latin 
America (see the October 2024 Regional Economic Out-
look for the Western Hemisphere). Similarly, although 
domestic investors have increased their participation in 
local currency debt markets, financial stability risks are 
still salient, especially in countries with weaker policy 
frameworks (Chapter 3 of the October 2025 Global 
Financial Stability Report).
This chapter takes stock of emerging market per-
formance in output and inflation stabilization during 
risk-off episodes over almost three decades. It exam-
ines the evolution of monetary, macroprudential, and 
fiscal policy frameworks along different dimensions, 
and it quantifies the gains from improved policy 
trade-offs. The analysis seeks to determine the extent 
to which emerging market resilience is structural and 
sustainable—rooted in enhanced policy frameworks—
or the result of favorable, yet changing, external 
6Concerns about capital flight in the postpandemic period may 
have been lessened by the synchronized nature of the inflation surge.
conditions. As emerging markets prepare for a poten-
tially more challenging global financial landscape (see 
Chapter 1), a clearer understanding of these underlying 
drivers is crucial for designing future policy strategies 
to mitigate risks.
To achieve these objectives, the chapter addresses the 
following questions:
	• How did emerging markets fare during risk-off 
episodes? How have emerging markets performed 
during risk-off shocks? Have they been more resil-
ient during recent episodes, both according to real 
and financial indicators, compared with earlier ones? 
	• How have policy frameworks evolved in emerging 
markets? Has the conduct of monetary policy shifted 
from a focus on exchange rates and inflation toward 
addressing domestic demand shortfalls as a result of 
better-anchored inflation expectations? Has mone-
tary policy become more credible? Does monetary 
policy steer domestic financial conditions or do these 
remain driven largely by US monetary policy? Have 
improved frameworks reduced the need for foreign 
exchange interventions? Has fiscal policy become 
more countercyclical? Have fiscal frameworks gained 
credibility and strengthened debt sustainability? 
	• To what extent can recent emerging market resilience 
be attributed to good luck (that is, benign external 
conditions) instead of good policies? How large is the 
contribution of improved policy frameworks to the 
better output and inflation performance of these 
economies during risk-off episodes? How does it 
compare with the contribution of external factors?
	• How should emerging markets deal with future risk-off 
shocks? What gains in policy trade-offs do improved 
policy frameworks accrue? What is the appropriate 
mix and timing of policy responses for countries 
with weaker policy frameworks during episodes of 
global financial stress?
To answer these questions, the chapter first com-
piles stylized facts about the performance of emerging 
markets during risk-off episodes and contrasts this per-
formance before and after the global financial crisis.7 
It then sheds light on the improvements in policy 
7The choice of the global financial crisis as the date to split the 
sample is driven by data considerations. Since for many countries in 
the sample data coverage begins in the early 2000s, the global finan-
cial crisis allows for an equal number of risk-off episodes in the two 
subperiods. However, this does not imply that the crisis represents 
a structural break in emerging markets’ performance in response to 
risk-off shocks. Rather, improvements in the policy framework are 
understood to have evolved gradually over time.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
54
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
frameworks by moving beyond the de jure definition 
and focusing on their implementation, credibility, 
and outcomes. Finally, the chapter uses a quantitative 
version of the IMF’s Integrated Policy Framework 
(IPF) to show how these improvements are reflected 
in better policy trade-offs and explores appropri-
ate policy responses, depending on country-specific 
characteristics.
The chapter’s main findings are as follows:
	• Emerging markets have historically been vulnerable 
to global risk-off events, but recent evidence points 
to increased resilience. While the magnitude and 
duration of risk-off shocks have not meaningfully 
changed—nor have the underlying financial factors 
leading to these shocks—most emerging markets 
have displayed a remarkable degree of resilience to 
these episodes since the global financial crisis, expe-
riencing smaller output contractions and negligible 
inflationary pressures.
	• The implementation and credibility of monetary policy 
have gradually improved over time, with emerging 
markets equipped with strong policy frameworks relying 
less on foreign exchange interventions. In general, 
central banks in emerging markets have increasingly 
focused on output stabilization rather than exchange 
rate management, reflecting better-anchored infla-
tion expectations. Financial markets’ expectations 
also align more closely with actual policy decisions, 
signaling improved credibility. At the same time, 
emerging markets with better-anchored inflation 
expectations intervene less in foreign exchange 
markets in response to risk-off episodes, as the 
exchange rate pass-through tends to be lower and 
fear of floating is reduced. Similarly, more strin-
gent macroprudential regulation limits the share of 
foreign currency debt, mitigating financial stability 
concerns and reducing the need for foreign exchange 
interventions.8
	• Central banks are less sensitive to fiscal pressures and 
retain traction over domestic borrowing conditions. 
Before the global financial crisis, higher government 
spending often led to looser monetary policy and 
rising inflation expectations, but postcrisis spending 
shocks have been met with rate hikes, and long-
term inflation expectations have remained anchored, 
as central banks have become more indepen-
dent. Domestic monetary policy shocks transmit 
8Consistent with this development, the use of capital flow 
management measures also declined. For a broader discussion, see 
Bergant and others (forthcoming).
effectively to short-term yields; however, US 
monetary policy still influences longer-term yields 
and riskier asset classes.
	• Emerging markets have made significant strides in 
implementing more effective fiscal policies, but borrow-
ing costs remain sensitive to high debt levels. Com-
pared with the period before the global financial 
crisis, stronger fiscal frameworks have allowed fiscal 
policy to react more to slack—helping stabilize 
output during global downturns—and to debt 
sustainability pressures, improving countries’ ability 
to stabilize debt, although sovereign spreads remain 
sensitive to debt burdens.
	• The resilience to risk-off shocks observed in recent years 
not only reflects benign external conditions, but it is 
also rooted in improved policy frameworks. Compar-
ing typical risk-off episodes after the global finan-
cial crisis with those before, the analysis estimates 
that improved policy frameworks accounted for 
0.5 percentage point higher growth and 0.6 per-
centage point lower inflation. In contrast, favorable 
external conditions supported faster growth, contrib-
uting another 0.5 percentage point, but did not ease 
inflationary pressures.
	• Dilemma or trilemma? Resilience to risk-off episodes, 
the diminished need for foreign exchange interven-
tions in the presence of strong policy frameworks, 
and evidence of autonomy of domestic monetary 
policy are suggestive of a progressive transition 
toward a world that, while unequal across countries, 
appears to be characterized by the trilemma of the 
classic Mundell-Fleming framework and less by the 
dilemma described in Rey (2015), in which mon-
etary policy independence is limited unless capital 
controls are used.
The chapter offers some policy recommendations to 
deal with future risk-off shocks:
	• Looking forward, efforts to strengthen policy frame-
works should be sustained, as these enhance emerging 
markets’ ability to withstand risk-off shocks by easing 
policy trade-offs and reducing the likelihood of sudden 
stops. Model simulations suggest that strong policy 
frameworks reduce the extent of monetary policy 
tightening required to contain inflation, allowing 
a shift in focus toward output stabilization. In 
response to a 10 percent nominal exchange rate 
depreciation triggered by a risk-off shock, econ-
omies with strong policy frameworks—as in the 
period after the global financial crisis—experience 
85 percent smaller output contractions in the 
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
55
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
following year than economies with weak policy 
frameworks, as in the period before the crisis. In 
addition, improved balance sheets cut in half the 
risk of sudden stops—abrupt reversals of capital 
inflows into an economy—and reduce their severity.
	• Emerging markets with weak policy frameworks should 
avoid delaying monetary tightening. Faced with 
risk-off and persistent cost-push shocks—as in the 
postpandemic environment—emerging markets with 
weak frameworks that hesitate to tighten the mone-
tary stance encounter steeper costs later. In response 
to a 10 percent nominal exchange rate depreciation 
and a 0.5 percentage point increase in inflation, pol-
icy rates need to rise by as much as 1.4 percentage 
points more than in comparable emerging markets 
that follow a standard Taylor rule to eventually 
bring inflation back to target, resulting in output 
contractions that are 0.7 percentage point larger five 
quarters after the shocks.
	• Foreign exchange interventions help contain inflation 
and limit output losses associated with monetary tight-
ening in countries with weak policy frameworks, but 
they are needed less when policy frameworks are strong. 
In emerging markets with weak frameworks, foreign 
exchange interventions help contain the exchange 
rate depreciation triggered by the risk-off shock and 
reduce the need for rate hikes, ultimately lowering 
output losses by 0.9 percentage point two years 
after the shock compared with a no-intervention 
scenario. However, the benefits of foreign exchange 
interventions are marginal in countries with strong 
frameworks, where inflation expectations are already 
well anchored and the exchange rate supports net 
exports. These results validate the notion that for-
eign exchange interventions are a useful policy tool, 
but not a substitute for improved policy frame-
works. In countries with strong policy frameworks, 
foreign exchange interventions become less relevant, 
repositioning policymakers in the trilemma, a world 
where they can opt for a flexible exchange rate and 
an independent monetary policy.
Despite significant progress, emerging markets’ 
resilience will continue to be tested. While policy 
frameworks have strengthened, risks lie ahead: External 
conditions can quickly deteriorate, fiscal space is lim-
ited by high debt following recent global shocks, and 
policy backsliding undermines hard-won credibility. 
As improvements have been uneven across countries, 
maintaining and building on these gains will require 
a steadfast commitment to improving frameworks, 
including by safeguarding central bank independence 
when inflation is low and fiscal pressures mount.
Emerging Market Resilience to Risk-Off 
Episodes
The global search for yield can generate destabiliz-
ing outcomes in emerging markets when risk appetite 
declines, leading to capital flight (Hofmann, Shim, and 
Shin 2016; Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad 2021, 
2022). The sophistication of international capital 
markets results in a multitude of factors that can affect 
risk appetite. The Risk-On Risk-Off (RORO) Index of 
Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad (2023) is a multi-
faceted measure of these factors—encompassing equity 
volatility risks, credit risks, liquidity risks, and currency 
risks—that describes investors’ willingness to take on, 
retain, or offload risky assets in advanced economies.
This chapter extends the original index start-
ing in 1997 up to the end of 2024 and deploys an 
algorithm-based approach to date risk-off episodes.9 
The 16 risk-off episodes identified by the algorithm 
are evenly split between the period before and after 
the global financial crisis. They correspond to well-
known events, including the dot-com crash, the global 
financial crisis, the European sovereign debt crisis, and 
the COVID-19 pandemic (Figure 2.2, panel 1).10
On average, episodes before and after the global 
financial crisis are broadly comparable. The average 
risk-off episode registered an increase of about one 
standard deviation and lasted about five months in 
both periods (Figure 2.2, panel 2). The largest episodes 
were the global financial crisis itself and the pandemic; 
the longest were the subprime crisis starting in June 
2007 and the global growth scare starting in May 2015 
(both lasted 10 months). Moreover, an analysis of the 
proportion of the RORO’s variation explained by each 
9See Online Annex 2.2 for details about the algorithm used to 
date the episodes. Applying the algorithm to other indices of shifts 
in global risk aversion (for example, Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xu 
2022) yields similar results.
10Similar to other risk-off episodes, the COVID-19 pandemic 
was characterized by heightened volatility and a widespread sell-off 
of risky assets. However, supply-side disruptions coupled with the 
outsize policy response made the episode somewhat atypical. The 
2013 taper tantrum is not identified as a risk-off episode because 
financial variables in advanced economies that feed into the RORO 
Index increased only modestly. In contrast with typical risk-off 
episodes, US bond yields increased sharply, consistent with a shock 
to US monetary policy rather than to an increase in risk aversion 
in advanced economies (Harikrishnan, Silk, and Yoldas 2023). 
However, the results are robust to the exclusion of the COVID-19 
episode and the inclusion of the 2013 taper tantrum.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
56
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
subcomponent indicates that—in both periods—about 
45 percent of the RORO’s variation during risk-off 
episodes is explained by credit spreads (Figure 2.2, 
panel 2), just above 40 percent by equity volatility, 
about 10 percent by liquidity risks, and the remainder 
by currency risks.
Comparing the responses of emerging markets’ 
capital flows, exchange rate pass-through, and credit 
spreads during risk-off episodes points to an increased 
resilience to surges in risk aversion in the postcrisis 
period. Since the global financial crisis, risk-off epi-
sodes have not been accompanied by outsized portfolio 
outflows, the exchange rate pass-through has become 
muted, and the increase in sovereign spreads is about 
one-fifth of what it used to be before the global finan-
cial crisis (Figure 2.3, panel 1). This greater resilience 
is reflected in easier policy trade-offs: Six months after 
the start of a risk-off episode, output losses are smaller 
in the postcrisis period (1 percent of GDP) compared 
with the precrisis period (1.8 percent of GDP), while 
the precrisis 0.9 percent price increase disappeared 
after the crisis (Figure 2.3, panel 2).11
11Economic crises in emerging markets typically have been associ-
ated with large output costs because they often represented declines 
in the trend growth rather than fluctuations around a trend (Aguiar 
and Gopinath 2007; Cerra and Saxena 2008). Replicating the exer-
cises of Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) for 1997–2024 confirms that 
the business cycles of the emerging markets in the sample began to 
resemble more those of advanced economies after the global financial 
crisis, although differences remain. See Online Annex 2.8 for details.
Risk-off episode
RORO Index
Magnitude           
Duration
Gold and currency
Liquidity
Credit spreads    
Contributions to variance of
RORO Index (right scale) 
Equity volatility
Figure 2.2.  Dates and Features of Risk-Off Episodes
1. Dates of Risk-Off Episodes
−4
8
−2
0
2
4
6
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Federal Reserve Board; Haver Analytics; J.P. Morgan; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows risk-off episodes identified using an extended version of the RORO 
Index of Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad (2023). The figure plots the standardized 
three-month sum of the RORO Index—see Online Annex 2.2 for details. Panel 2 shows 
the magnitude and duration of risk-off episodes and the variance decomposition of 
the RORO Index into key contributing factors. The first two bars denote the mean of 
the RORO Index (in standard deviations) during risk-off episodes and the length of the 
episodes (in months) in the pre-GFC (1997–2009) and post-GFC (2010–24) periods. The 
whiskers denote the range from minimum to maximum. GFC = global financial crisis; 
RORO Index = Risk-On Risk-Off Index.
2. Magnitude and Duration of Risk-Off Episodes and Contributions to
Variance of RORO Index
(Mean of standard deviation, months, and share)
0
12
3
6
9
0
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1997 99 2001 03
05
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
Figure 2.3.  Effects of Risk-Off Shocks
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Federal Reserve Board; Haver Analytics; J.P. Morgan; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars denote the change in variables six months after the start of risk-off 
episodes compared with similar time windows with no risk-off episodes. The 
specifications control for past real GDP growth, consumer price inflation, and country 
fixed effects. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. Risk-off episodes 
are identified using an extended version of the RORO Index of Chari, Dilts Stedman, 
and Lundblad (2023). The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC period is 
2010–24. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; GFC = global financial 
crisis; RORO Index = Risk-On Risk-Off Index.
1. Responses of Capital Flows, Exchange Rate, and
Borrowing Costs
−0.10
0.35
−0.05
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
−1.2
4.2
−0.6
0
0.6
1.2
1.8
2.4
3.0
3.6
Portfolio outﬂows
(percent of initial GDP)
Exchange rate
pass-through
(percent, right scale)
EMBI spread
(percent, right scale)
2. Responses of Output and Prices
(Percent)
−3
2
−2
−1
0
1
Real GDP
Consumer prices
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
57
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The Evolution of Policy Frameworks in 
Emerging Markets
The increased resilience of emerging markets to 
risk-off shocks after the global financial crisis corre-
sponds to a period with a substantially larger number 
of countries adopting inflation-targeting regimes and 
fiscal rules and tightening macroprudential regulations. 
However, ascribing such resilience to de jure changes 
in policy frameworks can be misleading as de facto 
policy frameworks vary substantially across countries 
(Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger 2005; Carare and Stone 
2006). This section describes progress achieved in the 
implementation of monetary, macroprudential, and 
fiscal frameworks—benchmarking it to the experience 
of advanced economies—and quantifies the role of 
improved policy frameworks as opposed to changing 
external conditions.12
Monetary Policy
Improvements in monetary policy frameworks can 
be assessed in several dimensions (Box 2.2 describes 
the milestones in the improvements of monetary 
policy implementation among emerging market central 
banks). The chapter first studies changes in the mone-
tary policy reaction function by estimating Taylor rule 
coefficients from a monthly regression that includes the 
deviation of one-year-ahead expected inflation from the 
inflation target and the real-time output gap, aug-
mented with nominal effective exchange rate depreci-
ation to capture fear of floating. The results show that 
in the postcrisis period policymakers are less concerned 
about exchange rate fluctuations, consistent with 
smaller pass-through to prices and a shift toward infla-
tion as the economy’s nominal anchor.13 At the same 
time, the weight associated with deviations of inflation 
expectations from the target declined, likely because of 
improved central bank credibility and more strongly 
anchored long-term inflation expectations (that is, 
beyond the monetary policy horizon) (Figure 2.4, 
panel 1). Consistent with this evidence, long-term 
inflation expectations became better anchored over 
time, as the sensitivity of three-year-ahead inflation 
12See Online Annexes 2.3–2.5 for details on the exercises on 
policy frameworks.
13The Taylor rule coefficients are obtained from the ordinary least 
squares estimates of the monetary policy reaction function, in line 
with the discussion in Carvalho, Nechio, and Tristao (2021), see 
Online Annex 2.3. Estimates should be interpreted with caution, 
however, as the size of monetary policy shocks tends to be larger in 
emerging markets than in the US.
EMs, Pre-GFC
EMs, Post-GFC
AEs
Pre- and post-GFC averages
Figure 2.4.  Monetary Policy Reaction Function
(Percent)
1. Estimates of Actual Reaction Function
−6
6
−4
−2
0
2
4
−1.5
1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the Taylor rule coefficients from a regression of the policy rate 
on its lag, the deviation of one-year-ahead inflation expectations from the target, 
the real-time output gap, the NEER appreciation, and country and time fixed effects. 
Panel 2 shows the sensitivity of long-term expected inflation to short-term inflation 
forecasts, based on a regression of changes in the three-year-ahead inflation 
expectations on changes in current year forecasts, following the methodology of 
Chapter 4 of the October 2018 World Economic Outlook and Bems and others (2021). 
Panel 3 shows the Taylor rule coefficients from a regression of the one-year-ahead 
forecast of the three-month saving rate on next year inflation expectations, next 
year real GDP forecast, and forecaster fixed effects; the figure is plotted for years 
with at least 1,000 observations. The sample excludes EMs with fixed exchange rate 
regimes, and Argentina, Türkiye, and Ukraine. In panel 1, the bars denote the point 
estimates, and the whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. In panel 2, the 
line denotes the cross-country average, and the shaded area denotes the interquartile 
range. In panel 3, the lines denote the point estimates, and the shaded areas denote 
90 percent confidence intervals. The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC 
period is 2010–24. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; GFC = 
global financial crisis; NEER = nominal effective exchange rate.
Inﬂation gap
Output gap
(right scale)
NEER appreciation
(right scale)
2. Sensitivity of Long-Term Inflation to Short-Term Inflation Forecasts
−1
4
0
1
2
3
1996
98
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
3. Estimates of Perceived Reaction Function
−2
5
−1
0
1
2
3
4
2004
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Expected inﬂation
Expected real GDP growth
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
58
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
forecasts to changes in one-year-ahead expected infla-
tion declined substantially after the global financial 
crisis (Figure 2.4, panel 2). With better-anchored infla-
tion expectations, central banks in emerging markets 
can shift attention to curbing output fluctuations. The 
estimates capture this desirable countercyclical bias in 
the postcrisis reaction function and are close to those 
of advanced economies (Figure 2.4, panel 1).
When monetary policy is credible, professional 
forecasters are expected to align their perceptions of the 
central bank’s reaction function with its actual conduct. 
Financial markets, however, may take longer to internal-
ize such shifts, since credibility builds over time. Survey 
data combining the interest rate expectations of individ-
ual forecasters with the corresponding macroeconomic 
projections make it possible to estimate time-varying 
Taylor rule coefficients (Bauer, Pflueger, and Sunderam 
2024). Results show a progressive decline in the magni-
tude of the Taylor rule coefficient on expected inflation 
over time and a marginal increase in the size of the 
output gap coefficient, pointing to gains in monetary 
policy credibility (Figure 2.4, panel 3).
A crucial aspect of monetary policy frameworks is 
the extent of central banks’ independence from fiscal 
pressures. (Box 2.3 shows that undermining central 
bank independence by removing governors for political 
reasons leads to currency depreciation and higher 
inflation.) Emerging markets have traditionally been 
plagued by fiscal dominance. When a central bank 
is not independent, the government has an incentive 
to rely on the central bank to finance its expenses, 
which, in turn, limits the monetary authority’s ability 
to raise interest rates to control inflation, weaken-
ing inflation-expectation anchoring.14 To assess how 
much fiscal dominance continues to challenge central 
bank independence in emerging markets, the analysis 
examines the response of policy rates and long-term 
inflation expectations—beyond the monetary policy 
horizon—in the year after an unexpected increase in 
military spending (Figure 2.5, panel 1).15 The results 
are suggestive of fiscal dominance prior to the global 
14Monetary financing is not the only channel through which 
governments may exert pressure on central banks. For instance, 
governments may also seek to ease financial conditions ahead of elec-
tions to stimulate economic activity and improve electoral prospects 
(Dinç 2005).
15Military spending tends to be more exogenous to economic 
conditions than other spending categories, but it is relatively small in 
some emerging markets. However, the results are broadly consistent 
with those obtained using primary spending in a structurally iden-
tified vector autoregression, as in Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and 
Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Végh (2013).
financial crisis, when increases in spending were 
followed by monetary easing and higher expected 
inflation. Unlike before the global financial crisis, 
central banks since then no longer accommodate fiscal 
spending, leaving long-term inflation expectations close 
to target, similarly to advanced economies.
Another key dimension of the implementation of 
monetary policy is the extent to which it retains auton-
omy with respect to US monetary policy actions. The 
literature has widely documented the powerful financial 
spillovers of US monetary policy to the rest of the 
EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
AEs
Domestic monetary policy shocks
US monetary policy shocks
Figure 2.5.  Central Bank Independence and Autonomy
(Percent)
Sources: Bloomberg; Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; J.P. Morgan, SIPRI Military 
Expenditure Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the coefficients of regressions of the two-year-ahead inflation 
expectations and next year policy rates on previous year military spending growth, 
controlling for lags of inflation, exchange rate, GDP growth, inflation forecasts, 
policy rate, government-debt-to-GDP ratio, government expenditure growth, 
military spending growth, and country and year fixed effects. The pre-GFC period 
is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC period is 2010–24. Panel 2 shows the responses of 
government bond yields, nominal exchange rates, stock prices, and EMBI spreads 
to one-standard-deviation domestic and US monetary policy shocks one day after 
the shock. Domestic monetary policy shocks are identified as in Checo, Grigoli, and 
Sandri (2024), and US monetary policy shocks are identified as in Bauer and Swanson 
(2023). The sample varies by country according to data availability for domestic 
monetary policy shocks, which for most countries cover only the post-GFC period. 
The bars denote the point estimates, and the whiskers denote 90 percent confidence 
intervals. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; EMBI = J.P. Morgan 
Emerging Market Bond Index; GFC = global financial crisis; m = month; y = year.
1. Responses of Inflation Expectations and Policy Rates to
Fiscal Spending Shocks
−0.3
0.5
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
−0.03
0.05
−0.02
−0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
2. Responses of Government Bond Yields, Exchange Rates,
Stock Prices, and Credit Spreads to Monetary Policy Shocks
−0.05
0.20
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
−0.4
1.6
1.2
0
0.4
0.8
3m yields
10y yields
Stock
prices
(right scale)
Nominal
exchange
rate
(right scale)
EMBI
spread
(right scale)
Policy rates
Inﬂation expectations
(right scale)
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
59
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
world (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey 2020b; Chapter 4 
of the April 2021 World Economic Outlook). Follow-
ing Grigoli, Sandri, and Schrimpf (forthcoming), the 
analysis in this chapter examines the impact of US and 
domestic monetary policy shocks on emerging mar-
ket financial variables the day after a monetary policy 
announcement (Figure 2.5, panel 2). Domestic shocks 
transmit strongly to government bond yields, especially 
at the short end of the yield curve, indicating that mon-
etary policy retains traction on borrowing conditions. A 
one-standard-deviation domestic monetary policy shock 
raises the three-month yield by about 10 basis points, 
whereas US monetary policy shocks show a consider-
ably smaller—and not statistically significant—pass-
through to domestic borrowing conditions. However, 
the effects on 10-year yields—whose risk premiums are 
more sizable—are broadly comparable. US monetary 
policy shocks, on the other hand, have larger effects 
on riskier asset classes, including stock prices, exchange 
rates, and credit spreads. A one-standard-deviation US 
monetary policy shock leads to a 24 basis point decline 
in stock prices, a 15 basis point exchange rate deprecia-
tion, and a 57 basis point widening of credit spreads. In 
contrast, a one-standard-deviation domestic monetary 
policy shock appreciates the currency by 7 basis points 
and lowers stock prices by 9 basis points.
Foreign Exchange Interventions
Emerging markets have historically exhibited fear of 
floating, owing to concerns over balance sheet mis-
matches, pass-through to inflation, and financial insta-
bility (Calvo and Reinhart 2002). Resistance to letting 
the exchange rate float, in turn, has hindered the 
development of hedging instruments and constrained 
the depth of domestic financial markets. As a result, 
many emerging markets’ central banks continued to 
engage in substantial exchange rate management even 
after adopting inflation-targeting frameworks.
While there is a case for foreign exchange interven-
tions even within an inflation-targeting regime, the 
benefits from deploying this policy tool diminish as 
policy frameworks mature and financial frictions ease 
(IMF 2023a).16 By leveraging cross-country variation 
16Foreign exchange interventions can be warranted in the presence 
of financial market imperfections—such as shallow markets or 
currency mismatches—provided they are transparent, rules-based, 
and do not undermine monetary policy credibility. Specifically, such 
interventions can be used to counter destabilizing premia from for-
eign exchange market frictions, counter financial stability risks from 
foreign exchange mismatches, and prevent potential de-anchoring of 
inflation expectations.
in the degree of anchoring of inflation expectations, 
the analysis shows that emerging markets with well-an-
chored inflation expectations intervene less in foreign 
exchange markets in response to uncovered interest 
parity deviations—differences between the change 
in the exchange rate and what is predicted by inter-
est rate differentials—triggered by risk-off episodes, 
as the exchange rate pass-through tends to be lower 
(Figure 2.6, panel 1). Similarly, when macropruden-
tial regulation effectively limits the share of foreign 
currency debt, financial stability concerns are reduced, 
and the need for foreign exchange intervention is 
diminished (Figure 2.6, panel 2).17 Thus, emerging 
markets with strong policy frameworks are more likely 
to allow deviations from uncovered interest parity to 
play out rather than counteracting them by selling 
foreign currency. 
Fiscal Policy
This section first examines the design of fiscal 
rules and the predictability of public finances. The 
IMF’s Fiscal Rule Strength Index shows a continued 
improvement in the legal basis, monitoring, enforce-
ment, and flexibility of fiscal rules in emerging markets 
(Figure 2.7, panel 1). However, progress has been 
uneven, with emerging markets on average still lagging 
advanced economies. In particular, countries often 
struggle to balance the flexibility and resilience of fiscal 
rules against the complexity of design while ensuring 
that escape clauses are reserved for events beyond the 
control of policymakers (Eyraud and others 2018). 
Strong fiscal frameworks and fiscal rules can strengthen 
the credibility of official projections, helping to anchor 
private sector expectations of future fiscal policy (End 
and Hong 2022; End 2023). Consistent with improve-
ments in the predictability of fiscal policy in emerging 
markets, professional forecasters have increasingly 
aligned their expectations of budget deficits with offi-
cial projections (Figure 2.7, panel 2).
An important dimension through which fiscal policy 
can contribute to output stabilization is its degree 
of countercyclicality. Emerging markets have histor-
ically implemented procyclical fiscal policy (Gavin 
and Perotti 1997; Ilzetzki and Végh 2008; Frankel, 
Végh, and Vuletin 2013), driven by limited access to 
17Similar regressions examining net tightening of capital flow mea-
sures introduced in response to uncovered interest parity deviations 
caused by risk-off shocks suggest that emerging markets also rely on 
capital flow measures relatively less when their inflation expectations 
are strongly anchored.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
60
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
international credit markets during downturns and 
institutional weaknesses that encouraged loose fiscal 
policy during upswings (Végh 2015). However, since 
the global financial crisis, some emerging markets have 
graduated from procyclical to countercyclical fiscal pol-
icy (bottom-right quadrant of Figure 2.8). For several 
others, the co-movement of government expenditures 
and slack is more negative than it was in the precrisis 
period. On average, the degree of countercyclicality 
has moved closer to that of advanced economies. 
Improvements in countercyclicality are most pro-
nounced in the years following downturns in the 
global business cycle, suggesting that emerging markets 
increasingly use fiscal policy to shield their economies 
from external shocks.18
18Online Annex 2.5 confirms that the change in primary expen-
ditures has become more negatively correlated with the change in 
output gaps, controlling for initial debt burdens and country fixed 
effects. More countercyclical fiscal policy is also present across com-
modity exporters, although fiscal policy in these countries is still less 
countercyclical than in commodity importers.
Weakly anchored—strongly anchored
Looser—tighter
Figure 2.6.  Use of Foreign Exchange Interventions in 
Response to Uncovered Interest Parity Deviations
(Percent of GDP)
1. Conditioning on Inflation Expectations Anchoring
−2.0
0.5
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
2. Conditioning on the Stringency of Macroprudential Regulation
−1.5
0.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
11
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Months since the risk-oﬀ shock
11
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Months since the risk-oﬀ shock
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Foreign Exchange Intervention Dataset (Adler and 
others 2024); Haver Analytics; IMF, Integrated Macroprudential Policy Database; 
J.P. Morgan; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows the cumulative foreign exchange interventions (measured 
as net purchases) in response to a 1 percentage point increase in the UIP deviation 
instrumented with the RORO Index, conditional on inflation expectation anchoring 
or the stringency of macroprudential regulation. Percentiles 10 and 90 of the 
corresponding distributions are used to plot the figures. The regressions control 
for lagged inflation, exchange rate, UIP deviation, foreign exchange interventions, 
capital flow management measures, and country and time fixed effects. Inflation 
expectation anchoring index is measured as in Bems and others (2021). The 
stringency of macroprudential regulation is measured as the net cumulative 
tightening in foreign exchange related capital requirements, loan restrictions, 
and other position restrictions. The sample excludes EMs with fixed exchange 
rate regimes. The lines denote the point estimates, and the shaded areas denote 
90 percent confidence intervals. EMs = emerging markets; RORO Index = Risk-On 
Risk-Off Index; UIP = uncovered interest parity.
EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
AEs
EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
AEs
EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
AEs
Figure 2.7.  Strength of Fiscal Frameworks
Sources: Alonso and others, forthcoming; Consensus Economics; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the bars denote the strength of fiscal rules in EMs and AEs during 
the pre-GFC period and post-GFC period. The index of the strength of fiscal rules 
is constructed based on four institutional criteria: (1) legal basis, (2) presence of a 
monitoring mechanism, (3) enforcement and correction mechanism in place, and 
(4) flexibility and resilience against shocks. Higher values correspond to stronger 
fiscal rules. In panel 2, the bars denote the weight of private sector forecasts for 
budget deficits in official forecasts, obtained as regression coefficients of private 
sector forecasts on official forecasts captured in World Economic Outlook projections, 
controlling for country fixed effects. “Current year forecasts” refer to the current 
year fiscal balance, and “planned adjustment” refers to the expected change in the 
fiscal balance between the current year and next year, both submitted in April. The 
whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009, 
and the post-GFC period is 2010–24. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging 
markets; GFC = global financial crisis.
1. Strength of Fiscal Rules
(Index)
−1.0
2.5
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2. Elasticity of Private Sector Forecasts to Official Forecasts
(Percent)
0
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
Current year forecasts
Planned adjustment
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
61
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Finally, prudent fiscal policy that responds to debt 
sustainability pressures is critical to keep interest 
expenditures in check, contain sovereign spreads, 
and ensure that maturing debt can be rolled over. To 
assess whether increases in debt and interest expen-
ditures lead to higher primary balances, this section 
estimates a fiscal reaction function in the spirit of 
Bohn (1998) and Mauro and others (2015), among 
others. The sensitivity of the primary balance to debt 
levels and interest expenditure in emerging markets 
has increased since the global financial crisis (Figure 
2.9, panel 1).19 Meanwhile, the sensitivity to the 
interest bill has become close to 1 and exceeds that 
of advanced economies. This stronger response may 
reflect a greater reliance of emerging markets on 
fiscal consolidation to avoid losing market access or 
experiencing an increase in borrowing costs (Mendoza 
and Ostry 2008). In fact, while improvements in fiscal 
frameworks have translated into a greater capacity 
to manage higher public and external debt with the 
same external borrowing costs—suggesting a reduc-
tion in emerging markets’ debt intolerance (Reinhart, 
19The greater sensitivity of the primary balance to debt sustain-
ability pressures is particularly pronounced in countries with fiscal 
rules in place (Online Annex 2.5).
EMs
AEs
Figure 2.8.  Cyclicality of Government Expenditures
(Correlation coefficients)
−1.0
0.2
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; World Bank, Cross-Country Database of Fiscal 
Space; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Squares denote the correlation between the change in the ratio of primary 
government expenditures to GDP and the change in the output gap for the pre-GFC 
period (1997–2009) and the post-GFC period (2010–24). Primary government 
expenditures are constructed as the difference between government revenues and 
the primary balance. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; GFC = 
global financial crisis.
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
0.6
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
AEs
EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
Figure 2.9.  Fiscal Policy and Debt Sustainability
1. Responses of Primary Balance to Interest Bill and Public Debt
0
1.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0
0.10
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Interest bill
(percent of GDP)
Public debt
(percent of GDP, right scale)
2. Sensitivity of Spreads to Public and External Debt
0
2.5
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
External debt
(percent of exports, right scale)
Public debt
(percent of GDP)
3. Time Required to Reduce Increase in Public Debt by Half
(Years)
0
35
5
10
15
20
25
30
Low r − g
High r − g
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; J.P. Morgan; World Bank, Cross-Country 
Database of Fiscal Space; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 reports the elasticities of the primary balance to the lagged values of 
the interest bill and of public debt, all expressed in percent of GDP. The elasticities 
are obtained using regressions of the primary balance on the lagged values of the 
interest bill and public debt, and country and year fixed effects, jointly estimated for 
the pre-GFC period (1997–2009) and the post-GFC period (2010–24) using period 
dummies and interactions with the variables of interest while controlling for the output 
gap and unemployment rate. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. 
Panel 2 reports the elasticities of sovereign EMBI spreads to public debt and external 
debt, expressed in percent of GDP and percent of exports. The elasticities are obtained 
using regressions of the logarithm of the sovereign spread on public debt and external 
debt and country fixed effects, jointly estimated for the pre-GFC and post-GFC periods 
using period dummies and interactions with the variables of interest while controlling 
for the output gap and unemployment rate. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence 
intervals. Panel 3 plots the results of an illustrative simulation using coefficients from 
the estimated reaction function for public debt. The exercise assumes a stable initial 
public-debt-to-GDP ratio coupled with a shock that sends debt higher in a single year. 
The simulation assumes a low interest-growth differential (r − g) of 0 and a high 
interest-growth differential of 2 percent. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging 
markets; EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; GFC = global financial crisis.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
62
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Rogoff, and Savastano 2003)—sovereign spreads 
remain sensitive to debt burdens (Figure 2.9, panel 2), 
especially during periods of financial stress (Presbitero 
and Wiriadinata 2022). In addition, even with a more 
aggressive response, the estimated reaction functions 
imply that the speed at which debt is brought back 
down after an adverse shock is still relatively slow 
(Figure 2.9, panel 3).
The Contribution of Policy Frameworks 
to Macroeconomic Stabilization
To answer the question of the chapter’s title, “good 
luck or good policies?”—as posed by Easterly and 
others (1993) in the context of drivers of economic 
growth—this section quantifies the contribution of 
policy frameworks relative to the contribution of 
benign external conditions in boosting emerging mar-
ket resilience to risk-off shocks. The analysis proceeds 
in two stages.
The first stage explores the extent to which prox-
ies for the quality of policy frameworks predict 
growth and inflation in emerging markets during the 
12 months following the start of a risk-off episode. 
Specifically, the analysis considers a set of prede-
termined policy variables that capture monetary, 
macroprudential, and fiscal policy frameworks and, 
using episode-specific fixed effects, compares the 
resilience of emerging markets with the varying quality 
of policy frameworks while holding the impact of 
external conditions constant.20 The results indicate 
that stronger policies predict better performance and 
that countries benefited to an extent consistent with 
the strength of policy frameworks at the onset of the 
risk-off episodes. For example, an emerging market 
that entered a risk-off episode at the 75th percentile 
of lower foreign exchange mismatches is expected to 
experience 1.3 percentage point higher growth than an 
emerging market that enters the same risk-off episode 
at the 25th percentile (Figure 2.10, panel 1). Similarly, 
an emerging market at the 75th percentile in terms of 
20Episode fixed effects also control for the possibility that in recent 
episodes, emerging market economies could have benefited from a 
robust policy response and better policy frameworks in advanced 
economies. The empirical approach is inspired by previous work 
that studied the relevance of policy frameworks during the global 
financial crisis or oil price collapses (Blanchard and others 2010; 
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2011; Berkmen and others 2012; Grigoli, 
Herman, and Swiston 2019). See Online Annex 2.6 for details on 
the methodology.
anchoring of long-term inflation expectations tends to 
experience 1.3 percentage point lower inflation.
Leveraging the estimates obtained in the first stage 
of the analysis, the second stage quantifies the over-
all contributions of policy frameworks and external 
conditions to growth and inflation dynamics in the 
aftermath of risk-off shocks by accounting for the 
observed changes in these factors in the periods before 
Inflation
Real GDP growth
Figure 2.10.  Factors Contributing to Emerging Markets’ 
Resilience during Risk-Off Episodes
(Percent)
1. Policy Determinants
Sources: Allen and Juvenal 2025; Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; IMF, World 
Economic Outlook; IMF, Integrated Macroprudential Policy Database; World Bank, 
Cross-Country Database of Fiscal Space; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 reports the predicted change in real GDP growth and inflation during 
risk-off episodes for a country moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the 
distribution of a set of policy variables. See Online Annex 2.6 for details. The whiskers 
denote 90 percent confidence intervals. Panel 2 plots the contributions of policy 
frameworks and external conditions for the median emerging market in the post-GFC 
period (2010–24) relative to the pre-GFC period (1997–2009). Variables proxying for 
external conditions include real GDP growth in advanced economies, commodity 
terms-of-trade shocks, and US FCI-G index. Anchoring of inflation expectations 
and reserve adequacy account for monetary contributions, FX mismatches and 
macroprudential policy measures for macroprudential contributions, and external 
debt burden and the cyclically adjusted balance for fiscal contributions. CFM = 
capital flow management; FCI-G index = Financial Conditions Impulse on Growth 
index; FX = foreign exchange; GFC = global financial crisis.
2. Contributions
−1.5
1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
100
100
80
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
Real GDP growth
Inﬂation
Better anchoring of inﬂation expectations
Higher reserve adequacy
Lower FX mismatches
Stricter macroprudential policy
Lower external debt burden
Higher cyclically adjusted balance
Tighter CFM measures
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
External conditions
Policy frameworks
Monetary
Macroprudential
Fiscal
(right scale)
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
63
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
and after the global financial crisis.21 Improved policy 
frameworks contributed substantially to resilience 
during recent risk-off episodes, raising growth by 
0.5 percentage point and lowering inflation by 0.6 per-
centage point in the period since the global financial 
crisis compared with the period before the crisis began 
(Figure 2.10, panel 2). Improvements in monetary, 
macroprudential, and fiscal frameworks contributed 
roughly equally to the growth performance in the 
years since the crisis. Lower inflation, instead, is largely 
explained by improvements in monetary frameworks, 
especially better-anchored inflation expectations. More 
benign external conditions—captured by real GDP 
growth in advanced economies, commodity terms-of-
trade shocks, and global financial conditions—also 
contributed to faster growth in emerging markets after 
the global financial crisis, by 0.5 percentage point, but 
did not ease inflationary pressures.
How to Deal with Future Risk-Off Shocks: 
Evidence from Model Simulations
Economies featuring better policy frameworks enjoy 
more favorable policy trade-offs, which leave room for 
monetary policy to act countercyclically. This section 
leverages a quantitative version of the IMF’s Integrated 
Policy Framework (Q-IPF) model (Adrian and others 
2020, 2021; Adrian, Gaspar, and Vitek 2022) to set 
the stage by quantifying these trade-offs and then 
elaborate on the appropriate policy response emerg-
ing from improved policy frameworks.22 The Q-IPF 
contains four key frictions: (1) limited risk-bearing 
capacity of agents in the foreign exchange market, giv-
21The relative contributions of monetary, macroprudential, 
and fiscal policy frameworks to growth and inflation should be 
interpreted with caution. First, the predetermined policy frame-
works could still be endogenous to growth and inflation, even after 
controlling for pre-trends. Second, there is no one-to-one mapping 
between the policy variables shown in panel 1 of Figure 2.10 and 
the three policy frameworks. While individual policy variables may 
be more closely associated with a particular framework, they can 
nonetheless influence others. For instance, the level of external debt 
reflects both fiscal actions and macroprudential regulation.
22The Q-IPF model has two key advantages. First, as with the 
conceptual IPF models (Basu and others, forthcoming; Basu and 
Gopinath 2024), it jointly considers the role of monetary, foreign 
exchange, and macroprudential policies in small open economies 
while accounting explicitly for imperfections in trade and financial 
markets that generate inefficient fluctuations in risk premiums. 
Second, it is explicitly quantitative, can be solved nonlinearly, and 
can be used to assess the impact of different combinations of policies 
for countries with different sets of frictions.
ing rise to fluctuations in the uncovered interest parity 
risk premium; (2) an occasionally binding external 
debt limit, which can trigger sudden stops; (3) weakly 
anchored inflation expectations that result in a high 
pass-through of exchange rate changes to import 
and consumer prices; and (4) balance sheet foreign 
exchange mismatches, which amplify the contraction-
ary impact of exchange rate changes in case of a sud-
den stop. The model—augmented with an endogenous 
inflation indexation mechanism (Erceg, Lindé, and 
Trabandt 2024) to capture a more realistic inflation 
expectation de-anchoring process—is calibrated to two 
types of small open emerging markets with flexible 
exchange rates. The first type of economy resembles 
the average emerging market in the period prior to 
the global financial crisis and is subject to all four 
frictions. The second represents the average emerging 
market in the postcrisis period, featuring more strongly 
anchored inflation expectations and smaller balance 
sheet mismatches.23 The foreign economy is calibrated 
to the US.
Quantifying Policy Trade-Offs and the 
Probability of Sudden Stops 
To illustrate the policy trade-offs in emerging 
markets with policy frameworks of different quality, 
the analysis considers a risk-off shock that triggers 
capital outflows, and in turn causes the exchange rate 
to depreciate by 10 percent (Figure 2.11). In the case 
of the emerging market with strong policy frameworks 
(that is, the postcrisis emerging market), the exchange 
rate depreciation raises import prices, fueling price 
and wage inflation. With strongly anchored infla-
tion expectations, monetary policy can afford not to 
tighten policy rates aggressively, allowing the tempo-
rary increase in inflation to subside while prioritizing 
output stabilization, with output supported by higher 
net exports.
Policymakers in emerging markets with weak policy 
frameworks (that is, the pre–global financial crisis 
emerging market), on the other hand, face harsher pol-
icy trade-offs. For the same size depreciation, a greater 
exchange rate pass-through to domestic prices leads to 
23The model calibration to average emerging market conditions 
prior to and after the global financial crisis is illustrative and should 
be interpreted as equally informative about the current cross-country 
differences among emerging markets. See Online Annex 2.7 for 
details about the model calibration.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
64
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
a substantial increase in inflation. The central bank is 
then forced to tighten aggressively, depressing domestic 
demand. In the emerging market with strong policy 
frameworks output declines by only 0.1 percentage 
point and inflation rises by 0.2 percentage point, but 
the emerging market with weak policy frameworks suf-
fers a 0.3 percentage point contraction in output and a 
1 percentage point increase in inflation.
Another important implication of the improve-
ment in policy frameworks is the lower likelihood and 
severity of sudden stops. The period after the global 
financial crisis witnessed substantial changes in the bal-
ance sheets of several emerging markets. The average 
net foreign asset position increased by 13 percent of 
GDP relative to the period before the crisis, and the 
share of external liabilities denominated in domestic 
currency rose by 12.5 percentage points (see Chapter 3 
of the October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report 
for recent trends in local currency bond markets). 
These improvements keep the economy farther from 
the external debt limit, lowering by half the probability 
of experiencing a sudden stop, to 1.5 percent. Condi-
tional on experiencing a sudden stop, the severity of 
these events also dropped significantly. The average 
credit spread during sudden stops fell from 6.2 percent 
to 5.2 percent (Figure 2.12).
Costs of Delaying Monetary Tightening
The inflation surge after the pandemic period 
created a particularly challenging environment for 
emerging markets facing risk-off shocks. Global 
supply chain disruptions led to a rapid and persistent 
increase in prices (Chapter 2 of the October 2024 
World Economic Outlook), which amplified the adverse 
dynamics typically seen in emerging markets with weak 
policy frameworks. However, many emerging markets 
responded with timely and aggressive tightening of 
their monetary policy, which proved crucial in prevent-
ing de-anchoring of inflation expectations (English, 
Forbes, and Ubide 2024).
To quantify the costs associated with a delayed and 
dovish monetary policy response, the analysis focuses 
EM with weak policy frameworks
EM with strong policy frameworks
Figure 2.11.  Policy Trade-Offs in Response to Risk-Off Shocks
1. Nominal Exchange Rate
Depreciation
(Percent)
−2
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents the model simulations in response to a capital flow shock 
that triggers a 10 percent depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. The EM with 
weak policy frameworks is calibrated according to the characteristics of the average EM 
during the pre-GFC period, while the EM with strong policy frameworks is calibrated to 
the characteristics of the average EM during the post-GFC period. CPI = consumer price 
index; EM = emerging market; GFC = global financial crisis.
Quarters
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
2. CPI Inflation
(Percentage points)
−0.4
1.2
0
0.4
0.8
Quarters
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
3. Nominal Policy Rate
(Percentage points)
0
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
Quarters
4. Output Growth
(Percent)
−0.3
0.2
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
Quarters
Sudden-stop probability
Credit spread during sudden stops
(right scale)
EMs with weak policy frameworks
EMs with strong policy frameworks
Figure 2.12.  Probability and Severity of Sudden Stops
(Percent)
0
4
1
2
3
0
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure reports the probability and severity of sudden stops, based on 
stochastic simulations as described in Adrian and others (2020, 2021). The average 
severity of a sudden stop is measured using the credit spread, computed as the 
borrowing rate minus policy rate. EMs = emerging markets.
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
65
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
on emerging markets with weak frameworks and 
compares simulation results for two monetary policy 
regimes in response to a combination of a risk-off 
shock and a persistent cost-push shock (Figure 2.13), as 
in the postpandemic environment, causing a 10 percent 
nominal exchange rate depreciation and 0.5 percentage 
point increase in inflation. In the first regime, mon-
etary policy follows a standard Taylor rule, with the 
central bank responding to inflationary pressures in a 
timely and aggressive manner. In the second regime, 
the policy response is delayed and subdued: The central 
bank initially attempts to look through the inflation 
surge, but later, to address the already elevated infla-
tion, it ends up raising policy rates by more than in the 
first regime.24 While both regimes eventually succeed in 
bringing inflation back to target by the end of the third 
year following the shock, late tightening leads to a sub-
stantially larger rate hike of 1.4 percentage points and 
results in a more pronounced output contraction—by 
0.7 percent of GDP—five quarters after the shock.
The Role of Foreign Exchange Interventions
Finally, the model is used to examine the role of for-
eign exchange interventions, contrasting the outcomes 
for emerging markets with different policy frameworks 
and assuming sufficient reserve buffers. In response to 
a risk-off shock, and without intervention, the nominal 
exchange rate depreciates by 10 percent. However, 
when the central bank intervenes—running down 
reserves by 3 percent of GDP—it helps counter capital 
outflows, limiting the rise in the uncovered interest 
parity risk premium and halving the magnitude of the 
exchange rate depreciation.25
The results show that, despite foreign exchange 
interventions, the residual exchange rate depreciation 
in the emerging market with weak policy frame-
works still fuels inflation, reflecting a relatively high 
exchange rate pass-through. Yet two years after the 
shock, the cumulative price increase is 0.7 percent-
age point lower than in the no-intervention scenario. 
This moderates the need for monetary tightening and 
reduces the associated output loss by 0.9 percentage 
point (Figure 2.14, panel 1). In contrast, for emerging 
markets with strong policy frameworks, the benefits of 
foreign exchange intervention are more modest. Given 
better-anchored inflation expectations, inflation is 
only 0.1 percentage point lower when the central bank 
intervenes, and output is marginally higher despite the 
monetary policy tightening, as the nominal deprecia-
tion boosts net exports (Figure 2.14, panel 2).26
24In the model, prices and wages tend to rise faster when inflation 
is far from the target, leading to inflation persistence. This mecha-
nism worsens the trade-off associated with delayed monetary tighten-
ing, as inflation becomes more difficult to contain once expectations 
begin to drift.
25The effectiveness of foreign exchange interventions in offsetting 
the nominal exchange rate depreciation depends on the depth of for-
eign exchange markets. As this is assumed to be the same in emerg-
ing markets with weak and strong policy frameworks, the resulting 
depreciation when the central bank intervenes is the same.
26Adrian and others (2021) compare the effects of capital flow mea-
sures and foreign exchange interventions in a similar model setup. The 
simulations suggest that these tools offer similar advantages. While 
the analysis in the chapter pertains to foreign exchange interventions, 
comparing countries with strong and weak policy frameworks, the 
conclusions can be extended to the use of capital flow measures.
Standard Taylor rule
Late tightening
Figure 2.13.  Costs of Delaying Monetary Tightening for 
Emerging Markets with Weak Policy Frameworks
1. Nominal Exchange Rate
Depreciation
(Percent)
0
12
2
4
6
8
10
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents the model simulations in response to a capital flow shock 
that triggers a 10 percent depreciation of the nominal exchange rate combined with 
a cost-push shock. The EM with weak policy frameworks is calibrated according to the 
characteristics of the average EM during the pre-GFC period. In the “late tightening” 
scenario, the central bank first attempts to look through the inflation surge. CPI = 
consumer price index; EM = emerging market; GFC = global financial crisis.
Quarters
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
2. CPI Inflation
(Percentage points)
0
0.4
2.0
0.8
1.2
1.6
Quarters
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
3. Nominal Policy Rate
(Percentage points)
0.0
3.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Quarters
4. Output Growth
(Percent)
−1.6
0
−1.2
−0.8
−0.4
Quarters
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
66
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Conclusions and Policy Implications
Since the global financial crisis, most emerging 
markets have shown remarkable resilience to risk-off 
shocks, including in the aftermath of the COVID-19 
shock and the inflation surge that followed the 
pandemic. While favorable external conditions have 
certainly bolstered the capacity of these economies to 
withstand risk-off shocks, attributing recent resil-
ience solely to good luck does not tell the whole story. 
Improved policy frameworks have played a critical 
role in supporting macroeconomic stability, allowing 
countries to implement good policies.
An analysis of the evolution of policy frameworks 
in emerging markets reveals, on average, substantial 
progress over time, which helped narrow the gap 
with advanced economies, although the degree of 
progress varies across countries. De facto improve-
ments—which extend beyond the de jure adoption of 
inflation targeting and fiscal rules—have enhanced the 
implementation and credibility of monetary and fiscal 
policies, which in turn have led to more restrained 
use of foreign exchange interventions. In other words, 
emerging markets’ investment in upgrading policy 
frameworks has yielded high returns, boosting resil-
ience against risk-off shocks. Comparing the typical 
risk-off episode since the global financial crisis with a 
typical episode before the crisis suggests that improved 
frameworks accounted for 0.5 percentage point higher 
growth and 0.6 percentage point lower inflation. In 
contrast, favorable external conditions supported faster 
growth, contributing 0.5 percentage point, but did not 
ease inflationary pressures.
Based on the results from a rich set of empirical 
exercises to assess policy frameworks and model sim-
ulations aimed at quantifying policy trade-offs under 
different policy frameworks, this chapter offers some 
key insights for policymakers to navigate a shock-prone 
global environment:
	• Monetary policy. Clear communication of policy 
objectives and the central bank’s reaction function 
can help anchor inflation expectations and enhance 
credibility. This, in turn, eases policy trade-offs, 
allowing the central bank to focus more on output 
stabilization. In addition, reinforcing and safe-
guarding central bank independence are essential to 
ensure that policy decisions remain insulated from 
political pressures and to mitigate the risk of fiscal 
dominance. This continues to be relevant in the 
current context, in which inflation expectations are 
anchored and fiscal demands are mounting, tempt-
ing policymakers to yield to political pressure. 
	• Foreign exchange interventions. Foreign exchange 
interventions can play a stabilizing role for 
less-resilient emerging markets, but the benefits 
diminish as policy frameworks strengthen. Given the 
costs associated with foreign exchange interventions, 
efforts to anchor inflation expectations and reduce 
balance sheet mismatches—including through the 
implementation of macroprudential frameworks—
should be promoted, lessening the need for inter-
vention in the foreign exchange market.
	• Fiscal policy. Stronger fiscal guardrails are needed to 
foster fiscal discipline when high uncertainty and 
Nominal
exchange rate
depreciation
Output growth
(right scale)
CPI inﬂation
(right scale)
Nominal policy rate
(right scale)
Nominal
exchange rate
depreciation
Output growth
(right scale)
CPI inﬂation
(right scale)
Nominal policy rate
(right scale)
With FXI
Without FXI
With FXI
Without FXI
Figure 2.14.  Effects of Foreign Exchange Interventions
(Percent)
1. Emerging Markets with Weak Policy Frameworks
−4
6
−2
0
2
4
−2
3
−1
0
1
2
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents the model simulations in response to a capital flow shock 
that triggers a 10 percent depreciation of the nominal exchange rate in the absence 
of FXI. The FXI scenarios involve a decline in FX reserves by 3 percent of GDP. The EM 
with weak policy frameworks is calibrated according to the average characteristics 
of the pre-GFC EM, while the EM with strong policy frameworks is calibrated to the 
average characteristics of the post-GFC EM. FX reserves are expressed in percent of 
trend GDP; the nominal exchange rate depreciation and output growth are reported 
in percent; and CPI inflation and the nominal policy rate are expressed in percentage 
points. The figure reports the FX reserves when the shock hits, the cumulative change 
over the two years following the shock for CPI inflation and output, and the two-year 
average for the nominal exchange rate depreciation and policy rate changes. CPI = 
consumer price index; EM = emerging market; FX = foreign exchange; FXI = foreign 
exchange intervention; GFC = global financial crisis.
2. Emerging Market with Strong Policy Frameworks
0
6
1
2
3
4
5
0
3
1
2
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
67
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
spending pressures mount. Investing in a credi-
ble medium-term fiscal framework that combines 
more flexible rules with strong and independent 
fiscal institutions is essential to signal fiscal com-
mitment while allowing for a more countercyclical 
fiscal policy. Compliance with fiscal rules can be 
improved through a risk-based fiscal anchor tailored 
to the country’s debt-carrying capacity and robust 
correction mechanisms (Acalin and others 2025). 
Sound public debt management could also mitigate 
the effect of negative shocks on borrowing costs 
(Pedersoli and Presbitero 2023). These policies would 
help forge a path to debt sustainability and build up 
fiscal buffers (see Chapter 2 of the October 2021 
Fiscal Monitor). Deepening local currency bond 
markets and increasing resident investors’ participa-
tion can also improve resilience (see Chapter 3 of the 
October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report).
	• Trilemma, not dilemma? Taken together, the 
observed resilience to risk-off episodes, the reduced 
marginal benefits of foreign exchange interventions 
(and capital flow measures) where policy frameworks 
are strong, and the evidence of greater domestic 
monetary policy autonomy all point to a grad-
ual—though uneven across countries—shift away 
from the dilemma (Rey 2015) toward the classic 
Mundell-Fleming trilemma.
	• Looking ahead, emerging markets with strong 
frameworks are better positioned to navigate risk-off 
shocks. These economies benefit from easier policy 
trade-offs and face a lower risk of sudden stops. In 
contrast, countries with weaker frameworks should 
resist the temptation to delay monetary tighten-
ing, which can de-anchor inflation expectations 
and increase output losses. In these economies, 
foreign exchange interventions can provide tem-
porary relief. However, they are costly and should 
neither substitute nor postpone necessary efforts to 
anchor inflation expectations and reduce balance 
sheet mismatches. More broadly, foreign exchange 
interventions should not hinder the warranted 
adjustment of macroeconomic policies, including of 
the exchange rate.
The visible improvements in policy frameworks and 
their role in strengthening emerging market resilience 
to recent risk-off episodes should not lead to compla-
cency. Three key considerations warrant attention:
	• First, external conditions may not remain favorable. 
Although global financial conditions have been 
relatively benign since the global financial crisis, this 
can change quickly, leading to reduced consumption 
and investment in advanced economies. Meanwhile, 
rising global interest rates pose significant risks for 
emerging markets with already elevated debt. And 
geopolitical tensions can trigger unfavorable changes 
in emerging markets’ terms of trade.
	• Second, the economic fallout from the COVID-19 
pandemic and the energy shock triggered by Russia’s 
war in Ukraine has led to higher public-debt-to-
GDP ratios in many emerging markets. The eroded 
fiscal space may limit the ability of fiscal policy to 
respond effectively to future shocks, underscoring 
the need to rebuild fiscal capacity before the next 
period of market stress. Moreover, the postpandemic 
inflation surge may have put inflation expectations 
on edge, which means central banks must main-
tain a steady and credible commitment to inflation 
stability.
	• Third, the risks of policy backsliding should not be 
overlooked. Recent gains in credibility and insti-
tutional strength cannot be taken for granted. As 
Box 2.3 illustrates, central bank independence may 
come under pressure from politically driven appoint-
ments, potentially leading to fiscal dominance, loss 
of credibility, and inflation surges. Likewise, fiscal 
rules could be weakened or disregarded if political 
economy pressures dominate, undermining fiscal 
credibility.
For these reasons, the significant strides of emerging 
markets in recent years—and their effective responses 
to recent shocks—should be viewed as a foundation 
for further strengthening monetary, macroprudential, 
and fiscal policy frameworks, as well as rebuilding pol-
icy buffers to better withstand an increasingly uncer-
tain global environment.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
68
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The IMF’s precautionary instruments—the Flexible 
Credit Line (FCL), Precautionary and Liquidity Line 
(PLL), and Short-Term Liquidity Line (SLL)—are 
integral components of the institution’s lending 
toolkit. They provide qualifying members with 
up-front access to IMF resources, with no or limited 
conditionality, and aim to bolster market confidence 
while offering insurance against external shocks. 
These instruments are available to qualifying mem-
bers with very strong (or sound, in the case of the 
PLL) economic fundamentals and policy frameworks, 
a sustained history of implementing (and currently 
implementing) very strong policies, and a commit-
ment to maintain these policies.
This box assesses the effectiveness of these instru-
ments in supporting emerging markets’ access to 
international financial markets and bolstering market 
confidence during periods of heightened global risks. 
An event study around the approval of new FCL and 
SLL arrangements shows a significant and increasingly 
pronounced decline in sovereign spreads in the days 
following the announcements of the arrangements 
(Figure 2.1.1, panel 1).1,2
Precautionary instruments also help during risk-off 
episodes. Local projections with inverse propensity 
score weighting (Angrist, Jordà, and Kuersteiner 
2018) show that emerging markets with precaution-
ary arrangements experienced significantly smaller 
increases in spreads and capital outflows during the 
two most recent risk-off episodes, compared with peers 
with similar fundamentals (Figure 2.1.1, panel 2). 
These findings indicate that the value of these instru-
ments may increase in a shock-prone environment, in 
which recurring stress episodes can challenge emerging 
markets integrated into global trade and finance (IMF 
2023b).
The author of this box is Giulio Lisi.
1This analysis considers the Flexible Credit Line (FCL) 
arrangements approved in 2009 for Colombia, Mexico, and 
Poland; the FCLs approved for Chile and Peru in 2020, in the 
context of the COVID-19 shock; and the 2023 Morocco FCL. 
It also considers the Short-Term Liquidity Line approved for 
Chile in May 2022.
2This result is consistent with earlier work (Lisi 2022) and 
robust to the use of a synthetic control approach (Abadie 2021). 
On average, spreads remain more than 20 basis points lower than 
their synthetic counterparts in the 60 trading days following the 
announcement.
FCL/SLL/PLL users
EMBI EMs weighted 
sample
Figure 2.1.1.  IMF Precautionary Arrangements and 
Their Role during Risk-Off Episodes
−50
0
−40
−30
−20
−10
1. Changes in Sovereign Spreads
(Basis points)
1 day
5 days
10 days
Trading days after FCL/SLL announcement
Change in sovereign spreads
(basis points)
Cumulative change in capital outﬂows
(percent of annual GDP)
−300
600
−200
−100
100
300
0
200
400
500
−0.4
0.8
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
2. Precautionary Instruments and
Global Risk Events
3 months
3 months
6 months
6 months
Spreads
Outﬂows (right scale)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Emerging Portfolio Fund Research; 
Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the estimated change in spreads following the 
announcement of a new FCL or SLL, relative to other emerging markets 
included in the EMBI. Estimates control for global financial variables 
and lagged spreads. Panel 2 shows the impulse response functions 
from local projections with country and year fixed effects. Shocks 
are identified at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. Estimates are derived using inverse probability 
weighting for 2017–19 macroeconomic outcomes (EMBI spreads, debt 
to GDP, fiscal deficit, and current account balance) on the probability 
of observing a precautionary arrangement in the sample. The whiskers 
denote 90 percent confidence intervals. EMs = emerging markets; 
EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; FCL = IMF Flexible 
Credit Line; PLL = IMF Precautionary and Liquidity Line; SLL = IMF 
Short-Term Liquidity Line.
Box 2.1. IMF Arrangements and Emerging Market Resilience
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
69
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The cornerstone of an effective monetary policy 
framework is a clear nominal anchor and a strong, 
credible commitment to price stability. While the 
nominal anchor may differ across countries, in all 
cases it must be viewed as clear and credible, pro-
viding a basis for price- and wage-setting decisions. 
Over the past two and a half decades, many emerging 
market central banks have made substantial progress 
in modernizing their monetary frameworks—some-
times prompted by disorderly market conditions and 
at other times facilitated by favorable circumstances. 
Many of these reforms have placed price stability at 
the core of their mandates, often supported by IMF 
technical assistance. This box elaborates on some key 
milestones.
Limiting the scope for political interference is essen-
tial to credibly establishing a commitment to price 
stability.1 In some emerging markets, fiscal reforms 
and government endorsement of the central bank’s 
price stability objective played complementary roles in 
mitigating concerns about fiscal dominance. Invest-
ments in regulatory, supervisory, and macroprudential 
frameworks have also been crucial to allow monetary 
authorities to pursue price stability objectives. The 
Bank of Thailand offers a good example because its 
adoption of inflation targeting (IT) was supported and 
complemented by ambitious reforms in Thai financial 
sector policy.
Depending on the monetary framework, other key 
milestones may involve building adequate foreign 
The author of this box is Thomas J. Carter.
1See Brandao-Marques and others (2024) for evidence of links 
between government debt and long-term inflation expectations 
in emerging markets, along with complementary evidence from 
David, Pienknagura, and Yépez (2025).
exchange reserves or clarifying the appropriate role 
of the exchange rate. For emerging markets with IT, 
especially those transitioning from fixed exchange rate 
regimes, allowing for greater exchange rate flexibil-
ity and keeping foreign exchange interventions to 
an appropriate minimum are both critical because 
they help avoid any perception of targeting specific 
exchange rate levels and confusion about the “true” 
nominal anchor. The Central Bank of Chile and the 
South African Reserve Bank are examples of strong 
commitment to exchange rate flexibility and limited 
foreign exchange interventions.
Other key milestones relate to the develop-
ment of central banks’ operational, technical, and 
decision-making frameworks. Many emerging market 
central banks have surmounted a range of challenges 
in building their operational capacity to manage 
liquidity and steer short-term interest rates while 
promoting the development of interbank, securities, 
and other markets key to monetary transmission. The 
National Bank of Georgia, for example, prioritized a 
range of policy reforms in these areas to support the 
development of its IT framework.
A final key milestone is the development of a strong 
framework for communicating monetary policy deci-
sions and the rationales behind them. Many emerging 
markets’ central banks, including the examples noted 
in this box, have developed sophisticated commu-
nications frameworks centered around regular press 
conferences, policy statements, and monetary policy 
reports.2 These investments help enhance accountabil-
ity and improve public understanding of the central 
banks’ objectives and reaction functions.
2See Unsal, Papageorgiou, and Garbers (2022) for evidence of 
improvement in central banks’ communication frameworks.
Box 2.2. Milestones in Developing Monetary Policy Frameworks
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
70
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Implementing monetary policy without political 
interference is essential for central bank independence 
because it helps anchor inflation expectations and 
ensure price stability (Blinder 2000; Bernanke 2010; 
Fischer 2015; Ioannidou and others 2025). This box 
examines the macroeconomic effects of diminished 
central bank independence by leveraging politically 
motivated governor transitions, which occur when the 
appointment or removal of the incumbent does not 
follow clear, rule-based procedures; does not prioritize 
professional qualifications; and does not preserve the 
central bank’s operational independence. 
Based on 134 governor transitions in 11 advanced 
economies and 16 emerging markets since 2000, 
transitions are classified by whether news reports at the 
time of the transition mentioned political interference 
and political motive.1 Politically motivated transitions 
have been far more common in emerging markets 
(50, about half of all transitions) than in advanced 
economies (5, or 8 percent of all transitions). More-
over, inflation expectations are less well anchored in 
countries with more frequent politically motivated 
transitions (Figure 2.3.1): They exceed targets by 
about 1 percent where such transitions are the major-
ity and by over 2 percent where they are the norm. 
Expectations remain close to target in countries with-
out political transitions. This correlation holds within 
both advanced and emerging market economies. No 
such relationship is found with de jure measures of 
central bank independence (Romelli 2024). 
To identify the effects of politically motivated 
transitions on macroeconomic variables, the analysis 
uses difference-in-differences local projections (Dube 
and others 2023), controlling for past changes in 
macroeconomic variables, as well as country and time 
fixed effects. Six months after politically motivated 
transitions, real rates fall by 1.6 percentage points, 
exchange rates depreciate by 3.1 percent, and inflation 
and inflation expectations rise by 1.7 percentage points 
relative to countries with similar macroeconomic 
fundamentals that did not experience a governor 
transition. The exchange rate also tends to depreci-
ate, but the effect is not statistically significant. The 
limited number of politically motivated transitions 
in advanced economies makes it hard to have robust 
The authors of this box are Marijn A. Bolhuis, Rui Mano, and 
Hedda Thorell.
1The classification relies on subjective assessments based on 
information published for each transition on the website https://
centralbanking.com, supplemented with news reported by 
Bloomberg and the Financial Times.
evidence of differential effects across country groups. 
Results for emerging market economies are very 
close to those for the overall sample, while those for 
advanced economies are either smaller in magnitude 
(for expected inflation and exchange rate depreciation) 
or not significant.
Politically motivated transitions
Nonpolitically motivated
transitions
Inflation target (percent)
Long-term inflation expectations (percent)
Measure of de jure independence
(index, right scale)
Figure 2.3.1.  Effects of Politically Motivated 
Transitions
0
8
2
4
6
0
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
1. Inflation Targets, Long-Term Inflation Expectations, and
De Jure Central Bank Independence
0
1–25
26–50
51–75
76–100
Share of politically motivated transitions (percent)
−4
8
−2
0
2
4
6
2. Outcomes Following Governor Transitions after Six Months
(Percentage points)
Real
interest rate
Nominal
exchange rate
Realized
inﬂation
Inﬂation
expectations
Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development; Romelli 2024; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the bars show the mean of deviations from target of 
five-year-ahead inflation expectations, yellow rectangles the inflation 
target, and red squares the de jure central bank independence from 
Romelli (2024). All variables are expressed by country groups from 2000 
to 2024 based on the frequency of politically motivated transitions. In 
panel 2, the bars show average changes in the outcomes six months after 
politically motivated transitions (blue bars) and nonpolitically motivated 
transitions (red bars). The real interest rate is defined as the difference 
between the 3-month deposit rate (or equivalent) and 12-month-ahead 
inflation expectations. A positive change in the nominal exchange rate 
indicates a depreciation. Specifications control for pre-trends in outcome 
variables, a fixed set of macroeconomic control variables, and country 
and time fixed effects. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence 
intervals. The sample includes all transitions that can be used to isolate 
the causal effect of the transition.
Box 2.3. Macroeconomic Effects of Undermining Central Bank Independence
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
71
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
References
Abadie, A. 2021. “Using Synthetic Controls: Feasibility, Data 
Requirements, and Methodological Aspects.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Literature 59 (2): 391–425.
Abiad, A., J. Bluedorn, J. Guajardo, and P. Topalova. 2015. 
“The Rising Resilience of Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies.” World Development 72: 1–26.
Acalin, J., V. Alonso, C. Arroyo, R. Lam, L. Martinez, A.D.M. 
Nguyen, F. Roch, G. Sher, and A. Solovyeva. 2025. “Fiscal 
Guardrails against High Debt and Looming Spending 
Pressures.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 25/004, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Acosta-Henao, M., A. Fernández, P. Gomez-Gonzalez, and S. 
Kalemli-Özcan. 2024. “Firm Financing during Sudden Stops: 
Can Governments Substitute Markets?” NBER Working 
Paper 33283, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Adler, G., K. S. Chang, R. C. Mano, and Y. Shao. 2024. “Foreign 
Exchange Intervention: A Data Set of Official Data and Esti-
mates.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 57 (5): 1241–73.
Adrian, T., C. J. Erceg, M. Kolasa, J. Lindé, and P. Zabczyk. 
2021. “A Quantitative Microfounded Model for the Inte-
grated Policy Framework.” IMF Working Paper 21/292, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Adrian, T., C. J. Erceg, J. Lindé, P. Zabczyk, and M. J. Zhou. 
2020. “A Quantitative Model for the Integrated Policy Frame-
work. IMF Working Paper 20/122, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Adrian, T., V. Gaspar, and F. Vitek. 2022. “A Medium-Scale 
DSGE Model for the Integrated Policy Framework.” IMF 
Working Paper 22/015, International Monetary Fund, Wash-
ington, DC.
Adrian, T., F. Natalucci, and J. Wu. 2024. “Emerging Markets 
Navigate Global Interest Rate Volatility.” IMF Blog, January 
31.
Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath. 2007. “Emerging Market Business 
Cycles: The Cycle Is the Trend.” Journal of Political Economy 
115 (1): 69–102.
Aizenman, J., D. Park, I. A. Qureshi, J. Saadaoui, and G. Salah 
Uddin. 2024. “The Performance of Emerging Markets during 
the Fed’s Easing and Tightening Cycles: A Cross-Country 
Resilience Analysis.” Journal of International Money and 
Finance 148: 103169.
Alfaro, L., M. Calani, and L. Varela. 2021. “Granular Corporate 
Hedging under Dominant Currency.” NBER Working Paper 
28910, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 
MA.
Alonso, V., C. Arroyo, O. Aydin, V. Balasundharam, H. R. 
Davoodi, W. R. Lam, A. Nguyen, N. Salazar Ferro, G. Sher, 
and A. Solovyeva. Forthcoming. “Fiscal Rules at a Glance: 
An Update 1985–2024.” International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Angrist, J. D., Ò. Jordà, and G. M. Kuersteiner. 2018. “Semi-
parametric Estimates of Monetary Policy Effects: String 
Theory Revisited.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 
36 (3): 371–87.
Apeti, A. E., B. W. W. Bambe, J. L. Combes, and E. D. Edoh. 
2024. “Original Sin: Fiscal Rules and Government Debt in 
Foreign Currency in Developing Countries.” Journal of Mac-
roeconomics 80: 103600.
Basu, S., E. Boz, G. Gopinath, F. Roch, and D. Unsal. Forth-
coming. “A Conceptual Model for the Integrated Policy 
Framework.” Econometrica.
Basu, S., and G. Gopinath. 2024. “An Integrated Policy Frame-
work (IPF) Diagram for International Economics.” IMF 
Working Paper 2024/038, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Bauer, M. D., C. E. Pflueger, and A. Sunderam. 2024. “Percep-
tions about Monetary Policy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
139 (4): 2227–78.
Bauer, M. D., and E. T. Swanson. 2023. “A Reassessment of 
Monetary Policy Surprises and High-Frequency Identifica-
tion.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 37 (1): 87–155.
Bekaert, G., E. C. Engstrom, and N. R. Xu. 2022. “The Time 
Variation in Risk Appetite and Uncertainty.” Management 
Science 68 (6): 3975–4004.
Bems, R., F. Caselli, F. Grigoli, and B. Gruss. 2021. “Expecta-
tions’ Anchoring and Inflation Persistence.” Journal of Interna-
tional Economics 132: 103516.
Bergant, K., A. Fernández, K. Teoh, and M. Uribe. Forth-
coming. “Redrawing the Landscape of Cross-Border Flow 
Restrictions: Modern Tools and Historical Perspectives.” 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bergant, K., F. Grigoli, N. J. Hansen, and D. Sandri. 2024. 
“Dampening Global Financial Shocks: Can Macroprudential 
Regulation Help (More Than Capital Controls)?” Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking 56 (6): 1405–38.
Berkmen, S. P., G. Gelos, R. Rennhack, and J. P. Walsh. 2012. 
“The Global Financial Crisis: Explaining Cross-Country 
Differences in the Output Impact.” Journal of International 
Money and Finance 31 (1): 42–59.
Bernanke, B. S. 2010. “Central Bank Independence, Trans-
parency, and Accountability.” In Speeches at the Institute for 
Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank 
of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, May, vol. 25.
Blanchard, O. J., H. Faruqee, M. Das, K. J. Forbes, and L. L. 
Tesar. 2010. “The Initial Impact of the Crisis on Emerging 
Market Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 
263–323.
Blanchard, O., and R. Perotti. 2002. “An Empirical 
Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of Changes in 
Government Spending and Taxes on Output.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1329–68.
Blinder, A. S. 2000. “Central-Bank Credibility: Why Do We 
Care? How Do We Build It?” American Economic Review 
90 (5): 1421–31. 
Bohn, H. 1998. “The Behavior of US Public Debt and Deficits.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3): 949–63.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
72
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Brandao-Marques, L., M. Casiraghi, G. Gelos, O. Harrison, and 
G. Kamber. 2024. “Is High Debt Constraining Monetary 
Policy? Evidence from Inflation Expectations.” Journal of 
International Money and Finance 149: 103206.
Caballero, R. J., and G. Kamber. 2019. “On the Global Impact 
of Risk-Off Shocks and Policy-Put Frameworks.” NBER 
Working Paper 26031, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Calvo, G. A., and C. M. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of Floating.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2): 379–408.
Campa, J. M., and L. S. Goldberg. 2005. “Exchange Rate 
Pass-Through into Import Prices.” Review of Economics and 
Statistics 87 (4): 679–90.
Carare, A., and M. R. Stone. 2006. “Inflation Targeting 
Regimes.” European Economic Review 50 (5): 1297–315.
Carrière-Swallow, Y., B. Gruss, N. E. Magud, and F. Valencia. 2021. 
“Monetary Policy Credibility and Exchange Rate Pass-Through.” 
International Journal of Central Banking 17 (3): 61–94.
Carvalho, C., F. Nechio, and T. Tristao. 2021. “Taylor Rule 
Estimation by OLS.” Journal of Monetary Economics 124: 
140–54.
Cerra, V., U. Panizza, and S. C. Saxena. 2013. “International 
Evidence on Recovery from Recessions.” Contemporary Eco-
nomic Policy 31 (2): 424–39.
Cerra, V., and S. C. Saxena. 2008. “Growth Dynamics: The 
Myth of Economic Recovery.” American Economic Review 
98 (1): 439–57.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2020. “Capital 
Flows in Risky Times: Risk-On/Risk-Off and Emerging 
Market Tail Risk.” NBER Working Paper 27927, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2021. “Taper 
Tantrums: Quantitative Easing, Its Aftermath, and Emerging 
Market Capital Flows.” Review of Financial Studies 34 (3): 
1445–508.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2022. “Global 
Fund Flows and Emerging Market Tail Risk.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 30577, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2023. “Risk-On 
Risk-Off: A Multifaceted Approach to Measuring Global 
Investor Risk Aversion.” NBER Working Paper 31907, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Checo, A., F. Grigoli, and D. Sandri. 2024. “Monetary Policy 
Transmission in Emerging Markets: Proverbial Concerns, 
Novel Evidence.” BIS Working Paper 1170, Bank for Interna-
tional Settlements, Basel.
Chen, H., and P. Tillmann. 2025. “Monetary Policy Spillovers: 
Is This Time Different?” Journal of International Money and 
Finance 152: 103278.
Cobham, D. 2025. “Monetary Policy Frameworks from 1999 
to 2023.” SSRN Working Paper 5156869, Social Science 
Research Network. 
Das, M., G. Gopinath, and Ş. Kalemli-Özcan. 2022. “Preemp-
tive Policies and Risk-Off Shocks in Emerging Markets.” 
NBER Working Paper 29615, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
David, A. C., S. Pienknagura, and J. F. Yépez. 2025. “Can 
Fiscal Consolidations Announcements Help Anchor Inflation 
Expectations?” Journal of International Money and Finance 
151: 103247.
Dinç, S. I. 2005. “Politicians and Banks: Political Influences on 
Government-Owned Banks in Emerging Markets.” Journal of 
Financial Economics 77 (2): 453–79.
Dube, A., D. Girardi, Ò. Jordà, and A. M. Taylor. 2023. “A 
Local Projections Approach to Difference-in-Differences 
Event Studies.” NBER Working Paper 31184, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Easterly, W., M. Kremer, L. Pritchett, and L. H. Summers. 1993. 
“Good Policy or Good Luck? Country Growth Performance 
and Temporary Shocks.” Journal of Monetary Economics 32 
(3): 459–83.
End, N. 2023. “Big Brother Is Also Being Watched: Measuring 
Fiscal Credibility.” Journal of Macroeconomics 77: 103548.
End, N., and M. J. H. Hong. 2022. “Trust What You Hear: 
Policy Communication, Expectations, and Fiscal Credibility.” 
IMF Working Paper 22/036, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
English, B., K. Forbes, and A. Ubide, eds. 2024. Monetary Policy 
Responses to Post-Pandemic Inflation. London: CEPR Press.
Erceg, C. J., J. Lindé, and M. Trabandt. 2024. “Monetary Policy 
and Inflation Scares.” IMF Working Paper 24/036, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Erel, I., J. Liebersohn, C. Yannelis, and S. Earnest. 2023. 
“Monetary Policy Transmission through Online Banks.” 
NBER Working Paper 31380, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Eyraud, L., M. X. Debrun, A. Hodge, V. D. Lledo, and 
M. C. A. Pattillo. 2018. “Second-Generation Fiscal Rules: 
Balancing Simplicity, Flexibility, and Enforceability.” IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 18/004, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Fischer, S. 2015. “Central Bank Independence.” 2015 Herbert 
Stein Memorial Lecture, National Economists Club, Novem-
ber 4, Washington, DC.
Frankel, J. A., C. A. Végh, and G. Vuletin. 2013. “On Grad-
uation from Fiscal Procyclicality.” Journal of Development 
Economics 100 (1): 32–47.
Gavin, M., and R. Perotti. 1997. “Fiscal Policy in Latin 
America.” In NBER Macroeconomic Annual, vol. 12, edited 
by B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, 11–61. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Ghosh, M. A. R., M. J. D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi. 2017. 
“Managing the Tide: How Do Emerging Markets Respond 
to Capital Flows?” IMF Working Paper 17/069, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
CHAPTER 2  EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?
73
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Goldberg, L. S., and S. Krogstrup. 2023. “International Capital 
Flow Pressures and Global Factors.” Journal of International 
Economics 146: 103749.
Gomez-Gonzalez, J. E., O. M. Valencia, and G. A. Sánchez. 
2022. “How Fiscal Rules Can Reduce Sovereign Debt Default 
Risk.” Emerging Markets Review 50: 100839.
Gourinchas, P. O., and M. Obstfeld 2012. “Stories of the 
Twentieth Century for the Twenty-First.” American Economic 
Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1): 226–65.
Grigoli, F., A. Herman, and A. Swiston. 2019. “A Crude Shock: 
Explaining the Short-Run Impact of the 2014–16 Oil Price 
Decline across Exporters.” Energy Economics 78: 481–93.
Grigoli, F., D. Sandri, and A. Schrimpf. Forthcoming. “Tug 
of War: Global Spillovers and Monetary Policy Autonomy 
in Emerging Markets.” International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Gruss, B., and S. Kebhaj. 2019. “Commodity Terms of Trade: A 
New Database.” IMF Working Paper 19/021, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Hardy, B., D. Igan, and E. Kharroubi. 2024. “Resilience in 
Emerging Markets: What Makes It, What Could Shake It?” 
BIS Bulletin 88, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Harikrishnan, N., B. Silk, and E. Yoldas. 2023. “US Interest 
Rates and Emerging Market Currencies: Taking Stock 10 
Years after the Taper Tantrum.” FEDS Notes, October 4. 
Hofmann, B., I. Shim, and H. S. Shin. 2016. “Sovereign Yields 
and the Risk-Taking Channel of Currency Appreciation.” BIS 
Working Paper 538, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Ilzetzki, E., E. G. Mendoza, and C. A. Végh. 2013. “How Big 
(Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?” Journal of Monetary Econom-
ics 60 (2): 239–54.
Ilzetzki, E., and C. A. Végh. 2008. “Procyclical Fiscal Policy in 
Developing Countries: Truth or Fiction?” NBER Working 
Paper 14191, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023a. “Integrated Policy 
Framework—Principles for the Use of Foreign Exchange 
Intervention.” IMF Policy Paper 2023/061, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023b. “Review of the 
Flexible Credit Line, the Short-Term Liquidity Line and the 
Precautionary and Liquidity Line, and Proposals for Reform.” 
IMF Policy Paper 2023/039, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Ioannidou, V., S. Kokas, T. Lambert, and A. Michaelides. 
2025. “(In)dependent Central Banks.” SSRN Working Paper 
4262695, Social Science Research Network.
Kose, A., and E. Prasad. 2010. Emerging Markets: Resilience and 
Growth amid Global Turmoil. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution.
Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2011. “The 
Cross-Country Incidence of the Global Crisis.” IMF Economic 
Review 59 (1): 77–110.
Levy-Yeyati, E., and F. Sturzenegger. 2005. “Classifying 
Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds vs. Words.” European 
Economic Review 49 (6): 1603–35.
Liang, P., M. Sampaio, and S. Sarkisyan. 2024. “Digital 
Payments and Monetary Policy Transmission.” Ohio State 
University Working Paper 2024-14, Charles A. Dice Center 
for Research in Financial Economics, Columbus, OH.
Lisi, G. 2022. “IMF’s Precautionary Lending Instruments: Have 
They Worked?” IMF Working Paper 22/256, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Mauro, P., R. Romeu, A. Binder, and A. Zaman. 2015. “A 
Modern History of Fiscal Prudence and Profligacy.” Journal of 
Monetary Economics 76: 55–70.
Mendoza, E. G., and J. D. Ostry. 2008. “International Evidence 
on Fiscal Solvency: Is Fiscal Policy ‘Responsible’?” Journal of 
Monetary Economics 55 (6): 1081–93.
Miranda-Agrippino, S., and H. Rey. 2020a. “The Global Finan-
cial Cycle after Lehman.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 110: 
523–28.
Miranda-Agrippino, S., and H. Rey. 2020b. “US Monetary 
Policy and the Global Financial Cycle.” Review of Economic 
Studies 87 (6): 2754–76.
Obstfeld, M., J. D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi. 2019. “A Tie That 
Binds: Revisiting the Trilemma in Emerging Market Econo-
mies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (2): 279–93.
Pedersoli, S., and A. F. Presbitero. 2023. “Public Debt Manage-
ment and Private Financial Development.” Economic Systems 
47 (1): 101010.
Presbitero, A. F., and U. Wiriadinata. 2022. “Public Debt and 
r - g at Risk.” SSRN Working Paper 3710776, Social Science 
Research Network.
Reinhart, C. M., K. S. Rogoff, and M. A. Savastano. 2003. 
“Debt Intolerance.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34: 
1–74.
Rey, H. 2015. “Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial 
Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 21162, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Romelli, D. 2024. “Trends in Central Bank Independence: A 
De-Jure Perspective.” BAFFI CAREFIN Centre Research 
Paper 217, Bocconi University, Milan. 
Unsal, D. F., C. Papageorgiou, and H. Garbers. 2022. “Mon-
etary Policy Frameworks: An Index and New Evidence.” 
IMF Working Paper 22/022, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Végh, C. A. 2015. “Fiscal Policy in Emerging Markets: Procycli-
cality and Graduation.” NBER Reporter 4: 8–12.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
75
Countries increasingly seek to reshape their economies 
by targeting public support to specific firms and sectors. 
Their motives vary widely but often include an emphasis 
on developing strategic industries, with a view to raising 
future productivity and growth and reducing reliance 
on imports in key sectors such as energy. This chapter 
leverages theoretical models, empirical data, and case 
studies to investigate under what conditions such indus-
trial policies are most likely to succeed. Using a stylized 
model drawn from the infant industry literature, it shows 
that industrial policies can help onshore production and 
catch up with the global technology frontier in a sector 
where firms become more efficient the more they produce. 
But this comes at the cost of higher consumer prices during 
the catch-up phase and is sensitive to initial conditions 
such as the size of the technology gap, how quickly firms 
learn by doing, and market size. Such policies can also 
incur substantial public expenditure, an important 
consideration at a time of elevated debt and limited fiscal 
space in many countries. Empirically, recent industrial 
policies—mainly a combination of direct support and 
subsidized financing—are associated with improved 
outcomes in the targeted sector, but the magnitudes are 
small. Moreover, such interventions are likely to spill over 
to other sectors, which is difficult to identify empirically. 
Use of a multisector quantitative trade model to examine 
the aggregate policy impact finds that imperfect targeting 
of interventions could reduce aggregate productivity as 
factors of production move from one sector to another. For 
example, broad-based energy sector subsidies could lessen 
reliance on fossil fuel imports while reducing productivity 
in non-energy sectors. Overall, the chapter findings suggest 
that policymakers should be keenly aware of opportunity 
costs and trade-offs: While industrial policy can raise 
production in the targeted sector, this needs to be balanced 
against other considerations such as fiscal cost, higher 
The authors of this chapter are Shekhar Aiyar (co-lead), Hippolyte 
Balima, Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi (co-lead), Thomas Kroen, Rafael 
Machado Parente, Chiara Maggi, Yu Shi, and Sebastian Wende, with 
contributions from Lorenzo Rotunno and Simon Voigts and research 
assistance from Shrihari Ramachandra and Yarou Xu. Andrés Rodrí-
guez-Clare was the external advisor. The chapter benefited from 
comments by Mary E. Lovely and internal seminar participants and 
reviewers.
consumer prices, and possible resource misallocation. 
Appropriate targeting and safeguards, market disci-
pline, and complementary structural reforms are crucial 
elements of a well-designed industrial policy package.
Introduction
The global slowdown in growth, coupled with 
concerns about disruptions to supply chains and 
energy security, has prompted renewed interest in 
policies that enhance growth and resilience, includ-
ing industrial policy (IP). These interventions look 
to spur structural transformation by providing public 
support in the form of subsidies and other preferences 
to specific industries or firms. The focus on targeting 
individual businesses or sectors is key; while more 
general policy measures such as structural reforms and 
macroeconomic policies can also shape the economy, 
these would not qualify as IP. In principle, IP can 
address market failures that constrain the development 
of production capacity—for example, if costs fall with 
expanded production at the sector level. In practice, 
IP takes multiple forms and is used to pursue diverse 
objectives, including boosting productivity growth, 
protecting manufacturing jobs, building resilience by 
creating local supply chains, establishing self-reliance in 
key sectors such as energy, and diversifying the econ-
omy by developing infant industries. The salience of IP 
as a policy tool has been rising against the backdrop of 
rising geopolitical tensions.
Since 2009, the number of new IP interventions 
has increased significantly, with a notable acceleration 
following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic 
(Figure 3.1, panel 1). Nowhere is this more apparent 
than in the energy sector. A third of all IPs imple-
mented between 2009 and 2022 targeted at least one 
energy sector product, of which about 80 percent were 
rolled out in energy-dependent countries (Figure 3.1, 
panel 2). Several countries have turned to IP to boost 
energy security by reducing dependence on fossil fuel 
imports and accelerating electrification of the economy. 
Amid the global surge in IP, this chapter provides 
an analytical framework to analyze the domestic 
CHAPTER
3
INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE 
GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
76
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
macroeconomic benefits, risks, and trade-offs associ-
ated with such strategies. The analysis focuses on both 
sector-level and aggregate outcomes, including value 
added, productivity, and resource allocation, while 
illustrating economic trade-offs and risks. Throughout, 
a focus on the energy sector serves both to illustrate 
general principles and to highlight an important 
special case of industrial policy. Many countries are 
striving to reduce dependence on fossil fuel imports by 
promoting domestic production of clean technology. 
Moreover, the energy sector has extensive linkages with 
other sectors, making its performance consequential for 
the whole economy. To keep the analysis focused and 
tractable, the chapter centers on the policy effects of 
IP on domestic outcomes, as those are likely to be of 
first-order importance for policymakers.1
The chapter addresses four main questions:
	• How have industrial policies evolved recently? What 
types of industrial policy instruments have been 
deployed? What are their main stated objectives?
	• What are the main economic justifications for the use 
of IP? What types of market failures are IPs meant to 
address? What kinds of trade-offs do they present, 
both in theory and in practice? And what are the 
opportunity costs, in terms of fiscal resources with 
alternative uses?
	• Empirically, what are the effects of IP on targeted 
sectors? How do they differ along key sector and firm 
characteristics? Do the impacts of policies targeted 
at the energy sector differ from those rolled out in 
other sectors?
	• What are the general equilibrium effects of IP? Does 
the impact in a given sector spill over to other 
sectors as resources are reallocated? Can IP distort 
allocative efficiency and increase misallocation across 
sectors? Do policies specific to the energy sector 
deliver better macroeconomic outcomes than poli-
cies targeted at other sectors?
To address these questions, the chapter employs an 
array of empirical analyses, model-based simulations, 
and case studies. The main findings are as follows:
	• Industrial policies are making a strong comeback. 
They are being used to pursue an array of domestic 
objectives. Recent IPs often take the form of 
substantial subsidies and aim to achieve multiple 
domestic objectives—ranging from productivity 
gains and technological catch-up to job protection 
and self-sufficiency in key sectors, including energy.
1Although not the focus of this chapter, large-scale industrial 
policy can also have cross-country spillovers and trigger retaliation 
by trading partners. Recent IMF work has found that the domes-
tic effects of industrial policies are sensitive to the subsidies and 
trade barriers deployed by trading partners (Hodge and others 
2024; Rotunno and Ruta 2025) and that recent industrial policies 
have triggered retaliation (Evenett and others 2024). Theoretical 
frameworks find that global coordination on industrial policies 
could improve global outcomes, while retaliation could spark a 
wasteful global subsidy race (Ju and others 2024; Lashkaripour 
and Lugovskyy 2023). Box 3.2 finds that, in the EU, national-level 
subsidies that target local firms can negatively affect compet-
ing firms in other European countries. Beyond trade spillovers, 
Gopinath and others (2025), Graziano and others (2024), and Ruta 
and Sztajerowska (2025) show that industrial policies can shape 
cross-border foreign direct investment flows.
AEs
EMDEs
Energy
AEs—net exporters
Non-energy
EMDEs—net importers
AEs—net importers
EMDEs—net exporters
Figure 3.1.  Global Evolution of Industrial Policies
1. Rise in Usage Globally
(Number of new interventions)
0
2,000
400
800
1,200
1,600
2009 10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
2. Energy Industrial Policy by Dependence
(Percent, 2009–22)
0
100
20
40
60
80
Share of total industrial
policy measures
Share of energy-related industrial
policy measures
Sources: Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; U.S. Energy Information 
Administration; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Industrial policy (IP) is defined as state action directed at changing the structure 
of the domestic economy, following the text-based approach of Juhász and others 
(2022, 2025). In panel 1, the bars show the number of new IP interventions introduced 
by AEs and EMDEs. In panel 2, the first bar shows the share of IP interventions targeting 
energy-related products, defined as those including at least one energy product at 
the 6-digit Harmonized System (HS) code level. The second bar breaks down these 
interventions by countries’ energy dependence and income group. Countries are 
net energy importers (exporters) if their energy consumption exceeds (is less than) 
production. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies.
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
77
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
	• IP effectiveness is not guaranteed and depends on 
design, implementation, and broader macroeco-
nomic conditions. Model simulations and empirical 
evidence show that IPs can help jump-start domes-
tic industries, especially when productivity scales 
up with output. But their efficacy is sensitive to 
sector-specific characteristics that can be hard to 
determine in advance, such as the rate of learning by 
doing and potential market size. As shown by case 
studies of Korea and Brazil, appropriate targeting, 
careful implementation, complementary policies, 
and macroeconomic stability are all keys to success.
	• IPs typically involve trade-offs between competing 
objectives. Onshoring production in a strategic sector 
might lead to higher consumer prices for a pro-
longed period, and delivering certain IP objectives 
might require substantial fiscal outlays, which rep-
resent an important opportunity cost. For example, 
fiscal resources could be deployed on high-return 
structural reforms that do not require granular sec-
toral information to implement.
	• While IPs can deliver sector-level gains, translating 
these into broader economic benefits might remain 
challenging. Even when sector-level outcomes are 
positive, IPs can generate negative cross-sector 
spillovers, drawing away resources from sectors that 
are not targeted. If those sectors are highly produc-
tive, or exhibit economies of scale, then aggregate 
productivity could fall.
The chapter begins by documenting the recent rise 
in industrial policies. It then offers a stylized model of 
infant industry protection, which is used to illustrate 
the intertemporal trade-offs and risks of IP. A dynamic 
macroeconomic model with a granular energy sector 
augments the analysis by examining the trade-offs 
associated with IP targeting this sector. Case studies 
illustrate the mechanisms described in the model and 
add context on supporting frameworks and implemen-
tation challenges. Next, the chapter provides empirical 
evidence that IPs are associated with modest improve-
ments in targeted sectors and that effects vary across 
countries and sectors. A quantitative trade model 
shows that IP creates spillovers to untargeted sectors 
and how this can cause misallocation and reduce 
aggregate effects. The chapter concludes with implica-
tions for policy.2
2The analyses in this chapter reinforce the guidance put forward 
in recent IMF publications on industrial policy (see for example 
Chapter 2 of the April 2024 Fiscal Monitor and IMF 2024).
The Return of Industrial Policy
The resurgence of industrial policy is marked by a 
predominance of subsidy-based measures (Figure 3.2, 
panel 1).3 They comprise subsidized financing—
3Online Annex 3.1 provides references to data sources used 
throughout the chapter. The stylized facts presented in this section 
are broadly consistent with the use of alternative algorithms that 
categorize IP using the Global Trade Alert (GTA) in the recently 
developed New Industrial Policy Observatory (NIPO) database 
(Evenett and others, forthcoming). All online annexes are available at 
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.
Figure 3.2.  Industrial Policy Interventions by Instrument 
and Estimated Fiscal Costs
1. Interventions by Instrument
(Percent implemented globally, 2009–22)
AEs
EMDEs
Subsidized ﬁnancing
Direct support
Other policies
Subsidized ﬁnancing
Direct support
Other policies
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
2. Estimate of Fiscal Costs
(Percent of GDP, 2021)
China1
United Kingdom
Sample average of
EU countries
Canada
Israel
4.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Sources: Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao 2025; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 2025; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 highlights the distribution of industrial policies implemented between 
2009 and 2022 by instrument used, for AEs and EMDEs. “Subsidized financing” and 
“direct support” refer to subsidy-based measures. “Other policies” encompasses both 
tariff and nontariff trade barriers. See Online Annex 3.2 for a detailed breakdown of 
these policy categories. Panel 2 shows the estimated fiscal costs of industrial policy 
measures as a share of GDP for selected economies with available data. These costs 
include support provided through grants, tax expenditures, and financial instruments. 
The US is not included in panel 2 owing to the lack of comparable fiscal cost estimates. 
However, available data from the OECD indicate that US fiscal spending on green 
industrial policies adopted as part of COVID-19 recovery packages amounted to about 
3.2 percent of one year’s GDP. EU countries plot the sample average across Denmark, 
France, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, and Sweden. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
1China data refer to 2023 and include land subsidies.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
78
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
subsidies intended to alleviate financial constraints 
for targeted firms and sectors, such as loan guarantees 
and interest payment subsidies—and direct support 
measures, which include transfers such as financial 
grants and state aid.4 In both advanced economies and 
emerging market and developing economies, subsi-
dized financing and direct support measures accounted 
for over 80 percent of interventions, with other forms 
of IP, encompassing tariffs and nontariff measures, 
playing only a marginal role.5
It is inherently difficult to aggregate the total fiscal 
costs of these subsidies as they entail a wide range 
of policy instruments, which differ across countries 
and can be implemented by the central government, 
through state-owned enterprises (SOEs), or at the local 
level. Notwithstanding these caveats, available esti-
mates, including new ones for China (Box 3.1), indi-
cate that the fiscal cost of industrial policy is sizable, 
amounting to a few percentage points of GDP per year 
(Figure 3.2, panel 2).
Economic Rationale and Motivations
The economic justification for IP is typically 
grounded in correcting market failures, which prevent 
an efficient allocation of resources. The analyses in 
this chapter focus on infant industries, which are at 
an early stage of development domestically and lag 
the global technology frontier. If these industries see 
production costs decline as production increases, a case 
can be made for targeted public support to facilitate 
expansion.6 While such justifications were histori-
cally prominent in emerging market and developing 
economies, as illustrated by Brazil and Korea in the 
4For a more detailed breakdown of the intervention types classi-
fied under each of the three policy categories, see Online Annex 3.2. 
There are no comprehensive data on the fiscal costs attached to 
each intervention type. In principle, and although this is beyond 
the scope of this chapter, different instruments could carry different 
risks, including stemming from the level of public and private sector 
debt, the availability of credit, financial stability, and governance, 
including corruption.
5However, the use of these other forms of industrial policy has 
grown at a faster rate in recent years than subsidized financing and 
direct support measures in advanced economies, based on data avail-
able through the end of 2022.
6Industrial policy can target other market failures (including 
those stemming from asymmetric information, collective action, and 
coordination failures), help kick-start sectors that face high fixed 
costs (Baquie and others 2025) or relax financial frictions (Itskhoki 
and Moll 2019). They have also been used to overcome infrastruc-
ture gaps, spur diversification (Juhász, Lane, and Rodrik 2023), 
and target industries with large positive spillovers domestically 
(Garcia-Macia and Sollaci 2025).
1970s, they are increasingly prevalent in advanced 
economies to support strategic domestic industries that 
lag the global frontier, such as clean technologies and 
semiconductors.
In practice, the motivations for IP vary widely 
and might sometimes overlap. Enhancing compet-
itiveness in strategic sectors emerges as a primary 
driver of interventions in both advanced economies 
and emerging market and developing economies 
(Figure 3.3, panel 1).7 In advanced economies, climate 
mitigation and global value chain resilience also fea-
ture prominently among policy objectives. Although 
noneconomic concerns such as national security and 
geopolitics appear to be less prominent, it is likely that 
they drive, at least in part, the underlying motivation 
for proximate objectives like strategic competitiveness 
and global value chain resilience (Aiyar and others 
2023).
The sectoral breakdown of industrial policy inter-
ventions shows that advanced economies target 
mostly high-tech manufacturing and the energy sector 
(Figure 3.3, panel 2). In emerging market and devel-
oping economies, by contrast, the focus is broader, 
and interventions are more evenly distributed across 
high- and low-technology manufacturing, energy, and 
services.
Energy Independence and Rising Demand for 
Electricity
Industrial policies in the past 15 years have targeted 
energy products to spur a structural transformation 
of the energy sector, help reduce global greenhouse 
gas emissions in some countries, boost or diver-
sify energy production in net exporting countries, 
and promote energy independence. In fact, many 
net-energy-importing countries rely heavily on fossil 
fuel imports to meet their energy needs. For exam-
ple, fossil fuel imports meet more than 80 percent of 
energy needs in Japan, close to 50 percent in the EU, 
and about 20 percent in China (Figure 3.4, panel 1). 
Although importing energy can be a cost-efficient 
solution in many countries, it is often viewed as 
7As noted in Evenett and others (2024), a policy’s motive is 
categorized as “strategic competitiveness” if it is aimed at promoting 
domestic competitiveness or innovation in a strategic product or 
sector. Strategic sectors include medical equipment, semiconductors, 
critical minerals, military/civilian dual use, low-carbon technology, 
and other advanced technologies.
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
79
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
increasing vulnerability to external shocks, posing risks 
to national security and resilience.
To reduce reliance on fossil fuel imports, poli-
cymakers have encouraged substituting key fossil 
fuel uses with electricity, contributing to a growing 
share of electricity in final energy consumption (see 
Figure 3.4, panel 2). In parallel, electricity production 
itself has become ever less dependent on fossil fuels—
particularly in advanced economies (dashed blue 
line)—with the swift adoption of new technologies 
such as renewables. Industrial policy has often been 
deployed to help develop the domestic manufacturing 
of clean technologies, often in their infant industry 
stage, which will be analyzed in a subsequent section. 
Focus on the power sector has also been motivated by 
the increasing demand for electricity spurred by the 
adoption of emerging technologies—including electric 
vehicles and data centers. By 2030, global electricity 
demand from data centers and electric vehicles will 
surpass the current electricity consumption of most 
countries (Bogmans and others 2025; Online Annex 
Figure 3.2.2).
Against this backdrop of rising interest in onshor-
ing production in strategic industries, the next 
section examines the theoretical basis for supporting 
an industry that currently lags behind the world 
AEs
EMDEs
Figure 3.3.  Motivation for Industrial Policies and Targeted 
Sectors
1. Stated Motivation
(Share of measures, 2009–22, percent)
50
0
10
20
30
40
2. Targeted Sectors
(Percent implemented globally, 2009–22)
National security/
geopolitical concern
GVC resilience
Climate mitigation
Strategic competitiveness
High-tech manufacturing
Low-tech manufacturing
Commodities, energy, and food
Services
Other
28
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Sources: Evenett and others 2024; Evenett and others, forthcoming; Global Trade Alert; 
Juhász and others 2022, 2025; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Industrial policy (IP) is defined as state action directed at changing the structure 
of the domestic economy, following the text-based approach of Juhász and others 
(2022, 2025). Panel 1 highlights the stated motivations provided by governments for 
introducing new IP between 2009 and 2022, based on the subset of measures with 
available data. Panel 2 shows the distribution of IP interventions by targeted sector in 
AEs and EMDEs between 2009 and 2022. Sectors are classified according to NACE Rev. 
2 (2-digit level). High-technology manufacturing includes computer, electronic, and 
optical products; electrical equipment; chemical products; pharmaceuticals; basic and 
fabricated metals; machinery and equipment; and motor vehicles and other transport. 
Low-tech manufacturing includes wood; paper; printing; textiles; apparel; leather; 
rubber, plastic, and nonmetallic mineral products; furniture; other manufacturing; 
and repair. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies; GVC = global value chain.
AEs
AEs, right scale
EMDEs
EMDEs, right scale
Figure 3.4.  Industrial Policy for Energy Security and 
Increasing Needs for Electricity
1. Fossil Fuel Imports as a Share of Energy Demand in 2022
(Percent)
−100
100
−75
−50
−25
0
25
50
75
2. Electricity Share of Final Energy Consumption
(Percent)
20
34
22
24
26
28
30
32
40
75
45
50
55
60
65
70
CAN
IDN
ZAF
BRA
USA
CHN
GBR
EU
FRA
DEU
ITA
JPN
Share of electricity in energy
consumption
Share of fossil fuel in electricity
production
2000 02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Sources: Eurostat; International Energy Agency; U.S. Energy Information 
Administration; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 plots energy imports over energy demand. Energy demand = production 
+ imports − exports − international marine bunkers − international aviation bunkers 
+/− stock changes. Fossil fuel includes coal, peat, and oil share; crude, natural gas 
liquids, and feedstocks; natural gas; and oil products. Fossil fuel imports are measured 
as net imports, with positive values indicating net importers and negative values 
indicating net exporters. In panel 2, the sample includes 34 AEs and 27 EMDEs. The 
lines represent the simple average across countries within each group. Data labels in 
the figure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies;
EU = European Union.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
80
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
technology frontier. It draws from the infant industry 
literature, which emphasizes potential efficiency gains 
from supporting a sector in its early stage of domestic 
development.
Industrial Policy for Infant Industry 
Protection 
 A simple stylized model with two countries and 
sectoral learning-by-doing dynamics serves to illustrate 
the sector-level benefits countries might seek to capture 
through IP, the trade-offs involved, and how these 
depend on countries’ starting conditions. The model 
is grounded in the infant industry protection literature 
(Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare 2010; Melitz 2005; 
Redding 1999) and has two key features:
	• Sectoral learning by doing in the infant industry 
sector: To capture the potential for catch-up to the 
global frontier, the model features a young high-
tech sector—the infant industry—with learning 
by doing.8 In the infant industry, marginal costs 
decrease over time with accumulated production 
experience. This creates a rationale for policy inter-
ventions through industrial policies, based on purely 
economic considerations. The other sector features 
no learning by doing and captures a composite of 
more mature industries.9
	• Home country lagging the global frontier: The 
model features two countries, one of which is the 
technological leader with greater accumulated 
production experience and hence lower initial 
costs. Throughout, the model simulations take the 
perspective of the technological follower, which is 
assumed to start at a 30 percent cost disadvantage 
relative to the leader. This is broadly consistent with 
the midpoint for cost gaps between technological 
leaders and followers in studies of infant industry 
8In the model, the learning-by-doing parameter summarizes 
how accumulated experience can drive production costs lower over 
time—for example, as production processes are improved or as work-
ers gain know-how on the factory floor. These improvements are 
particularly salient at early stages of development in an industry.
9The sectoral learning rate in the high-tech sector is set at 
19 percent in the simulations, implying that a doubling of sectoral 
output leads to a 19 percent decline in marginal costs. This is 
broadly consistent with observed empirical cost curves and estimates 
in the academic literature (Barwick and others 2025 for electric 
vehicles [EVs]) and industry estimates (BNEF 2024). Cooper and 
Johri (2002) cite 20 percent as the typical learning rate in their liter-
ature review, whereas Barwick and others (2025) cite an 8 percent to 
30 percent range.
protection and learning by doing.10 Moreover, the 
foreign leader is assumed to have accumulated five 
times more experience than the home country in the 
infant industry.11
Industrial policy, consisting of a mix of subsidies 
and trade protections, can incentivize the onshoring of 
high-tech production in the home country, but with 
other attendant dynamic effects. Figure 3.5 compares 
outcomes for a country that starts behind the global 
frontier in the infant industry sector across two scenar-
ios: one in which the home country rolls out IP in the 
sector (solid blue line) and a baseline scenario in which 
it does not (dashed line).12
Under IP, domestic production ramps up more 
than tenfold because of production subsidies and trade 
protection. As domestic producers learn by doing, their 
production costs drop rapidly (Figure 3.5, panels 1 
and 2). This comes with two costs. First, even as IP 
leads domestic production costs to drop significantly 
over time, consumer prices increase temporarily and 
remain elevated for a prolonged period (Figure 3.5, 
panel 3). This occurs because trade protection increases 
the price consumers face for imported goods, and 
domestic production costs remain higher than those 
prevailing at the frontier during the catch-up phase. 
Second, the subsidy imposes a fiscal cost, which will be 
explored in more detail later in the chapter.
The conditions under which IP may boost domes-
tic production and enable rapid domestic learning by 
doing depend, however, on key parameters and initial 
conditions. Figure 3.6 shows how domestic production 
costs, production volumes, and consumer prices under 
the same industrial policy mix compare at the end 
of the period, depending on key sectoral characteris-
tics in the home country. Results from the previous 
experiment, in light blue, are compared with results 
10For example, Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2024) reports a 
30 percent cost gap between China and Europe/US for EV batteries. 
Regarding historical examples of early-stage industry protection, 
Luzio and Greenstein (1995) report a 45 percent cost gap between 
Brazil and the US in microcomputers in the 1980s; Head (1994) 
reports a 25 percent cost gap between the US and the United King-
dom in the late 1880s in tinplate.
11The analysis uses a fivefold advantage as a midpoint, which is 
comparable to key examples. For example, in the production of solar 
panels, China’s cumulative experience is about 8–12 times that of the 
EU and US, while for wind energy equipment, China’s cumulative 
experience is 2–3 times larger (see Online Annex Figure 3.2.3).
12The simulations are shown for an industrial policy that consists 
of a 10 percent tariff and a 12 percent production subsidy imposed 
by the home country. The industrial policy is financed through 
lump-sum taxation. 
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
81
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Figure 3.6.  Key Sector Characteristics Determine the 
Long-Term Eﬀects of Industrial Policy
(Relative change, baseline in period 1 normalized to 1)
1. Relative Costs
0
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Baseline
Farther from
frontier
Slow learning
Smaller market
size
2. Relative Increase in Production Volumes
0
14
2
4
6
8
10
12
Baseline
Farther from
frontier
Slow learning
Smaller market
size
3. Relative Infant Industry Consumer Prices
0.50
0.70
0.55
0.60
0.65
Baseline
Farther from
frontier
Slow learning
Smaller market
size
Foreign with home IP
Home with IP
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bar charts show relative change in costs, production volumes, and consumer 
prices in period 20 relative to period 1. Each scenario has 12 percent production 
subsidy and 10 percent tariff. The baseline learning rate is 19 percent, and the baseline 
cost advantage of the foreign country is 30 percent. In “farther from the frontier” 
scenario, the foreign country has a 40 percent cost advantage. In the “slow learning 
rate” scenario, the home learning rate is assumed half as large, and in the “smaller 
market size” scenario the home country is assumed to have no access to exports. Red 
squares in panel 1 indicate the relative cost decline in the foreign country in period 20 
relative to period 1 if the home country imposes IP. IP = industrial policy.
Home with IP
Home with no IP
Foreign
Baseline—IP
Baseline—no IP
Baseline—IP
Baseline—no IP
Figure 3.5.  Intertemporal Trade-Oﬀs Depend on
Learning Rate
(Baseline in period 1 = 1; time on x-axis)
1. Production Costs
0.4
1.1
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
3. Infant Industry Consumer Prices
0.5
1.1
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
2. Domestic Production Volumes
0
14
2
4
6
8
10
12
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: This figure is a stylized model illustration. Period 1 simulates model outcomes 
for one period assuming no IPs. Thus, period 1 outcomes are identical across both 
scenarios. IP scenario assumes that home economy imposes trade protections and 
production subsidies (12 percent production subsidy and 10 percent tariff) in period 2 
and onward. The “no IP” scenario assumes that no IPs are in place from period 1 
onward. The learning rate is 19 percent. Normalizations in period 1 are as follows: 
production costs, production volumes, and consumer prices are each normalized to 1. 
IP = industrial policy.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
82
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
if the home country either (1) starts farther from the 
global frontier, (2) experiences a slower learning rate, 
or (3) faces a smaller market—for example, because it 
does not have access to export markets.13
When IP is conducted further behind the frontier,14 
home production costs decline more slowly as produc-
tion quantities increase only 3.5 times over the long 
term. Hence, there is less domestic learning by doing. 
Instead, the home country continues to rely primarily 
on imports, even as their prices rise because of trade 
protections. Since domestic production costs fall more 
slowly, consumer prices decline less over time.
Public support may not deliver the intended effects 
if domestic producers cannot learn as fast as antici-
pated. For example, learning could be slower if short-
ages of skilled labor limit improvements to production 
processes or if barriers to the diffusion of foreign 
knowledge slow technology adoption (Eugster and 
others 2022). If learning in the home country happens 
only half as fast as in the foreign country, domestic 
costs decline more slowly than in the foreign country 
as production volumes increase. Consequently, instead 
of catching up to frontier production costs, domes-
tic costs diverge further relative to the technology 
frontier—remaining 80 percent higher over the long 
term. Domestic production volumes do not ramp up 
over time, and consumer prices stay higher for much 
longer. Hence, domestic consumption also remains 
more subdued than in the baseline.
Market size is key for industrial policy to deliver 
production cost declines through learning by doing. In 
the last counterfactual, the home country is assumed 
to lack access to export markets. The effectively limited 
market size now constrains the expansion of domestic 
production volumes. There is less learning by doing, 
with production increasing by only about one-third of 
the increase in the baseline scenario and production 
costs declining more slowly.
13Figure 3.6. shows endpoints after 20 years. The full dynamic 
paths are in Online Annex Figures 3.3.1.–3.3.4.
14The literature has discussed the possibility that a country far 
behind the global frontier may be able to leapfrog the current 
technological leader (Brezis and others 1991; Lee and Lim 2001; 
Aghion, Akcigit, and Howitt 2015; Stiglitz 2017). For example, a 
country might skip a particular technology altogether by moving to 
deploy mobile phones widely rather than first investing in landline 
infrastructure. The stylized model in this section focuses on a single 
technology and does not capture such leapfrogging. However, Online 
Annex Figure 3.3.1 investigates how countries could get closer to 
the frontier from the start in a given technology—for instance, by 
attracting foreign direct investment or technology transfers from the 
technological leader. In that case, by starting closer to the frontier, 
the home country could not only catch up to the global frontier but 
surpass the incumbent technological leader over time.
Finally, it should be noted that the exercise abstracts 
from the vital complementary role that non-targeted 
structural policies can play in enhancing productivity. 
Box 3.3 provides further analysis.
Lessons from Key Industrial Policies, 
Past and Present
The stylized model of the previous section helped 
illustrate the dynamic role of IP at the sectoral level and 
showed how its efficacy is sensitive to many factors. 
This section seeks to enrich that analysis with greater 
realism by exploring two key applications. First, a more 
detailed scenario analysis of energy-security-related 
IP in Europe, aimed at onshoring clean technology 
production, is used to illustrate potential trade-offs. 
Second, two prominent historical cases—Brazil and 
Korea in the 1970s—are revisited for more granular 
insights into the appropriate design and implementa-
tion of IP and other complementary policies.
Industrial Policy, the Power Sector, and Energy 
Security
Many countries are seeking to enhance energy 
security by transitioning to renewable energy and 
electrifying key sectors such as transportation. This 
would entail widespread adoption of clean technology 
equipment, much of which is currently produced in 
the cost leader, China.15 IP has been proposed as a 
way to reshore electric vehicles and renewable power 
equipment production in the EU and other advanced 
economies, as these industries are at the infant industry 
stage. Manufacturing these technologies domesti-
cally would increase self-reliance in a critical sector 
while providing job opportunities. But what are the 
trade-offs?
To quantify possible trade-offs in the case of the 
European Union, an extended version of the infant 
industry model of the previous section is calibrated 
to clean technology data. It is then augmented with 
the Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy 
Transition (GMMET), a dynamic global model with 
a granular energy sector representation, to simulate 
the path of clean technology adoption and sectoral 
outcomes between 2024 and 2035.16
15The literature emphasizes the role of learning-by-doing dynam-
ics in these clean technology industries (see, for example, Bai and 
others 2020 and Barwick and others 2025). 
16See Online Annex 3.4 for details on the extended version of the 
model and its calibration.
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
83
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
The model is run under three policy scenarios.
	• A baseline scenario assumes continuation of indus-
trial policy settings observed in 2024.
	• A no industrial policy (no-IP) scenario assumes the 
removal of all existing tariffs and subsidies in the 
clean tech sector.
	• A reshoring scenario assumes that major advanced 
economies increase production subsidies to onshore 
manufacturing.
Prices, adoption, and onshoring. Learning-by-doing 
generates a substantial decline in the price of clean 
technologies in the next decade in the EU, but with 
varying magnitudes under the three policy scenarios 
(Figure 3.7). Both the no-IP scenario and the reshoring 
scenario result in sharper price declines than exist-
ing baseline policies. The additional price declines 
under the no-IP scenario are driven by the removal of 
existing tariffs, which leads to an increase in low-cost 
imports. By contrast, if policies observed at the start 
of the simulation period are maintained (the baseline 
scenario), the main driver of the decline in prices is 
the reduction in production costs of domestic firms, 
which increase production volumes and benefit from 
learning by doing. These effects are further ampli-
fied domestically under the onshoring scenario, as 
larger subsidies drive a greater increase in production 
volumes domestically. However, even as domestic pro-
duction costs decline substantially, they remain higher 
than those of the technology leader, which continue to 
improve over time.17
Across policy scenarios, the decline in clean technol-
ogy prices drives uptake (Figure 3.8, panels 1 and 2), 
particularly under the no-IP and reshoring scenarios, 
under which price declines are steepest.
A key distinction between scenarios lies in the 
degree of onshoring of clean technology equipment 
manufacturing (Figure 3.8, panel 3). Under the 
baseline, Europe loses domestic market share, as its 
relatively small market limits the scope for catch-up 
learning. In the no-IP scenario, the removal of tariffs 
leads to domestic producers being outcompeted by 
lower-cost imports. In the reshoring scenario, Europe 
achieves substantial self-reliance through a combina-
tion of subsidies and cumulative learning effects.
Energy security and macroeconomic effects. The 
increased penetration of clean technologies leads to a 
substantial reduction in fossil fuel use in power pro-
duction and transportation in both the reshoring and 
no-IP scenarios relative to the baseline.18 Both policy 
paths enhance energy security and reduce fossil fuel 
dependence in the EU (Figure 3.9, panel 1).
But key trade-offs arise as the two scenarios have 
very different impacts on the labor market and fiscal 
spending (Figure 3.9, panels 2 and 3). The no-IP 
scenario eliminates the subsidies present in the base-
line but leads to a reduction of employment in clean 
technology manufacturing of more than 0.5 percent 
of the labor force as imports dominate. On the other 
hand, the reshoring scenario results in a reallocation 
of labor toward clean technology manufacturing, 
equivalent to more than 1 percent of the labor force. 
However, these gains are offset by declines in other 
manufacturing sectors, in part driven by exchange rate 
movements.
In addition, reshoring entails substantial fiscal 
costs—estimated at 0.4 percent of EU GDP annually, 
17The model captures the effects of learning by doing on the 
production cost of clean technologies. In practice, other factors 
could lead to divergence in these costs across regions, including 
access to low-cost inputs, such as critical minerals. Recent literature 
has demonstrated that a fragmentation of global commodity markets 
could lead to substantial increases in the price of critical minerals in 
the EU (Chapter 3 of the October 2023 World Economic Outlook 
and Alvarez and others 2025).
18By 2035, oil use in passenger transportation declines by 20 to 
30 percent relative to the baseline scenario, and coal use in power 
generation also falls. However, gas use increases because electricity 
demand is higher and a firming up of capacity is needed to support 
renewables.
Domestic learning
Tariffs
Foreign learning
Subsidies
Import share
Total price
Figure 3.7.  Decomposition of EU Electric Vehicle Price Decline
(Percent change between 2024 and 2035)
−60
10
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
Sources: Bloomberg New Energy Finance; International Renewable Energy Agency; and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows illustrative price change for electric vehicles in the EU under 
business as usual, and two hypothetical scenarios, derived by a four-country version 
of the infant industry model, calibrated to current policies, production, and trade 
patterns of clean technologies. Under baseline scenario, the EU maintains status 
quo IPs. Under no-IP scenario, all IPs are removed starting in 2025. Under reshoring 
scenario, a 15 percent production subsidy is introduced in addition to status quo 
trade protections. EU = European Union; IP = industrial policy.
Baseline
No IP
Reshoring
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
84
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Figure 3.8.  No-IP and Reshoring Policies Accelerate Take-Up, 
but Domestic Production Impacts Diﬀer
1. European EV Shares
(Percent of passenger fleet)
0
70
10
20
30
40
50
60
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Under the baseline scenario, the EU continues to impose status quo industrial 
policies. Under the no-IP scenario, all industrial policies are removed starting in 2025. 
Under the reshoring scenario, 15 percent electric vehicle and 30 percent renewable 
production subsidies are introduced starting in 2025. See Online Annex 3.4 for details. 
EV = electric vehicle; IP = industrial policy.
Baseline
No IP
Reshoring
2. European Renewable Generation Excluding Hydroelectric
(Percent of generation)
34
46
36
38
40
42
44
Baseline
No IP
Reshoring
3. European Clean Tech Production
(Percent of domestic use)
0
90
15
30
45
60
75
Baseline
No IP
Reshoring
2035
2024
Figure 3.9.  Policy Options to Reduce Fossil Fuel Use through 
Access to Cheaper Clean Technologies Present Trade-Oﬀs
1. European Fuel Use in 2035
(Deviation from baseline, percent)
−40
20
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Under the baseline scenario, the EU continues to impose status quo industrial 
policies. Under the no-IP scenario, all industrial policies are removed starting in 2025. 
Under the reshoring scenario, 15 percent electric vehicle and 30 percent renewable 
production subsidies are introduced starting in 2025. In panel 3, the European subsidy 
cost under the no-IP scenario is zero. See Online Annex 3.4 for details. IP = industrial 
policy.
2. European Clean Tech Labor in 2035
(Deviation from baseline, percent of labor market)
−1.0
2.5
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
No IP
Reshoring
3. European Subsidy Cost
(2025–35, annual average, billion euros)
0
90
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
No IP
Reshoring
No IP
Reshoring
Coal use in electricity
Oil use in transportation
Gas use in electricity
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
85
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
or approximately €80 billion in annual subsidies, 
on average, from 2025 to 2035, equivalent to about 
€30,000 per job created in the sector. These would 
amount to close to half of today’s EU budget and 
exceed current agricultural subsidies.19
Overall, IP could allow Europe to achieve 
self-reliance in clean technology manufacturing and 
could protect jobs in the sector, but it would entail 
large fiscal costs. However, these model results are sen-
sitive to key assumptions. For example, the simulations 
assume Europe achieves learning rates comparable to 
those observed in China over the past decade. But this 
is not guaranteed, and any deviation from this assump-
tion, such as a slower learning rate, would worsen 
the identified trade-offs, as described in the previous 
section. Indeed, history shows that IP does not always 
deliver as intended, as is discussed next.
Historical Case Studies
The stylized model of sectoral industry dynamics 
suggests that key parameters such as domestic learning 
rates and market size are important factors to con-
sider for IP. But how have such parameters shaped IP 
outcomes in practice? And what part do policy design, 
implementation, and complementary policies play in 
determining the success of IP?
To shed light on these questions, this section exam-
ines two prominent and well-documented historical 
cases in emerging markets: Brazil and Korea.20 During 
the 1970s, the two countries adopted large-scale 
industrial policies using instruments that resemble 
those documented in modern industrial strategies, with 
the aim of promoting structural transformation in 
selected strategic sectors (Online Annex 3.5). However, 
their approaches differed markedly. Brazil emphasized 
mainly import-substituting industrialization and relied 
on state-owned enterprises as the primary implementa-
tion vehicle, whereas Korea pursued an export-oriented 
model based on large private business conglomerates 
19In principle, these could be financed by the potential revenues 
from EU carbon pricing over the coming years (Carton and others, 
forthcoming), which are not modeled in the exercise. If financed 
through an increase in debt-to-GDP ratios, these subsidies could 
lead to an initial slight increase in GDP, which later would be offset 
by a slowdown in activity when debt-to-GDP ratios need to be 
brought back down (see Online Annex 3.4.5).
20Of course, care should be taken in extrapolating lessons from 
historical case studies; there are many differences today from the 
1970s, including the geopolitical context, trade relations, and global 
technology.
(chaebols).21 Korea’s experience is broadly regarded as 
more successful—see Ocampo and Porcile (2020) for a 
comparative perspective, as reflected in higher growth 
rates of manufacturing value added and real GDP 
over the period (Online Annex Figure 3.5.1). Recent 
empirical studies of Korea’s experience provide causal 
evidence that IP promoted the expansion of targeted 
industries, boosted their international competitiveness, 
and generated positive spillovers to other sectors (Choi 
and Shim 2024a; Lane 2025). Further analyses show 
that subsidized firms continued to grow faster than 
those never subsidized for up to 30 years after the 
subsidies ended (Choi and Levchenko 2024). However, 
the literature also contains some dissenting views.22
Policy design. A comparison of the two countries’ 
experiences reveals the crucial role played by good pol-
icy design, elements of which include fostering domes-
tic learning by doing, targeting a sufficiently large 
market to allow firms to reach an efficient scale of pro-
duction, and directing support toward areas with high 
potential returns or positive externalities. In Korea, 
deliberate policies emphasized experiential learning on 
the factory floor. Chaebols relied on salaried engi-
neers over administrators at the plant level to absorb 
foreign technologies and build domestic capabilities. In 
contrast, Brazil’s IPs were implemented through state-
owned enterprises and lacked the private sector engage-
ment that was central to Korea’s learning-by-doing 
model (Peres and Primi 2019). The outward-oriented 
strategy in Korea also enabled chaebols to access global 
markets and benefit from scale economies, whereas 
21The motivations behind IP in Korea and Brazil also diverged 
(Ayres and others 2019; De Bolle, Cohen-Setton, and Sarsenbayev 
2025; Lane 2025). In Korea, IP was considered essential for military 
and industrial modernization, as well as for long-term develop-
ment—in Brazil, a key objective following the 1973 oil crisis was 
to reduce dependence on oil imports by investing in domestic oil 
production and alternative energy sources.
22For instance, Kim, Lee, and Shin (2021) argue that IPs in 
Korea increased resource misallocation. For Brazil, some com-
mentators are more positive about the country’s IP experience. 
Recent papers suggest that IP may have benefited some sectors 
that could gain access to large export markets, noting that public 
support—including the development of an ecosystem of educational 
and R&D institutions—contributed to Embraer’s success in the 
aeronautics sector as well as to innovation and productivity gains in 
agriculture (Sabel and others 2012; Veiga and Rios 2019). Indeed, 
Rodrik (1993) shows that some export incentives introduced under 
the 1972 Benefícios Fiscais a Programas Especiais de Exportação 
(BEFIEX) program were effective in boosting Brazil’s exports by 
multinational firms, even though these firms sometimes had to 
adjust their global strategies by reducing exports to third countries. 
More recently, Akerman and others (2025) show that public R&D 
investment significantly increased Brazil’s agricultural output, driven 
by both higher productivity and expanded input use.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
86
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
in Brazil, import-substitution confined state-owned 
enterprises to a limited domestic market, constraining 
their ability to scale up production volumes. In Korea, 
support was directed toward sectors considered critical 
for military and industrial modernization and tech-
nologically within reach, drawing lessons from Japan’s 
1958–68 development experience.
Implementation. The two cases underscore the 
importance of careful implementation, including 
fostering competition, relying on competent imple-
menting agencies and objective benchmark criteria 
to evaluate success or failure, and incorporating 
safeguards—such as sunset clauses—to limit the costs 
of policy failures. In contrast to the limited competi-
tion faced by Brazil’s state-owned-enterprises, domestic 
and international competition were central to Korea’s 
approach, helping to ensure market discipline. For 
example, the government supported multiple firms 
within sectors and allowed market forces to determine 
the winners. This approach was evident in the early 
stages of the automotive industry, when numerous 
entrants initially competed and benefited from state 
support, before Hyundai emerged as the dominant 
firm.23 IP governance was also institutionalized in 
Korea. Monthly export promotion meetings—chaired 
by senior officials and involving representatives from 
academia, finance, and industry—provided a struc-
tured forum for oversight and performance review. 
Export targets served not only as benchmarks for 
allocating state resources but also as de facto sunset 
clauses: firms that failed to meet targets risked los-
ing access to state support, regardless of their size or 
political influence. Brazil, by contrast, lacked an IP 
governance framework and safeguards comparable to 
Korea’s.
Complementary policies. Finally, the cases demon-
strate the vital enabling role of structural reforms (see 
also Box 3.3) and macroeconomic stability. In Korea, 
an anti-corruption campaign launched prior to its 
industrial policy drive helped to signal that all chaebols 
were subject to the rule of law. During its industrial 
push, the government invested in industrial parks 
and facilitated imports of essential raw materials and 
capital goods to support domestic production. It also 
strengthened the education system to meet the growing 
demand for skilled engineers and production workers. 
23In an advanced economy context, the case of Airbus offers 
another example of how competition-enhancing industrial policy can 
succeed in reducing costs in commercial jet manufacturing, boosting 
R&D and building a pan-European supply chain (Hodge and others 
2024).
In Korea, land reforms preceded IP, unlike in Brazil 
(de Bolle, Cohen-Setton, and Sarsenbayev 2025). 
Moreover, in Brazil, a fragmented budgeting process, 
high reliance on external borrowing, and persistent 
macroeconomic instability—including periods of 
overvalued exchange rates and accelerating inflation—
ultimately culminated in the 1980s external debt crisis 
and eroded the effectiveness of the country’s strategy.
Industrial Policy and Sector Performance 
This section estimates the link between IPs and 
economic performance, both in the targeted sector and 
in cross-sectoral spillovers via input-output linkages.24
Industrial policies and targeted sector performance. 
Economic performance improves in targeted sectors, 
though the magnitudes are small.25 As shown in 
Figure 3.10, panel 1, direct support IPs are found to 
improve value added, productivity, and the allocation 
of resources across firms within industries (allocative 
efficiency) in line with previous findings (Baquie and 
others 2025). For subsidized financing, point estimates 
go in the same direction, but the results are not sig-
nificant. In terms of magnitudes, one additional direct 
support measure is associated with about 0.5 percent 
higher value added and 0.3 percent higher total factor 
productivity (TFP) in the targeted sector three years 
after implementation.26 These magnitudes are rela-
24The analysis rests on a local projection method following Baquie 
and others (2025). It covers 58 countries (including 31 advanced 
economies) and 732 NACE Revision 2 (4-digit) sectors from 2009 
to 2021. The key regressor is the change in the stock of subsidized 
financing and direct support IPs in a given sector, country, and year, 
identified by applying the Juhász and others (2022, 2025) algorithm 
to the Global Trade Alert (GTA) database. Results are broadly con-
sistent with the use of alternative algorithms that categorize IP using 
the GTA database in the recently developed NIPO database.
25Online Annex 3.6 reports the local projection coefficients for 
all time horizons before and after the implementation of IPs, thus 
specifying the full dynamic path. The chapter focuses on the two 
most prevalent instruments of industrial policy while recognizing 
that other measures not in the database could also have important 
economic effects. The main outcome variables, constructed using 
Orbis data, are sectoral value added, sectoral productivity, and with-
in-sector allocative efficiency, following Hsieh and Klenow (2009). 
Despite the inclusion of a wide range of fixed effects and controls, 
a causal analysis is challenged by the endogenous implementation of 
IPs. For this reason, the results in this section are presented as asso-
ciations. See Online Annex 3.6 for information on the number of 
observations for each country, a full description of the methodology, 
and a summary table with the key findings in this section.
26A new subsidized financing measure (direct support measure) 
is found for about 12 (6) percent of country-industry observations. 
Countries that implement new industrial policies implement on 
average 1.8 (2.0) new subsidized financing (direct support) measures 
at a time.
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
87
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
tively small, as industry value added grows on average 
6.5 percent and TFP grows about 4 percent per year in 
the sample. These results reflect higher capital accu-
mulation and employment in the aftermath of subsidy 
industrial policies (see Online Annex 3.6).
Two findings emerge when investigating whether the 
relation between IPs and economic performance differs 
by countries’ income level (Figure 3.10, panel 1). 
First, direct support is associated with medium-term 
improvements in value added, productivity, and 
allocative efficiency in advanced economies, but not in 
emerging market and developing economies. Second, 
subsidized financing is associated with a reduction in 
allocative efficiency in emerging markets—although 
this is not significant. One additional direct support 
measure is associated with a 0.3 percent increase in 
allocative efficiency in advanced economies, whereas 
one additional subsidized financing measure is associ-
ated with a 0.5 percent decrease in allocative efficiency 
in emerging market and developing economies (as 
discussed in greater depth for China in Box 3.1). 
These findings may reflect the role of complementary 
horizontal policies, such as reforms to improve gover-
nance quality and institutional capacity (Box 3.3), or 
differences in education, which have been found to be 
key complements to IPs (Deléchat and others 2024). 
They may also reflect temporary increases in misallo-
cation as governments incentivize initially small and 
unproductive firms to scale up production and learn by 
doing (Kim, Lee, and Shin 2021; Choi and Levchenko 
2024). Next, the sample is split into infant and mature 
industries (Figure 3.10, panel 2).27 This exercise 
identifies infant industries as industries with a large 
share of young and financially constrained firms that 
are relatively close to the world productivity frontier. 
Direct support appears to have a similar impact across 
sectors. But subsidized financing appears to benefit 
only infant industries: The estimates suggest that one 
additional financial subsidy is linked to a 0.5 percent 
increase in the value added of infant industries and a 
1.2 percent decrease for mature industries three years 
after the shock. These findings are likely to reflect the 
importance of financial frictions for the capital accu-
mulation of young and productive firms and industries 
(Machado Parente and others 2025).
Industrial policies in the energy sector and downstream 
sector performance. A large share of IPs target energy 
sectors and can potentially spill over to the rest of 
the economy because energy is a key factor of pro-
duction. Estimates suggest that one additional direct 
support measure is associated with 0.7 percent higher 
27These results build on investigation by Baquie and others (2025) 
of the relationship between industrial policy and targeted sector 
outcomes along several different sector-specific and firm-specific 
dimensions. They find, individually, a stronger association between 
industrial policy and economic outcomes in young firms, as well as 
in more financially constrained firms. Moreover, they find a stronger 
association between industrial policy and sectoral value added in sec-
tors with high markups and high external dependence (such as ship 
building and pharmaceutical products) relative to sectors with low 
markups and low external dependence (for instance, manufacturing 
of nonelectric domestic appliances). 
Subsidized financing
Direct support
Figure 3.10.  Industrial Policies and Medium-Term 
Performance of Targeted Sectors
(Percent)
1. AEs and EMDEs
−2
4
−1
0
1
2
3
Sources: Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; Orbis; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The figure estimates the impact of industrial policies (IPs) using the local 
projection method. The dependent variables are the log difference in sectoral value 
added, TFP, or allocative efficiency three years after policy implementation. The 
key right-hand-side variables are the change in the number of subsidized financing 
and direct support IPs targeting the sector. Regional coefficients are estimated by 
interacting IPs with a dummy for AEs or EMDEs. Infant/mature industry coefficients 
are estimated by interacting IPs with a dummy for each industry being infant/mature. 
In each country, infant industries are industries with above-average share of young 
and leveraged firms and below-average distance to the world productivity frontier. 
All specifications control for one lag of dependent and independent variables and 
include country-sector, country-year, and sector-year fixed effects. Whiskers represent 
90 percent confidence intervals. See Online Annex Table 3.6.2 for further details on 
the data underlying each bar. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market 
and developing economies; TFP = total factor productivity.
Value added
TFP
Allocative eﬃciency
All
AEs
EMDEs
All
AEs
EMDEs
All
AEs
EMDEs
2. Infant and Mature Industries
−2.5
1.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0
0.5
1.0
Value added
TFP
Allocative eﬃciency
Infant
Mature
Infant
Mature
Infant
Mature
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
88
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
TFP in the targeted energy sector within a year of 
policy implementation (Online Annex Figure 3.6.5, 
panel 1). These productivity improvements spill over 
to downstream sectors over time as producers pur-
chase energy from more productive suppliers. One 
additional direct support measure to energy sectors 
is linked to a 2.5 percent increase in value added for 
downstream sectors one to three years after the shock 
(Figure 3.11).28 However, the measure is also linked to 
a temporary 1.7 percent decrease in allocative effi-
ciency in downstream sectors. These findings could 
reflect differences across firms in energy cost shares, 
suggesting that firms benefiting the most from lower 
energy prices are not necessarily the most productive 
(Aterido, Iootty, and Melecky 2025; Fontagné, Martin, 
and Orefice 2024).
Beyond the impact of IP on targeted sectors, there 
is the wider question of its impact on the overall econ-
omy. Cross-sector linkages and spillovers can result in 
28This analysis focuses on spillovers of IPs targeted at energy sec-
tors while keeping trade barriers and other policies constant in that 
sector. Before implementation, industries that receive IP and those 
that do not, do not differ statistically in their outcomes.
the general equilibrium effects of IP differing consider-
ably from its sectoral effects. This is investigated in the 
next section.
Cross-Sector Spillovers and Aggregate 
Effects 
To study the cross-sector spillovers and aggregate 
effects of industrial policies, a quantitative trade model 
is used (similar to Hodge and others 2024; Ju and 
others 2024; Lashkaripour and Lugovskyy 2023; and 
Rotunno and Ruta 2025). The model features labor as 
the only factor of production and 20 granular sectors 
with input linkages between sectors and countries. 
External economies of scale at the sector level that are 
not internalized by firms when making production 
and hiring decisions create a rationale for IP. In the 
scenarios under consideration, all advanced economies 
conduct industrial policy, and the focus is on domestic 
outcomes in that block of countries.
IP in one sector: energy. The first scenario focuses 
on the cross-sectoral effects of IP in the energy 
sector.29 Implementing externality-correcting subsi-
dies in the energy sector leads output in the sector to 
rise by more than 50 percent as employment ramps 
up.30 Since industries in this sector feature increasing 
returns to scale, sectoral TFP rises by almost 3 percent 
(Figure 3.12, panel 1). However, growth in employ-
ment draws workers from non-energy sectors. As some 
of the untargeted sectors have increasing returns to 
scale, this labor reallocation reduces their TFP.31
In aggregate, higher TFP in the energy sector and 
lower TFP in non-energy sectors result in a small 
drop in economy-wide TFP. This is because the 
energy sector (as a whole) does not have the high-
est returns to scale in the calibration. Moreover, the 
29Whereas the focus in Figures 3.7 and 3.8 was on IP in the clean 
technology sector in the EU, here the scope is much broader and 
includes energy commodity mining (ISIC sector B05–06), coke 
and petroleum refining (ISIC sector C19), and electrical equipment 
(ISIC sector C27). Thus, it captures both the extraction and process-
ing of energy commodities and the capital goods used by the energy 
sector. See Online Annex 3.7 for details of an exercise that limits the 
scope of IP to clean technology.
30Sector-specific scale-elasticity parameters are calibrated based on 
estimates from Bartelme and others (2025). Sectoral subsidy rates 
are chosen to correct distortions associated with external economies 
of scale in the energy sector (Ju and others 2024; Lashkaripour and 
Lugovskyy 2023).
31Across non-energy sectors, those with a high input share of 
energy tend to benefit from energy IP, whereas the output contrac-
tion in non-energy sectors is concentrated in those with low energy 
shares, notably services. 
Value added
Allocative eﬃciency
Figure 3.11.  Downstream Impact of Energy Sector Industrial 
Policy
(Percent)
−4
6
−2
0
2
4
Sources: Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; Orbis; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The figure estimates the impact of industrial policies (IPs) using the local 
projection method. The dependent variables are the log difference in value added 
and allocative efficiency over the specified horizon. 0 = the short-term horizon 
corresponding to when industrial policies are introduced; see Online Annex 3.6 for 
details. The key independent variable is the change in the number of direct support 
IPs in upstream energy sectors. All specifications control for one lag of dependent 
and independent variables, for IPs implemented in downstream sectors, and include 
country-sector, country-year, and sector-year fixed effects. Shaded areas represent 
90 percent confidence intervals, and numbers report point estimates.
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Horizon
2.52
2.24
−0.49
−1.75
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
89
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
fiscal cost of the IP is steep, at an annual expenditure 
of 1.8 percent of GDP in the new long-run steady 
state. At the same time, energy imports as a share 
of energy consumption fall by 5.1 percentage points 
(Figure 3.12, panel 2). Thus, there is a trade-off 
between greater energy self-reliance on the one hand 
and falling aggregate efficiency and larger public 
expenditure on the other.
Well-targeted IP across sectors. The previous scenario 
featured a decline in aggregate productivity because 
resources were withdrawn in many non-energy sectors 
with increasing returns to scale. The next scenario 
simulates a broader IP strategy, with subsidies rolled 
out for every sector of the economy with increasing 
returns to scale. Major advanced economies imple-
ment “optimal” IP—with subsidies increasing in a 
sector’s returns to scale.32 In this scenario, output 
and employment rise sizably in the targeted sectors 
(Figure 3.13, panel 1). This leads to aggregate TFP 
gains due to the expansion in sectors with increas-
ing returns to scale. However, achieving these results 
requires fiscal resources of close to 5.5 percent of 
32It should be noted that this model does not incorporate strategic 
competition between countries or retaliatory cycles, which could in 
principle drive a “race to the bottom” and erode global benefits from 
returns to scale.
Sectoral output shares
TFP
Employment
Targeted sectors
Untargeted sectors, right scale
Figure 3.12.  Sectoral and Aggregate Effects of Industrial 
Policy in the Energy Sector
Sources: Global Trade Alert; Market Access Map; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Inter-Country Input-Output tables and Trade in 
Value-Added indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows changes in outcomes in energy industrial policy (IP) scenario 
relative to the status quo baseline from estimates of quantitative trade model. Energy 
IP scenario simulates introduction of optimal subsidies in the energy sector. IPs are 
introduced for the AEs in the sample (Australia, Canada, EU, Iceland, Israel, Japan, 
Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States), and results 
are reported as weighted average effect across all AEs, unless noted otherwise. Weights 
are shares in total output by AEs. Targeted energy sectors are “energy mining,” “coke 
and petroleum refining,” and “electrical equipment.” IPs in all other sectors (untargeted 
sectors) remain unchanged. Panel 1 reports percentage change in sectoral output, 
TFP, and employment calculated as the weighted sum across targeted and untargeted 
sectors. Panel 2 reports percentage changes in aggregate TFP. Subsidy costs are 
reported as change relative to the status quo baseline. AEs = advanced economies; TFP 
= total factor productivity.
1. Sectoral Effects on Targeted and Untargeted Sectors
(Percent)
−20
80
0
20
40
60
−2
8
0
2
4
6
2. Aggregate Effects
(Percentage points, unless noted otherwise)
−0.8
0.4
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
−8
4
−6
−4
−2
0
2
Aggregate TFP change
Energy import share,
right scale
Size of subsidies
(percent of GDP),
right scale
Sectoral output shares
TFP
Employment
Targeted sectors
Untargeted sectors
Targeted subsidies
Uniform subsidies
Figure 3.13.  Sectoral Effects and Aggregate Effects of 
Optimal and Uniform Industrial Policy
Sources: Global Trade Alert; Market Access Map; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Inter-Country Input-Output tables and Trade in 
Value-Added indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows changes in heterogeneous industrial policy (IP) scenario relative 
to the status quo baseline from estimates of quantitative trade model. Heterogeneous 
IP scenario simulates introduction of optimal subsidies in all sectors with increasing 
returns to scale, that is, manufacturing sectors. IPs are introduced for the AEs in the 
sample (Australia, Canada, EU, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Norway, 
Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States), and results are reported as weighted 
average effect across all AEs, unless noted otherwise. Weights are shares in total output 
by AEs. Panel 1 reports percentage change in sectoral output, TFP, and employment 
calculated as the weighted sum across targeted and untargeted sectors. Panel 2 reports 
percentage changes in aggregate TFP. Subsidy costs are reported as change relative to 
the status quo baseline. AEs = advanced economies; TFP = total factor productivity.
1. Sectoral Effects on Targeted and Untargeted Sectors
(Percent)
−10
30
0
10
20
2. Aggregate Effects
−1
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
Aggregate TFP change
(percentage points)
Size of subsidies
(percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
90
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
GDP annually, targeted with great precision to correct 
scale externalities across all sectors, a high bar.33 
Moreover, even with precise targeting, the effects may 
be smaller in practice because of implementation chal-
lenges and the overall business and macroeconomic 
environment, as seen in this chapter’s case studies.
Mistargeted IP. In practice, governments may lack 
accurate information about returns to scale or be 
subject to capture by special interests. A final scenario 
evaluates the effects of IP when subsidies are not 
optimally targeted. Specifically, subsidies are increased 
uniformly across all sectors, irrespective of whether 
they present increasing returns to scale. The aggregate 
fiscal envelope is held constant relative to the previ-
ous scenario with perfect targeting. In this scenario, 
aggregate productivity declines slightly despite the 
large fiscal cost of 5.5 percent of GDP (Figure 3.13, 
panel 2). Whereas productivity improves in some 
sectors with increasing returns to scale, it declines in 
other sectors, leading to a slight decrease in aggregate 
productivity. This illustrates that the precise identifica-
tion and targeting of sectors with increasing returns to 
scale is critical for IP to achieve aggregate gains.
Conclusions and Policy Implications
Industrial policy has returned to the center of the 
policy debate. If well designed and targeted to address 
production-side market failures, it can improve eco-
nomic outcomes at sectoral and aggregate levels. The 
experience of countries such as Korea illustrates that 
carefully crafted subsidies, aligned with clear objectives 
and implemented within a sound institutional frame-
work, can catalyze structural transformation.
However, the risks that IP may not deliver economic 
gains are significant. Effectiveness is highly sensitive 
to conditions that are difficult to assess ex ante—such 
33Despite the large fiscal costs, fiscal multipliers are higher than 1 
in the simulations. It is also important to note that in this scenario, 
all sectors with increasing returns to scale receive subsidies that fully 
correct the externality, which would require a subsidy proportional 
to the returns-to-scale parameters for each sector. Thus, in such 
models, the size of the needed subsidies depends on calibration of 
the returns-to-scale parameter (as discussed in Lashkaripour and 
Lugovskyy 2023; Bartelme and others 2025; and Ju and others 
2024). In addition, the quantitative trade model has a simplified 
fiscal sector with tariff revenue lump-sum rebates to households 
and subsidies financed via lump-sum taxation. This abstracts from 
distortionary taxation, other types of government spending, and 
dynamic fiscal effects. 
as the extent of learning by doing, proximity to the 
technological frontier, and market size. Even when 
well targeted, interventions can be fiscally costly. 
For instance, a clean technology subsidy in the EU 
sufficient to onshore a significant share of production 
could cost about 0.4 percent of annual GDP, close to 
half of the EU budget. Poorly targeted policies risk 
wasting scarce fiscal resources without delivering mean-
ingful returns. Country-specific circumstances matter, 
and the successful implementation of industrial policy 
rests on strong institutional capacity and good gover-
nance, constraints that may be particularly relevant in 
emerging market and developing economies. The role 
of complementary structural reforms that do not target 
particular firms or sectors but aim to improve the 
general business environment is vital.
Moreover, even when delivering sectoral improve-
ments, IP entails important trade-offs. Cross-sectoral 
spillovers can be negative, undermining aggregate 
productivity even as targeted sectors expand. And 
even though they are not the focus of this chap-
ter, adverse cross-country spillovers and retaliatory 
cycles are likely to further reduce net benefits from 
domestic IP. Policies that enhance resilience—such 
as onshoring—may come at the cost of efficiency, 
including higher consumer prices during the tran-
sition. And spillovers can have mixed effects across 
dimensions: for example, energy sector IP may 
enhance energy security and raise value added in 
downstream industries while drawing resources away 
from more productive sectors, reducing allocative 
efficiency.
These findings underscore the importance of careful 
policy design and implementation. Governments 
should be mindful of the risks of wasteful spend-
ing, especially when debt is elevated and fiscal space 
limited. They should weigh the opportunity cost of IP 
against potentially more efficient horizontal policies. 
And they should recognize and manage trade-offs 
explicitly. If IP is pursued, it should be grounded in 
clear diagnostics of market failures, include mecha-
nisms for regular evaluation and recalibration, and be 
embedded within a strong institutional and macroeco-
nomic framework. Market discipline should be encour-
aged through vigorous domestic and international 
competition. Doing so will increase the likelihood that 
IP delivers on its promise—without compromising 
fiscal sustainability or economic efficiency.
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
91
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
China has long used various industrial policy tools 
to support priority economic sectors, including (but 
not limited to) cash subsidies, tax benefits, subsidized 
credit, subsidized land, and trade and regulatory barri-
ers that benefit incumbent firms (State Council 2005). 
This has had a material impact on the economy, 
helping to develop specific industries and technologies. 
However, it has also generated fiscal costs and poten-
tial factor misallocation.
Based on financial reports of listed firms and the 
registry of land transactions, Garcia-Macia, Kothari, 
and Tao (2025) estimate the equivalent fiscal cost of 
industrial policy in China to be about 4 percent of 
GDP between 2011 and 2023 (Figure 3.1.1). Cash 
subsidies were the costliest instrument, followed by 
tax benefits (which have grown since the pandemic), 
land subsidies, and subsidized credit. Most of this 
support was directed to the manufacturing sector, with 
industries like semiconductors, high-tech manufactur-
ing, and automobiles benefiting especially from cash 
subsidies and tax benefits.
While the strategic direction of industrial policy in 
China is set by the central government in five-year 
plans (for example, State Council 2021), implementa-
tion is highly decentralized through local governments 
(Fang, Li, and Lu 2025). This can lead to wasteful 
duplication and excess investment followed by capacity 
cuts, as seen in sectors like coal and steel in the 2010s 
(IMF 2018, 2019), but it can also favor policy experi-
mentation. A case in point is the electric vehicle (EV) 
sector. China made a strategic decision to prioritize 
EVs in 2009, when the market was virtually nonex-
istent. The government initially provided producer 
subsidies, leveraged public procurement, and required 
carmakers to focus on EVs, but later shifted support 
to consumer subsidies as it realized too many firms 
were entering the market (Branstetter and Li 2023; 
Chapter 2 of the April 2024 Fiscal Monitor). 
The authors of this box are Daniel Garcia-Macia and Siddharth 
Kothari.
Despite the success in some technologies, industrial 
policy appears to have lowered overall productivity by 
distorting the allocation of production factors across 
firms and sectors. Combining a sector-level measure 
of industrial policy counts (Juhász and others 2022) 
with revenue productivity outcomes for a large sample 
of firms, Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao (2025) show 
that subsidies led to inefficiently high production in 
targeted sectors, while trade and regulatory barriers 
limited production to suboptimal levels, possibly by 
increasing the market power of incumbent firms. 
Evaluating these results with a structural model, factor 
misallocation induced by industrial policies is found 
to have reduced China’s aggregate total factor pro-
ductivity by 1.2 percent and its GDP by as much as 
2 percent.
Tax
Subsidies
Credit
Land
Figure 3.1.1.  China: Industrial Policy 
Support
(Percent of GDP)
0
6
1
2
3
4
5
23
2011
13
15
17
19
21
Sources: Baidu Maps; Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao 2025; 
Ministry of Natural Resources of the People’s Republic of China; 
Wind Information Co., Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Industrial policy is defined as sector-specific subsidies. 
Results for listed firms are extrapolated to unlisted firms. See 
further details in Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao (2025).
Box 3.1. Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on Misallocation
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
92
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Since the global financial crisis, EU governments 
have increasingly supported firms through state 
aid, which peaked at almost 1.5 percent of GDP in 
2022. State aid is provided by national governments 
and, therefore, risks skewing competition in favor of 
domestic companies and eroding the level playing field 
in the EU single market. This box examines how state 
aid affects employment and revenue at beneficiary 
firms as well as nonrecipients in competing indus-
tries across borders in Europe (Brandão-Marques and 
Toprak 2024).
Drawing on firm-level data from six major EU 
economies, regressions show that state aid provides a 
lift to recipient firms, increasing revenues and employ-
ment, but only temporarily, as shown in Figure 3.2.1. 
To ensure that the relationship is causal, state aid 
shocks are defined as the unanticipated excess equity 
return (in percent) observed the day government aid 
to a firm is announced. A 1 percent state aid shock 
is followed, after one year, by a 0.3 percent increase 
in the recipient firm’s employment and a 0.6 percent 
increase in its revenue. These gains, however, largely 
dissipate by the second year, which is consistent with 
state aid providing only temporary relief of finan-
cial constraints. The effects are strongest for smaller, 
younger firms that are highly leveraged and have low 
cash buffers. 
Firms based in other EU countries that operate in 
the same industry but do not receive state aid suffer 
significant employment and revenue losses from 
cross-border spillovers. After a 1 percent unanticipated 
aid shock to a peer, employment in nonrecipient com-
peting firms falls by about 0.13 percent and revenues 
by roughly 0.24 percent the following year. These 
adverse impacts deepen over time, with employment 
declining by 0.21 percent and revenue dropping by 
0.46 percent in the second year. Moreover, the effects 
are more pronounced in more concentrated sectors. 
This suggests that state aid distorts competition as 
recipients tend to crowd out nonrecipient firms that 
operate in the same industry.
These findings highlight a clear trade-off: While 
national state aid by EU members can help recipi-
ents in the short run, state aid also causes negative 
spillovers to firms operating in the same industry that 
The authors of this box are Luis Brandão-Marques and Hasan 
Toprak.
do not receive the aid. This could risk fragmenting 
Europe’s single market by disadvantaging firms across 
borders and creating distortions that could jeopardize 
the efficient allocation of resources and the benefits 
from EU-wide competition. Hence, should there be a 
case for state aid to firms in the EU to address specific 
market failures, this should be done at the EU level 
instead of by individual member states to mitigate 
adverse spillovers and preserve equitable conditions for 
firms across the single market. Moreover, by reducing 
spillovers, the pooling of resources at the EU level 
could also ensure a more efficient use of funds and 
limit waste.
Employment
Revenue
Figure 3.2.1.  Effects of State Aid on 
Recipient and Nonrecipient Firms
−0.2
0.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
1. Effect on the Focal Firm
After one year
After two years
−0.5
0
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
2. Spillover
After one year
After two years
Sources: Brandão-Marques and Toprak 2024; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The bars show the impact of 1 percent excess return 
(state‐aid shock) on recipient firms and on competing 
nonrecipient firms. Solid bars indicate effects that are 
statistically significant at the 10 percent level or higher, while 
shaded bars denote effects that are not statistically significant.
Box 3.2. Support or Distort: Evaluating National State Aid in Europe
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
93
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Structural reforms can yield better outcomes than 
industrial policies (IPs). Like IPs, structural reforms 
aim at tackling key frictions hampering growth and 
productivity. Unlike IPs, these policies target econo-
my-wide frictions; their effectiveness generally does 
not rely on information about sector-level charac-
teristics, including distortions; and they have been 
associated with improved macroeconomic outcomes 
(Chapter 3 of the October 2019 World Economic Out-
look; Budina and others 2023). But structural reforms 
can also yield better sector-level outcomes than IPs. 
For instance—and although estimation is imprecise—a 
significant improvement in governance can boost 
industry value added in high-distortion sectors (char-
acterized by high markups) relative to low-markup 
sectors by 2.1 percent, whereas IPs targeting sectors 
with those distortions may be associated with only a 
0.2 percent increase (Figure 3.3.1). Similarly, improve-
ments in financial development and private sector 
access to credit are more effective than IPs at bolster-
ing economic activity in sectors highly dependent on 
external financing (Baquie and others 2025).
In addition, while the fiscal costs of IPs can be 
high—as they can entail sizable subsidies—structural 
reforms often result in lower fiscal costs, and some 
can even lead to increased fiscal revenues—for exam-
ple, if they improve tax collection. Fiscal costs are an 
important consideration at a time of limited fiscal space 
(Aligishiev and others 2023; Chapter 2 of the April 
2024 Fiscal Monitor). Therefore, structural reforms 
seem to provide better results with lower fiscal costs and 
reduced distortion risks. Given these trade-offs, coun-
tries should weigh the fiscal sustainability of IPs care-
fully and prioritize structural reforms that offer more 
cost-effective paths to inclusive and sustained growth.
Even when IPs are desirable, structural reforms are 
essential for their success. Structural fundamentals 
such as governance quality or a good business environ-
ment could strengthen the link between IPs and eco-
nomic performance by reducing risks of rent-seeking 
behavior and improving targeting (IDB 2014; Cherif 
and Hasanov 2019; Cherif and Hasanov 2020; 
Criscuolo, Lalanne, and Díaz 2022; Criscuolo and 
others 2022; Garcia-Macia and Sollaci 2025). Other 
structural conditions, such as a more educated work-
The author of this box is Rafael Machado Parente. 
force, can enhance learning by doing and innovation 
sparked by well-crafted IPs. Indeed, firms in countries 
with a better business environment experience higher 
capital accumulation in the short term in response 
to IPs (Baquie and others 2025). Moreover, firms 
in emerging market and developing economies with 
better governance and higher human capital experience 
higher value-added growth after the implementation 
of IPs. Complementarity between IPs and structural 
factors in emerging market and developing economies 
suggests that policies to improve fundamentals may be 
an important precondition for IPs’ success (Deléchat 
and others 2024). Overall, these findings suggest a 
phased approach: first strengthen structural factors, 
then address sectoral issues with targeted interventions.
Governance and markups
Industrial policies and markups
Figure 3.3.1.  Industrial Policies versus 
Governance Reforms
(Industry value added, percent)
−2
6
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Sources: Baquie and others 2025; Budina and others 2023; 
Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; Orbis; and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The dependent variable is the log difference of the 
sectoral-level value added over the horizon considered. 0 = the 
short-term horizon corresponding to when industrial policies 
are introduced. The variables of interest are the interaction 
between the change in protectionist industrial policies and 
sectoral markups and the interaction between sectoral markups 
and the quality of governance index from Budina and others 
(2023). Differently from Baquie and others (2025), the figure 
reports changes from the 25th percentile to the median of the 
distributions of markups, governance, and industrial policies. 
Shaded areas represent 90 percent confidence intervals. For 
more details, see Baquie and others (2025).
Horizon
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Box 3.3. A Comparison between Industrial and Structural Policies
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
94
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
References
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, and Peter Howitt. 2015. “The 
Schumpeterian Growth Paradigm.” Annual Review of Econom-
ics 7 (1): 557–75.
Aiyar, S., J. Chen, C. Ebeke, G. Garcia-Saltos, T. Gudmundsson, 
A. Ilyina, A. Kangur, S. Rodriguez, M. Ruta, T. Schulze, G. 
Soderberg and J. Trevino. 2023. “Geoeconomic Fragmenta-
tion and the Future of Multilateralism.” IMF Staff Discussion 
Note 23/01, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Akerman, Ariel, Jacob Moscona, Heitor Pellegrina, and Karthik 
Sastry. 2025. Public R&D Meets Economic Development: 
Embrapa and Brazil’s Agricultural Revolution. NBER Working 
Paper 34213.
Aligishiev, Zamid, Gabriela Cugat, Romain A. Duval, Davide 
Furceri, João Tovar Jalles, Margaux MacDonald, Giovanni 
Melina, and others. 2023. “Market Reforms and Public Debt 
Dynamics in Emerging Market and Developing Economies.” 
IMF Staff Discussion Note 23/005, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Alvarez, J., M. Benatiya Andaloussi, C. Maggi, A. Sollaci, M. 
Stuermer, and P. Topalova. 2025. “Geoeconomic Fragmen-
tation and Commodity Markets.” CEPR Discussion Paper 
20451, Centre for Economic Policy Research, Paris. https://
cepr.org/publications/dp20451.
Aterido, Reyes, Mariana Iootty, and Martin Melecky. 2025. 
“Energy Prices, Energy Intensity, and Firm Performance.” 
Policy Research Working Paper 11069, World Bank Group, 
Washington, DC.
Ayres, Joao, Garcia Marcio, Guillén Diogo, and Kehoe Patrick. 
2019. “The Monetary and Fiscal History of Brazil, 1960–
2016.” NBER Working Paper 25421, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bai, Jie, Panle Jia Barwick, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li. 
2020. “Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover, and Indus-
trial Quality Upgrading: Evidence from the Chinese Auto 
Industry.” NBER Working Paper 27644, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baquie, Sandra, Yueling Huang, Florence Jaumotte, Jaden Kim, 
Rafael Machado Parente, and Samuel Pienknagura. 2025. 
“Industrial Policies: Handle with Care.” IMF Staff Discussion 
Note 25/002, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bartelme, Dominick, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and 
Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2025. “The Textbook Case for 
Industrial Policy: Theory Meets Data.” Journal of Political 
Economy 133 (5): 1527–73.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, Shanjun Li, and Nahim 
B. Zahur. 2025. “Drive Down the Cost: Learning by Doing 
and Government Policies in the Global EV Battery Industry.” 
NBER Working Paper 33378, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF). 2024. Lithium-Ion 
Battery Price Survey. Retrieved on 10/12/2024 . https://www.
bnef.com/login?r=%2Finsights%2F35513
Bogmans, Christian, Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, Ganchimeg 
Ganpurev, Giovanni Melina, Andrea Pescatori, and 
Sneha D. Thube. 2025. “Power Hungry: How AI Will 
Drive Energy Demand.” IMF Working Paper 25/081, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://doi.
org/10.5089/9798229007207.001.
Brandão-Marques, Luis, and Hasan H. Toprak. “A Bitter After-
taste: How State Aid Affects Recipient Firms and Their Com-
petitors in Europe”, IMF Working Papers 2024, 250 (2024), 
https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400295706.001
Branstetter, Lee G., and Guangwei Li. 2023. “The Challenges of 
Chinese Industrial Policy.” In Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
Policy and the Economy, vol. 3, edited by Benjamin Jones and 
Josh Lerner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brezis, Elise S., Paul R. Krugman, and Daniel Tsiddon. 1991. 
“Leapfrogging: A Theory of Cycles in National Technological 
Leadership.” NBER Working Paper 3886, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Budina, Nina, Christian H. Ebeke, Florence Jaumotte, Andrea 
Medici, Augustus J. Panton, Marina M. Tavares, Bella Yao, 
and others. 2023. “Structural Reforms to Accelerate Growth, 
Ease Policy Trade-offs, and Support the Green Transition in 
Emerging Market and Developing Economies.” IMF Staff 
Discussion Note 23/007, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Carton, Benjamin, Geoffroy Dolphin, Romain Duval, 
Andrew Hodge, Amit Kara, Simon Voigts, and Sebastian 
Wende. Forthcoming. “The Investment Impacts of 
Europe’s Green Transition.” International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. 
Cherif, Reda, and Fuad Hasanov. 2019. “The Return of the 
Policy That Shall Not Be Named: Principles of Industrial 
Policy.” IMF Working Paper 19/074, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Cherif, Reda, and Fuad Hasanov. 2020. “Principles of True 
Industrial Policy.” Journal of Globalization and Development 
2019003.
Choi, Jaedo, and Andrei Levchenko. 2024. “Superstars or Super-
villains? Large Firms in the South Korean Growth Miracle.” 
NBER Working Paper 32648, National Bureau of Economic 
Research. 
Choi, Jaedo, and Younghun Shim. 2024a. “Industrialization 
and the Big Push: Theory and Evidence from South Korea.” 
IMF Working Paper 24/259, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Cooper, Russell, and Alok Johri. 2002. “Learning-by-Doing 
and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary Economics 
49 (8): 1539–66.
Criscuolo, C., N. Gonne, K. Kitazawa, and G. Lalanne. 2022. 
“An Industrial Policy Framework for OECD Countries: Old 
Debates, New Perspectives.” OECD Science, Technology 
and Industry Policy Paper 127, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Paris.
CHAPTER 3  INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE
95
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Criscuolo, C., G. Lalanne, and L. Díaz. 2022. “Quantifying 
Industrial Strategies (QuIS): Measuring Industrial Policy 
Expenditures.” OECD Science, Technology and Indus-
try Working Paper 2022/05, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development, Paris.
De Bolle, Monica, Jérémie Cohen-Setton, and Madi 
Sarsenbayev. 2025. The New Economic Nationalism. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Deléchat, C., G. Melina, M. Newiak, C. Papageorgiou, 
and N. Spatafora. 2024. “Economic Diversification in 
Developing Countries: Lessons from Country Experiences 
with Broad-based and Industrial Policies.” IMF 
Departmental Paper 24/006, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Eugster, Johannes L., Giang Ho, Florence Jaumotte, and Roberto 
Piazza. 2022. “International Knowledge Spillovers.” Journal of 
Economic Geography 22 (6): 1191–224.
Evenett, Simon, Adam Jakubik, Jaden Kim, Fernando Martín, 
Samuel Pienknagura, Michele Ruta, Sandra Baquie, Yueling 
Huang, and Rafael Machado Parente. Forthcoming. “Indus-
trial Policy since the Great Financial Crisis.” IMF Working 
Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Evenett, Simon, Adam Jakubik, Fernando Martín, and Michele 
Ruta. 2024. “The Return of Industrial Policy in Data.” The 
World Economy 47 (7): 2762–88.
Fang, Hanming, Ming Li, and Guangli Lu. 2025. “Decoding 
China’s Industrial Policies.” NBER Working Paper 33814, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Fontagné, Lionel, Philippe Martin, Gianluca Orefice. 2024. 
“The Many Channels of Firm’s Adjustment to Energy Shocks: 
Evidence from France.” Economic Policy 39 (117): 5–43.
Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Siddharth Kothari, and Yifan Tao. 2025. 
“Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on 
Misallocation.” IMF Working Paper 25/155, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Garcia-Macia, D., and A. Sollaci. 2025. “Industrial Policies 
for Innovation: A Cost-Benefit Framework.” IMF Economic 
Review, July.
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Andrea F. Presbitero, 
and Petia Topalova. 2025. “Changing Global Linkages: A 
New Cold War?” Journal of International Economics 153: 
104042.
Graziano, Alejandro G., Monika Sztajerowska, and Christian 
Volpe Martincus. 2024. “Trading Places: How Trade Policy Is 
Reshaping Multinational Firms’ Location.” CESifo Working 
Paper 11514, Munich.
Harrison, Ann, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade, 
Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy for Developing 
Countries.” In Handbook of Development Economics, edited by 
Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, ed. 1, vol. 5, chapter 0, 
4039–214. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Head, Keith. 1994. “Infant Industry Protection in the Steel 
Rail Industry.” Journal of International Economics 37 (3–4): 
141–65.
Hodge, Andrew, Roberto Piazza, Fuad Hasanov, Xun Li, 
Maryam Vaziri, Atticus Weller, and Yu Ching Wong. 2024. 
“Industrial Policy in Europe: A Single Market Perspective.” 
IMF Working Paper 24/249, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC. 
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation 
and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.” The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1403–48.
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 2014. “Rethinking 
Productive Development: Sound Policies and Institutions for 
Economic Transformation.” Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018. “China 2018 Article 
IV Consultation Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 18/240, 
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2019. “China 2019 Article 
IV Consultation Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 19/266, 
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2024. “Industrial Policy 
Coverage in IMF Surveillance—Broad Considerations.” IMF 
Policy Paper 24/008, Washington, DC. 
Itskhoki, Oleg, and Benjamin Moll. 2019. “Optimal Development 
Policies with Financial Frictions.” Econometrica 87 (1): 139–73.
Ju, Jiandong, Hong Ma, Zi Wang, and Xiaodong Zhu. 2024. 
“Trade Wars and Industrial Policy Competitions: Understand-
ing the US-China Economic Conflicts.” Journal of Monetary 
Economics 141: 42–58.
Juhász, Réka, Nathan Lane, Emily Oehlsen, and Verónica C. 
Pérez. 2022. “The Who, What, When, and How of Industrial 
Policy: A Text-Based Approach.” Working Paper. https://ssrn.
com/abstract=4198209.
Juhász, Réka, Nathan Lane, Emily Oehlsen, and Veronica C. 
Perez. 2025. “Measuring Industrial Policy: A Text-Based 
Approach.” NBER Working Paper 33895, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Juhász, Réka, Nathan Lane, and Dani Rodrik. 2023. “The New 
Economics of Industrial Policy.” NBER Working Paper 31538, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Kim, Minho, Munseob Lee, and Yongseok Shin. 2021. “The 
Korean Heavy Industry Drive of 1973.” NBER Working 
Paper 29252, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Lane, Nathan. 2025. “Manufacturing Revolutions: Industrial 
Policy and Industrialization in South Korea.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 140 (3).
Lashkaripour, Ahmad, and Volodymyr Lugovskyy. 2023. “Profits, 
Scale Economies, and the Gains from Trade and Industrial 
Policy.” American Economic Review 113 (10): 2759–808.
Lee, Keun, and Chaisung Lim. 2001. “Technological Regimes, 
Catching-Up and Leapfrogging: Findings from the Korean 
Industries.” Research Policy 30 (3): 459–83.
Luzio, Eduardo, and Shane Greenstein. 1995. “Measuring the 
Performance of a Protected Infant Industry: The Case of 
Brazilian Microcomputers.” Review of Economics and Statistics 
77 (4): 622–33.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
96
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Machado Parente, Rafael, Samuel Pienknagura, Sandra Baquie, 
Yueling Huang, Florence Jaumotte, and Jaden Kim. 2025. 
“Industrial Policies and Firm Performance: A Nuanced 
Relationship.” IMF Working Paper 25/143, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Melitz, Marc J. 2005. “When and How Should Infant Industries 
Be Protected?” Journal of International Economics 66 (1): 
177–96.
Ocampo, José Antonio, and Gabriel Porcile. 2020. “Latin 
American Industrial Policies: A Comparative Perspective.” In 
The Oxford Handbook of Industrial Policy, edited by Arkebe 
Oqubay and others. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2025. “Quantifying Industrial Strategies 2019–22: 
Trends and Priorities across 11 OECD countries.” OECD 
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Paper 179. Paris. 
https://doi.org/10.1787/91e20a26-en.
Peres, Wilson, and Annalisa Primi. 2019. Industrial Policy and 
Learning. Lessons from Latin America. In: How Nations 
Learn: Technological Learning, Industrial Policy, and Catch-up. 
Oxford University Press.
Redding, Stephen. 1999. “Dynamic Comparative Advantage and 
the Welfare Effects of Trade.” Oxford Economic Papers 51 (1): 
15–39.
Rodrik, Dani. 1993. “Taking Trade Policy Seriously: Export 
Subsidization as a Case Study in Policy Effectiveness.” 
NBER Working Paper 4567, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Rotunno, Lorenzo, and Michele Ruta. 2025. “Trade Partners’ 
Responses to US Tariffs.” IMF Working Paper 25/147, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ruta, Michele, and Monika Sztajerowska. 2025. “Shifting 
Advantages: Do Subsidies Shape Cross-Border Investment?” 
IMF Working Paper 25/080, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Sabel, Charles, Eduardo Fernández-Arias, Ricardo Hausmann, 
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Ernesto Stein. 2012. Export 
Pioneers in Latin America. Inter-American Development 
Bank.
State Council of China (State Council). 2005. Decision of 
the State Council on Promulgating and Implementing the 
“Temporary Provisions on Promoting Industrial Structure 
Adjustment.” Decision No. 40, Beijing.
State Council of China (State Council). 2021. Outline of the 
People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Year Plan for National 
Economic and Social Development and Long-Range Objec-
tives for 2035. Beijing.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2017. “Industrial Policy, Learning and 
Development.” In The Practice of Industrial Policy: Govern-
ment—Business Coordination in Africa and East Asia, edited 
by John Page and Finn Tarp, 23–39. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
Academic.
Veiga, Pedro da Motta, and Sandra Polónia Rios. 2019. 
EMBRAER and the Trajectory of Brazil’s Aeronautics Industry 
Ecosystem. Policy Center for the New South, Policy Paper 
19/18.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
97
T
he Statistical Appendix presents historical 
data as well as projections. It comprises eight 
sections: Assumptions, What’s New, Data 
and Conventions, Country Notes, Classifica-
tion of Economies, General Features and Composition 
of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classifica-
tion, Key Data Documentation, and Statistical Tables.
The first section summarizes the assumptions 
underlying the estimates and projections for 2025–26. 
The second section briefly describes the changes to 
the database and statistical tables since the April 2025 
World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section 
offers a general description of the data and the conven-
tions used for calculating country group composites. 
The fourth section presents selected key information 
for each country. The fifth section summarizes the clas-
sification of economies in the various groups presented 
in the WEO, and the sixth section explains that classi-
fication in further detail. The seventh section provides 
information on methods and reporting standards for 
the member countries’ national account and govern-
ment finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical 
tables. Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statisti-
cal Appendix B is available online at www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO.
Data in these tables have been compiled based on 
information available through September 30, 2025, 
but may not reflect the latest published data in all 
cases. For the date of the last data update for each 
economy, please refer to the notes provided in the 
online WEO database. The figures for 2025–26 are 
shown with the same degree of precision as the his-
torical figures solely for convenience; because they are 
projections, the same degree of accuracy is not to be 
inferred.
Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econ-
omies are assumed to remain constant at their average 
levels measured during August 1, 2025–August 29, 
2025. For 2025 and 2026, these assumptions imply 
average US dollar–special drawing right conversion 
rates of 1.351 and 1.373, US dollar–euro conversion 
rates1 of 1.130 and 1.167, and yen–US dollar conver-
sion rates of 147.7 and 145.3, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $68.92 
a barrel in 2025 and $65.84 a barrel in 2026.
National authorities’ established policies are assumed 
to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific 
policy assumptions underlying the projections for 
selected economies.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the 
three-month government bond yield for the United States 
will average 4.3 percent in 2025 and 3.7 percent in 
2026, that for the euro area will average 2.0 percent in 
2025 and 2.1 percent in 2026, and that for Japan will 
average 0.4 percent in 2025 and 0.8 percent in 2026. 
Further, it is assumed that the 10-year government bond 
yield for the United States will average 4.3 percent in 
2025 and 4.1 percent in 2026, that for the euro area 
will average 2.5 percent in 2025 and 2.6 percent in 
2026, and that for Japan will average 1.5 percent in 
2025 and 1.7 percent in 2026.
What’s New
	• Data for Liechtenstein have been added to the data-
base and are included in the advanced economies 
group composites.
Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 197 economies form the 
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are 
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department 
and regional departments, with the latter regularly 
updating country projections based on consistent 
global assumptions.
1In regard to the introduction of the euro, on December 31, 
1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective 
January 1, 1999, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the 
euro and currencies of the member countries adopting the euro are 
as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO. See that box 
as well for details on how the conversion rates were established. For 
the most recent table of fixed conversion rates, see the Statistical 
Appendix of the April 2023 WEO.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
98
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Although national statistical agencies are the 
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions, 
international organizations are also involved in statis-
tical issues, with the objective of harmonizing meth-
odologies for the compilation of national statistics, 
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, 
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the 
production of economic statistics. The WEO database 
reflects information from both national source agencies 
and international organizations.
Most countries’ macroeconomic data as presented 
in the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version 
of the System of National Accounts (SNA 2008). The 
IMF’s sector statistical standards—the sixth edition of 
the Balance of Payments and International Investment 
Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Finan-
cial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide, and the 
Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM 
2014)—have been aligned with the SNA 2008. These 
standards reflect the IMF’s special interest in countries’ 
external positions, monetary developments, financial 
sector stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The 
process of adapting country data to the new standards 
begins in earnest when revised versions of the manuals 
are released. However, full concordance with the most 
recent versions of the manuals is ultimately dependent 
on the provision by national statistical compilers of 
revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are 
only partly adapted to the most recent versions of these 
manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, conversion 
to the updated standards will have only a small impact 
on major balances and aggregates. Many other coun-
tries have partly adopted the latest standards and will 
continue implementation over a number of years.2
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the 
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF 
staff estimates. While attempts are made to align data 
on gross and net debt with the definitions in the 
GFSM 2014, because of data limitations or specific 
country circumstances, these data can sometimes devi-
ate from the formal definitions. Although every effort 
is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant and 
internationally comparable, differences in both sectoral 
and instrument coverage mean that the data are not 
2Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European 
System of National and Regional Accounts 2010, and a few coun-
tries use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar 
adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please 
refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards to which each 
country adheres.
universally comparable. As more information becomes 
available, changes in either data sources or instrument 
coverage can give rise to data revisions that are some-
times substantial. For clarification on the deviations 
in sectoral or instrument coverage, please refer to the 
metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are 
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual 
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages 
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates 
of change.3 Arithmetically weighted averages are used 
for all data for the emerging market and developing 
economies group—except data on inflation and money 
growth, for which geometric averages are used. The 
following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, inter-
est rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are 
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market 
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three 
years) as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic 
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted 
by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share 
of total world or group GDP.4 For the aggregation 
of inflation in advanced economies (and subgroups), 
annual rates are simple percent changes from the 
previous years; for the aggregation of world inflation 
and inflation in emerging market and developing 
economies (and subgroups), annual rates are based on 
logarithmic differences.
Composites for real GDP per capita in 
purchasing-power-parity terms are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to international dollars 
in the years indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors 
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepan-
cies in transactions within the area. Unadjusted annual 
3Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and com-
modity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of 
change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based 
on the simple arithmetic average.
4See Box A2 in the Statistical Appendix of the October 2024 
WEO for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based 
weights as well as Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO, “Revised 
Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 WEO Update, 
Appendix 1.1 of the April 2008 WEO, Box A2 of the April 
2004 WEO, Box A1 of the May 2000 WEO, and Annex IV of 
the May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne 
Schulze-Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the 
World Economic Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Eco-
nomic Outlook (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 
December 1993), 106–23.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
99
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
GDP data are used for the euro area and for the major-
ity of individual countries, except Cyprus, Ireland, 
Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-adjusted 
data. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 
1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver-
age market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment 
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group 
labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are 
sums of individual country data after conversion to 
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the 
years indicated for balance of payments data and at 
end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denomi-
nated in currencies other than US dollars.
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes 
and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent 
changes for individual countries weighted by the US dol-
lar value of exports or imports as a share of total world 
or group exports or imports (in the preceding year).
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are 
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group 
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of 
a few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the 
economies with exceptional reporting periods for 
national accounts and government finance data.
For some countries, the figures for 2024 and earlier 
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; 
Table G lists the date of the latest actual outturns for 
the indicators in the national accounts, prices, gov-
ernment finance, and balance of payments for each 
country.
Country Notes
Afghanistan: Data for 2021–24 are reported for 
selected indicators, with estimates for fiscal data. 
GDP growth for 2024 is an estimate. Projections for 
2025–30 are omitted because of an unusually high 
degree of uncertainty, given that the IMF has paused 
its engagement with Afghanistan owing to a lack of 
clarity within the international community regarding 
the recognition of a government in the country. Data 
reported in the WEO contain a structural break in 
2021 as a result of the change from calendar year to 
solar year reporting; the actual reported GDP growth 
rate for solar year 2021 is –20.7 percent.
Algeria: Total government expenditure and net 
lending/borrowing include net lending by the govern-
ment, which mostly reflects support to the pension 
system and other public sector entities.
Argentina: The official national consumer price 
index (CPI) starts in December 2016. For earlier peri-
ods, CPI data for Argentina reflect the Greater Buenos 
Aires Area CPI (prior to December 2013); the national 
CPI (IPCNu, December 2013 to October 2015); 
the City of Buenos Aires CPI (November 2015 to 
April 2016); and the Greater Buenos Aires Area 
CPI (May 2016 to December 2016). Given limited 
comparability of these series because of differences in 
geographic coverage, weights, sampling, and method-
ology, the WEO does not report average CPI inflation 
for 2014–16 and end-of-period inflation for 2015–16. 
In addition, Argentina discontinued the publication 
of labor market data starting in the fourth quarter of 
2015, and new series became available starting in the 
second quarter of 2016.
Bolivia: Projections for 2026–30 have been omitted 
owing to significant uncertainty regarding the eco-
nomic outlook.
Costa Rica: The central government definition was 
expanded as of January 1, 2021, to include 51 public 
entities in accordance with Law 9524. Data back to 
2019 are adjusted for comparability.
Dominican Republic: The fiscal series have the 
following coverage: Public debt, debt service, and 
the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the 
consolidated public sector (which includes the central 
government, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector, 
and the central bank); the remaining fiscal series are 
for the central government.
Ecuador: Fiscal projections for 2025–30 are excluded 
from publication because of ongoing program 
discussions.
Eritrea: Data and projections for 2020–30 are 
excluded from the database because of constraints in 
data reporting.
India: Real GDP growth rates are calculated in 
accordance with national accounts with base year 
2011/12.
Iran: Historical figures for nominal GDP in US 
dollars are computed using the official exchange rate 
up to 2017. From 2018 onward, the NIMA (the 
country’s domestic Forex Management Integrated Sys-
tem) exchange rate, rather than the official exchange 
rate, is used to convert nominal rial GDP figures to 
US dollars. The IMF staff assesses that the NIMA 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
100
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
rate better reflects the transaction-value-weighted 
exchange rate in the economy over that period of 
time.
Israel: Projections are subject to heightened uncer-
tainty owing to the conflict in the region and thus may 
undergo revisions.
Lebanon: Fiscal and national accounts data for 
2022–24, as well as debt data for 2023–24, are IMF 
staff estimates and not provided by the national 
authorities. Estimates and projections for 2025–30 
are omitted owing to an unusually high degree of 
uncertainty.
Libya: Actual data and projections are subject to 
high uncertainty due to frequent data revisions by the 
authorities. Fiscal and debt data for 2024 are IMF staff 
estimates based on information from the Central Bank 
of Libya. National accounts data for 2020–24 are IMF 
staff estimates.
Nigeria: National accounts data have been revised 
and rebased, with 2019 as the new base year. This 
replaces the 2010 benchmark and aligns national 
accounts statistics with updated international stan-
dards, including the 2008 SNA, BPM6, and GFSM 
2014. The rebasing entailed broader sectoral and data 
coverage capturing previously unrecorded activities 
such as the digital economy, parts of the informal 
economy (particularly in the agriculture sector), pen-
sion and health insurance schemes, social insurance 
trust funds, household firms, quarrying and other 
minerals, and modular oil refining. Adding to dedi-
cated sectoral studies, the rebasing drew on more com-
prehensive data coverage of household and informal 
sector activity, including from the National Business 
Sample Census and the Survey of Establishments, the 
National Agricultural Sample Census and Survey, and 
the 2019 and 2023 Nigeria Living Standards Surveys. 
The rebasing exercise resulted in an upward revision 
of the nominal GDP by 40.8 percent in 2019.
Pakistan: Projections do not yet reflect the impact 
of flooding in summer 2025, whose impact is still 
being assessed.
Sierra Leone: Although the currency was rede-
nominated on July 1, 2022, local currency data are 
expressed in the old leone for the October 2025 WEO.
Sri Lanka: Data and projections for 2025–30 are 
excluded from publication owing to ongoing discus-
sions on restructuring of sovereign debt.
Sudan: Projections reflect the IMF staff’s analysis 
based on the assumption that the ongoing con-
flict will terminate by the end of 2025 and that 
reengagement and reconstruction will commence 
shortly thereafter. Data for 2011 exclude South 
Sudan after July 9; data for 2012 and onward pertain 
to the current Sudan.
Syria: Data are excluded from 2011 onward because 
of the uncertain political situation.
Timor-Leste: Published data for real GDP refer to 
non-oil real GDP, while published data for nominal 
GDP refer to total nominal GDP.
Turkmenistan: Real GDP data are IMF staff esti-
mates compiled in line with international methodol-
ogies (SNA), using official estimates and sources as 
well as United Nations and World Bank databases. 
Estimates of and projections for the fiscal balance 
exclude receipts from domestic bond issuances as 
well as privatization operations, in line with the 
GFSM 2014. The authorities’ official estimates for 
fiscal accounts, which are compiled using domestic 
statistical methodologies, include bond issuance 
and privatization proceeds as part of government 
revenues.
Ukraine: Revised data for national accounts are 
available for 2000 onward and exclude Crimea and 
Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
Uruguay: In December 2020, the authorities began 
reporting national accounts data according to the SNA 
2008, with base year 2016. The new series begin in 
2016. Data prior to 2016 reflect the IMF staff’s best 
effort to preserve previously reported data and avoid 
structural breaks.
Starting in October 2018, Uruguay’s public pen-
sion system received transfers in the context of Law 
19,590 of 2017, which compensates people affected 
by the creation of the country’s mixed pension system. 
These funds are recorded as revenues, consistent with 
the IMF’s methodology. Therefore, data for 2018–22 
are affected by these transfers, which amounted to 
1.2 percent of GDP in 2018, 1.0 percent of GDP 
in 2019, 0.6 percent of GDP in 2020, 0.3 percent 
of GDP in 2021, 0.1 percent of GDP in 2022, and 
0 thereafter. See IMF Country Report 19/64 for fur-
ther details.5 The disclaimer about the public pension 
system applies only to the revenues and net lending/
borrowing series.
The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was 
changed from consolidated public sector to non-
financial public sector with the October 2019 WEO. 
5Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Coun-
try Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 
February 2019).
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
101
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
In Uruguay, nonfinancial public sector coverage 
includes the central government, local government, 
social security funds, nonfinancial public corporations, 
and Banco de Seguros del Estado. Historical data were 
also revised accordingly. Under this narrower fiscal 
perimeter—which excludes the central bank—assets 
and liabilities held by the nonfinancial public sector, 
for which the counterpart is the central bank, are not 
netted out in debt figures. In this context, capitaliza-
tion bonds issued in the past by the government to the 
central bank are now part of the nonfinancial public 
sector debt.
Venezuela: Projecting the economic outlook, 
including assessing past and current economic 
developments used as the basis for the projections, is 
rendered difficult by the lack of discussions with the 
authorities (the most recent Article IV consultation 
took place in 2004), incomplete metadata for limited 
reported statistics, and difficulties in reconciling 
reported indicators with economic developments. 
The fiscal accounts include the budgetary central 
government; social security; FOGADE (the country’s 
deposit insurance institution); and a reduced set of 
public enterprises, including Petróleos de Venezuela, 
S.A. Following some methodological upgrades to 
achieve a more robust nominal GDP, historical data 
and indicators expressed as a percentage of GDP have 
been revised from 2012 onward. For most indicators, 
data for 2018–24 are IMF staff estimates. The effects 
of hyperinflation, the paucity of reported data, and 
uncertainty mean that the IMF staff’s estimated and 
projected macroeconomic indicators should be inter-
preted with caution. Venezuela’s consumer prices are 
excluded from all WEO group composites.
West Bank and Gaza: Estimates and projections for 
2025–30 are excluded from publication owing to the 
unusually high degree of uncertainty. Annual data for 
the unemployment rate are available up to 2022.
Zimbabwe: The Zimbabwe authorities have recently 
redenominated their national accounts statistics 
following the introduction on April 5, 2024, of a new 
national currency, the Zimbabwe gold, replacing the 
Zimbabwe dollar. The use of the Zimbabwe dollar 
ceased on April 30, 2024.
Classification of Economies
Summary of the Economy Classification
The economy classification in the WEO divides the 
world into two major groups: advanced economies 
and emerging market and developing economies.6 This 
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic 
or otherwise, and has evolved over time. The objective 
is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably mean-
ingful method of organizing data. Table A provides an 
overview of the classification, showing the number of 
economies in each group by region and summarizing 
some key indicators of their relative size (GDP valued 
at purchasing power parity, total exports of goods and 
services, and population).
Some economies remain outside the classification 
and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba 
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are 
examples of economies that are not IMF members, and 
the IMF therefore does not monitor them.
General Features and Composition of 
Groups in the World Economic Outlook 
Classification
Advanced Economies
Table B lists the 42 advanced economies. The seven 
largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange 
rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, France, 
Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute 
the subgroup of major advanced economies, often 
referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of the 
euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Com-
posite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover 
the current members for all years, even though the 
membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European 
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced 
economies in the WEO.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing 
economies (155) comprises all those that are not classi-
fied as advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and 
developing economies employed in the WEO are 
emerging and developing Asia; emerging and develop-
ing Europe (sometimes also referred to as “central and 
6As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always 
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by interna-
tional law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are 
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate 
and independent basis.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
102
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
eastern Europe”); Latin America and the Caribbean; 
Middle East and Central Asia (which comprises the 
regional subgroups Caucasus and Central Asia; and 
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan); 
and sub-Saharan Africa.
Emerging market and developing economies are also 
classified according to analytical criteria that reflect 
the composition of export earnings and a distinc-
tion between net creditor and net debtor economies. 
Tables D and E show the detailed composition of 
emerging market and developing economies in the 
regional and analytical groups.
The analytical criterion source of export earnings 
distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard 
International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and 
nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products 
(SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized 
into one of these groups if their main source of export 
earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on aver-
age between 2020 and 2024.
The financial and income criteria focus on net 
creditor economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted 
poor countries (HIPCs), low-income developing coun-
tries (LIDCs), and emerging market and middle-income 
economies (EMMIEs). Economies are categorized as net 
debtors when their latest net international investment 
position, where available, was less than zero or their 
current account balance accumulations from 1972 
(or earliest available data) to 2024 were negative. Net 
debtor economies are further differentiated based on 
experience with debt servicing.7
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are 
or have been considered by the IMF and the World 
Bank for participation in their debt initiative known as 
the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external 
debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustain-
able” level in a reasonably short period of time.8 Many 
of these countries have already benefited from debt 
relief and have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita 
income levels below a certain threshold (based on 
$2,700 in 2017 as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas 
method and updated following new information in 
early 2024), structural features consistent with limited 
development and structural transformation, and exter-
nal financial linkages insufficiently close for them to be 
widely seen as emerging market economies.
The EMMIEs are emerging market and developing 
economies not classified as LIDCs.
7During 2020–24, 41 economies incurred external payments 
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling 
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or 
rescheduling during 2020–24.
8See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and 
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The 
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
103
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods 
and Services, and Population, 20241
(Percent of total for group or world)
Number of 
Economies
GDP1
Exports of Goods and 
Services
Population
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced Economies
42
100.0
39.6
100.0
61.0
100.0
13.8
United States
37.3
14.8
16.5
10.0
30.8
4.3
Euro Area
20
29.0
11.5
41.3
25.2
31.8
4.4
Germany
7.6
3.0
9.9
6.0
7.6
1.0
France
5.6
2.2
5.4
3.3
6.2
0.9
Italy
4.6
1.8
4.0
2.4
5.3
0.7
Spain
3.4
1.4
3.3
2.0
4.4
0.6
Japan
8.3
3.3
4.7
2.9
11.2
1.6
United Kingdom
5.5
2.2
5.7
3.5
6.3
0.9
Canada
3.3
1.3
3.7
2.3
3.7
0.5
Other Advanced Economies
18
16.5
6.5
28.1
17.2
16.1
2.2
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
7
72.3
28.7
49.8
30.4
71.2
9.8
Emerging 
Market and
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging Market and Developing Economies 
Regional Groups
155
100.0
60.4
100.0
39.0
100.0
86.2
Emerging and Developing Asia
30
57.1
34.4
50.3
19.6
55.0
47.4
China
32.0
19.3
30.2
11.8
20.4
17.6
India
13.6
8.2
6.6
2.6
21.1
18.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
15
12.9
7.8
15.1
5.9
5.3
4.6
Russia
5.8
3.5
3.8
1.5
2.1
1.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
33
11.9
7.2
14.0
5.4
9.4
8.1
Brazil
4.0
2.4
3.1
1.2
3.1
2.7
Mexico
2.8
1.7
5.4
2.1
1.9
1.7
Middle East and Central Asia
32
12.3
7.4
16.6
6.5
13.3
11.4
Saudi Arabia
2.1
1.3
2.9
1.1
0.5
0.4
Sub-Saharan Africa
45
5.8
3.5
4.1
1.6
17.1
14.7
Nigeria
1.8
1.1
0.5
0.2
3.4
2.9
South Africa
0.8
0.5
1.0
0.4
0.9
0.8
Analytical Groups2
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
26
10.4
6.3
15.8
6.2
9.9
8.6
Nonfuel
127
89.6
54.1
84.2
32.8
90.0
77.6
Of which, Primary Products 
35
3.6
2.2
4.3
1.7
8.7
7.5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies 
117
48.4
29.2
41.6
16.2
66.9
57.7
Of which, Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2020–24
43
5.5
3.3
3.8
1.5
13.4
11.5
Other Groups2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
96
92.6
55.9
95.9
37.4
76.8
66.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
58
7.4
4.5
4.1
1.6
23.2
20.0
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
39
2.8
1.7
2.3
0.9
13.0
11.2
1 GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those for which 
data are included in the group aggregates.
2 West Bank and Gaza is omitted from group composites for source of export earnings and Syria is omitted from group composites across all Analytical and Other 
Groups because of insufficient data.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
104
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Germany
Malta
Belgium
Greece
The Netherlands
Croatia
Ireland
Portugal
Cyprus
Italy
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Finland
Lithuania
Spain
France
Luxembourg
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
United States
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Andorra
Israel
Puerto Rico
Australia
Korea
San Marino
Czech Republic
Liechtenstein
Singapore
Denmark
Macao SAR2
Sweden
Hong Kong SAR1
New Zealand
Switzerland
Iceland
Norway
Taiwan Province of China
1 On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
2 On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
Table C. European Union
Austria
France
Malta
Belgium
Germany
The Netherlands
Bulgaria
Greece
Poland
Croatia
Hungary
Portugal
Cyprus
Ireland
Romania
Czech Republic
Italy
Slovak Republic
Denmark
Latvia
Slovenia
Estonia
Lithuania
Spain 
Finland
Luxembourg
Sweden
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
105
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings1
Fuel
Nonfuel Primary Products
Emerging and Developing Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Kiribati
Timor-Leste
Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
Latin America and the Caribbean
Ecuador
Bolivia
Guyana
Chile
Venezuela
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Middle East and Central Asia
Algeria
Afghanistan
Azerbaijan
Mauritania
Bahrain
Somalia
Iran
Sudan
Iraq
Tajikistan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Yemen2
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Chad
Botswana
Republic of Congo
Burkina Faso
Equatorial Guinea
Burundi
Gabon
Central African Republic
Nigeria
Democratic Republic of the Congo
South Sudan
Eritrea
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
 
Zambia
Zimbabwe
1 Emerging and developing Europe is omitted from the table because no economies in the group have fuel or nonfuel primary products as their main source of 
export earnings.
2 Yemen does not currently export oil due to the internal conflict.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
106
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
*
Bhutan
*
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
•
Cambodia
*
*
China
•
•
Fiji
*
•
India
*
•
Indonesia
*
•
Kiribati
•
*
Lao P.D.R.
*
*
Malaysia
•
•
Maldives
*
•
Marshall Islands
•
•
Micronesia
•
•
Mongolia
*
•
Myanmar
*
*
Nauru
•
•
Nepal
•
*
Palau
*
•
Papua New Guinea
*
*
Philippines
*
•
Samoa
*
•
Solomon Islands
*
*
Sri Lanka
*
•
Thailand
•
•
Timor-Leste
•
*
Tonga
*
•
Tuvalu
•
•
Vanuatu
*
•
Vietnam
•
•
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
•
Belarus
*
•
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
•
Bulgaria
*
•
Hungary
*
•
Kosovo
*
•
Moldova
*
*
Montenegro
*
•
North Macedonia
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Poland
*
•
Romania
*
•
Russia
•
•
Serbia
*
•
Türkiye
*
•
Ukraine
*
•
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
•
Argentina
•
•
Aruba
*
•
The Bahamas
*
•
Barbados
*
•
Belize
*
•
Bolivia
*
•
•
Brazil
*
•
Chile
*
•
Colombia
*
•
Costa Rica
*
•
Dominica
*
•
Dominican Republic
*
•
Ecuador
*
•
El Salvador
*
•
Grenada
*
•
Guatemala
*
•
Guyana
•
•
•
Haiti
*
•
*
Honduras
*
•
*
Jamaica
*
•
Mexico
*
•
Nicaragua
*
•
*
Panama
*
•
Paraguay
*
•
Peru
*
•
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
•
St. Lucia
*
•
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
*
•
Suriname
*
•
Trinidad and Tobago
•
•
Uruguay
*
•
Venezuela
•
•
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and 
Per Capita Income Classification
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
107
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
•
•
*
Algeria
•
•
Armenia
*
•
Azerbaijan
•
•
Bahrain
•
•
Djibouti
*
*
Egypt
*
•
Georgia
*
•
Iran
•
•
Iraq
•
•
Jordan
*
•
Kazakhstan
*
•
Kuwait
•
•
Kyrgyz Republic
*
*
Lebanon
*
•
Libya
•
•
Mauritania
*
•
*
Morocco
*
•
Oman
*
•
Pakistan
*
•
Qatar
•
•
Saudi Arabia
•
•
Somalia
*
•
*
Sudan
*
*
*
Syria4
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
*
*
Tunisia
*
•
Turkmenistan
•
•
United Arab Emirates
•
•
Uzbekistan
•
*
West Bank and Gaza
*
•
Yemen
*
*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
*
•
Benin
*
•
*
Botswana
•
•
Burkina Faso
*
•
*
Burundi
*
•
*
Cabo Verde
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Cameroon
*
•
*
Central African Republic
*
•
*
Chad
*
•
*
Comoros
*
•
*
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
*
•
*
Republic of Congo
*
•
*
Côte d’Ivoire
*
•
*
Equatorial Guinea
•
•
Eritrea
•
*
*
Eswatini
•
•
Ethiopia
*
•
*
Gabon
•
•
The Gambia
*
•
*
Ghana
*
•
*
Guinea
*
•
*
Guinea-Bissau
*
•
*
Kenya
*
*
Lesotho
*
*
Liberia
*
•
*
Madagascar
*
•
*
Malawi
*
•
*
Mali
*
•
*
Mauritius
•
•
Mozambique
*
•
*
Namibia
•
•
Niger
*
•
*
Nigeria
*
*
Rwanda
*
•
*
São Tomé and Príncipe
*
•
*
Senegal
*
•
*
Seychelles
*
•
Sierra Leone
*
•
*
South Africa
•
•
South Sudan
*
*
Tanzania
*
•
*
Togo
*
•
*
Uganda
*
•
*
Zambia
*
•
*
Zimbabwe
*
*
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and  
Per Capita Income Classification (continued)
1 Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
2 Dot (star) indicates that the country has (has not) reached the initiative’s completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the initiative’s decision point.
3 Dot (star) indicates that the country is classified as an emerging market and middle-income economy (low-income developing country).
4 Syria is omitted from group composites for net external position and per capita income classification for lack of a fully developed database.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
108
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1 
National Accounts
Government Finance
Afghanistan
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
The Bahamas
Jul/Jun
Bangladesh
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Barbados
Apr/Mar
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Apr/Mar
Dominica
Jul/Jun
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Apr/Mar
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Fiji
Aug/Jul
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
Apr/Mar
India
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Apr/Mar
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Jul/Jun
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Apr/Mar
St. Lucia
Apr/Mar
Thailand
Oct/Sep
Tonga
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Trinidad and Tobago
Oct/Sep
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region
1 Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
109
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
NSO
2024/25
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
Albania
Albanian lek
IMF staff
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2020
NSO
2024
Algeria
Algerian dinar
NSO
2024
2001
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
Andorra
Euro
NSO
2024
2010
. . .
NSO
2024
Angola
Angolan kwanza
NSO
2024
2015
ESA 1995
NSO
2024
Antigua and Barbuda
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
CB
2023
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Argentina
Argentine peso
NSO
2024
2004
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Armenia
Armenian dram
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Aruba
Aruban florin
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2024
Australia
Australian dollar
NSO 
2024
2022
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2024
Austria
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2024
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan manat
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2024
The Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Bahrain
Bahrain dinar
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Bangladesh
Bangladesh taka
NSO
2024/25
2015/16
SNA 2008
Other
2024/25
Barbados
Barbados dollar
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
NSO
2024
2022
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
Belgium
Euro
CB
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
CB
2024
Belize
Belize dollar
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Benin
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Bhutan
Bhutanese ngultrum
NSO
2023/24
2016/17
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
NSO
2024
1990
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bosnian convertible 
marka
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 2021
NSO
2024
Botswana
Botswana pula
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Brazil
Brazilian real
NSO
2024
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Brunei Darussalam
Brunei dollar
MoF
2024
2010
SNA 2008
MoF
2024
Bulgaria
Bulgarian lev
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2024
Burkina Faso
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2024
Burundi
Burundi franc
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verdean escudo
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2011
NSO
2024
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Cameroon
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
From 2016
NSO
2024
Canada
Canadian dollar
NSO
2024
2017
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2024
Central African 
Republic
CFA franc
NSO
2019
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Chad
CFA franc
NSO
2023
2017
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
Chile
Chilean peso
CB
2024
2018
SNA 2008
From 2003
NSO
2024
China
Chinese yuan
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Colombia
Colombian peso
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
Comoros
Comorian franc
NSO
2024
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
Congolese franc
NSO
2020
2005
SNA 1993
From 2005
NSO
2024
Republic of Congo
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
110
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Afghanistan
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 6
Albania
IMF staff
2024
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Algeria
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Andorra
NSO
2023
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2023
BPM 6
Angola
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Antigua and Barbuda
MoF
2024
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Argentina
MEP
2024
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Armenia
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Aruba
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Australia
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Austria
NSO
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Azerbaijan
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
The Bahamas
MoF
2023/24
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Bahrain
MoF
2023
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Bangladesh
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
Barbados
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Belarus
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Belgium
CB
2024
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Belize
MoF
2024
1986
CG,MPC
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Benin
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Bhutan
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 6
Bolivia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Botswana
MoF
2023/24
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Brazil
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Brunei Darussalam
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
MoF
2024
BPM 6
Bulgaria
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Burkina Faso
MoF
2024
2001
CG
. . .
CB
2023
BPM 6
Burundi
MoF
2024
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Cabo Verde
MoF
2024
2001
CG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Cambodia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Cameroon
MoF
2024
2001
CG
Mixed
MoF
2024
BPM 6
Canada
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Central African 
Republic
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2019
BPM 5
Chad
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2022
BPM 5
Chile
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
China
MoF
2024
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
GAD
2024
BPM 6
Colombia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Comoros
MoF
2024
1986
CG
. . .
CB and IMF staff
2024
BPM 5
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
MoF
2023
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2023
BPM 6
Republic of Congo
MoF
2024
2001
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
111
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colón
CB
2024
2017
SNA 2008
From 2016
CB
2024
Côte d'Ivoire
CFA franc
NSO
2023
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2024
Croatia
Euro
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
NSO
2024
Cyprus
Euro
Other
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
Other
2024
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2024
Denmark
Danish krone
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
Djibouti
Djibouti franc
NSO
2023
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Dominica
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2023
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
CB
2024
2018
SNA 2008
From 2018
CB
2024
Ecuador
US dollar
CB
2024
2018
SNA 2008
From 2018
NSO
2024
Egypt
Egyptian pound
MEP
2023/24
2021/22
SNA 2008
Other
2024/25
El Salvador
US dollar
CB
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Equatorial Guinea
CFA franc
MEP
2024
2006
SNA 1993
MEP
2024
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
Other
2019
2011
SNA 1993
Other
2019
Estonia
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2024
Eswatini
Swazi lilangeni
NSO
2023
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
NSO
2023/24
2015/16
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Fiji
Fijian dollar
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Finland
Euro
NSO
2024
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
France
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
Gabon
CFA franc
MEP
2024
2001
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
The Gambia
Gambian dalasi
NSO
2023
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Georgia
Georgian lari
NSO
2024
2019
SNA 2008
From 1996
NSO
2024
Germany
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1991
NSO
2024
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
NSO
2023
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Greece
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2024
Grenada
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2022
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Guatemala
Guatemalan quetzal
CB
2024
2013
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2024
Guinea
Guinean franc
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Guinea-Bissau
CFA franc
NSO
2023
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2024
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
NSO
2024
20126
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Haiti
Haitian gourde
NSO
2024/25
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
Honduras
Honduran lempira
CB
2024
2000
SNA 1993
CB
2024
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong dollar
NSO
2024
2023
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2024
Hungary
Hungarian forint
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 2021
NSO
2024
Iceland
Icelandic króna
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1990
NSO
2024
India
Indian rupee
NSO
2024/25
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2024/25
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Iran
Iranian rial
CB
2024/25
2021/22
SNA 2008
CB
2024/25
Iraq
Iraqi dinar 
NSO
2024
2007
. . .
NSO
2024
Ireland
Euro
NSO
2024
2023
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2024
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
112
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Costa Rica
Other
2024
1986
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Côte d'Ivoire
MoF
2024
1986
CG
A
CB
2023
BPM 6
Croatia
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Cyprus
Other
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Czech Republic
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Denmark
NSO
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Djibouti
MoF
2024
1986
CG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Dominica
MoF
2023/24
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Dominican Republic
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Ecuador
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Egypt
MoF
2023/24
. . .
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 5
El Salvador
Other
2024
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Equatorial Guinea
MEP
2023
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 5
Eritrea
Other
2019
2001
CG
C
Other
2019
BPM 5
Estonia
MoF
2024
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Eswatini
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Ethiopia
MoF
2023/24
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 5
Fiji
MoF
2023/24
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Finland
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
France
NSO
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Gabon
IMF staff
2023
2001
CG
A
IMF staff
2021
BPM 6
The Gambia
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2023
BPM 6
Georgia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Germany
NSO
2024
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Ghana
MoF
2023
2001
CG
CB
CB
2023
BPM 5
Greece
NSO
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Grenada
MoF
2022
. . .
CG
CB
NSO
2022
BPM 6
Guatemala
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Guinea
MoF
2024
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Guinea-Bissau
MoF
2024
2001
CG
CB
CB
2023
BPM 6
Guyana
MoF
2023
1986
CG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Haiti
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 5
Honduras
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 5
Hong Kong SAR
MoF
2023/24
2001
CG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Hungary
MEP
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Iceland
NSO
2023
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
India
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG,SG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
Indonesia
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Iran
MoF
2023/24
2001
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 5
Iraq
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Ireland
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
113
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Israel
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2024
2020
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2024
Italy
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Japan
Japanese yen
Other
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 1980
Other
2024
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
NSO
2023
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2023
Kenya
Kenyan shilling
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Kiribati
Australian dollar
NSO
2023
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2023
Korea
South Korean won
CB
2024
2020
SNA 2008
From before 
1980
NSO
2024
Kosovo
Euro
NSO
2024
2016
ESA 2010
NSO
2024
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz som
NSO
2024
2005
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2024
Lao P.D.R.
Lao kip
NSO
2024
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Latvia
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2020
Other
2024
Lebanon
Lebanese pound
NSO
2021
2019
SNA 2008
From 2019
NSO
2024
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
NSO
2023/24
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Liberia
US dollar
IMF staff
2024
2018
SNA 1993
Other
2024
Libya
Libyan dinar
MEP
2019
2013
SNA 1993
Other
2024
Liechtenstein
Swiss franc
NSO
2023
2013
ESA 2010
NSO
2024
Lithuania
Euro
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 2005
NSO
2024
Luxembourg
Euro
NSO
2024
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2024
Macao SAR
Macanese pataca
NSO
2024
2023
SNA 2008
From 2023
NSO
2024
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
NSO
2022
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
NSO
2024
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MoF
2024
2019
SNA 2008
CB
2024
Mali
CFA franc
NSO
2023
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Malta
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2024
Marshall Islands
US dollar
NSO
2022/23
2014/15
SNA 2008
NSO
2023
Mauritania
New Mauritanian 
ouguiya
NSO
2023
1998
SNA 2008
From 2014
NSO
2023
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
NSO
2023
2018
SNA 2008
From 1999
NSO
2024
Mexico
Mexican peso
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Micronesia
US dollar
NSO
2022/23
2003/04
SNA 2008
NSO
2023/24
Moldova
Moldovan leu
NSO
2024
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Mongolia
Mongolian tögrög
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Montenegro
Euro
NSO
2024
2006
ESA 2010
NSO
2024
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2024
Mozambique
Mozambican metical
NSO
2023
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Myanmar
Myanmar kyat
Other
2020/21
2015/16
. . .
Other
2021/22
Namibia
Namibian dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Nauru
Australian dollar
Other
2020/21
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2023/24
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NSO
2024/25
2010/11
SNA 2008
CB
2024/25
The Netherlands
Euro
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NSO
2024
20096
SNA 2008
From 1987
IMF staff
2024
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
114
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Israel
Other
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
. . .
Other
2024
BPM 6
Italy
NSO
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Jamaica
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Japan
Other
2023
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
MoF
2024
BPM 6
Jordan
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kazakhstan
MoF
2023
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Kenya
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kiribati
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Korea
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kosovo
MoF
2024
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kuwait
MoF
2023
2014
CG,SS
Mixed
CB
2024
BPM 6
Kyrgyz Republic
MoF
2024
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Lao P.D.R.
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Latvia
MoF
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Lebanon
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 5
Lesotho
MoF
2023/24
2014
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Liberia
MoF
2024
2001
CG
A
CB
2024
BPM 5
Libya
CB
2024
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Liechtenstein
NSO
2023
2014
SG
A
IMF staff
2021
BPM 6
Lithuania
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Luxembourg
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Macao SAR
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SS
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Madagascar
MoF
2024
1986
CG
CB
CB
2023
BPM 6
Malawi
MoF
2024
2014
CG
C
NSO
2023
BPM 6
Malaysia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Maldives
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Mali
MoF
2023
2001
CG
. . .
CB
2023
BPM 6
Malta
Other
2024
2001
CG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Marshall Islands
MoF
2022/23
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2023
BPM 6
Mauritania
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Mauritius
MoF
2022/23
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Mexico
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Micronesia
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,SG
A
NSO
2017/18
BPM 6
Moldova
MoF
2024
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Mongolia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Montenegro
MoF
2024
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Morocco
MEP
2024
2001
CG
A
GAD
2024
BPM 6
Mozambique
MoF
2023
2001
CG,SG, LG
. . .
CB
2022
BPM 6
Myanmar
Other
2019/20
2014
CG
C
IMF staff
2021/22
BPM 6
Namibia
MoF
2023
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Nauru
MoF
2023/24
2001
CG
C
IMF staff
2022/23
BPM 6
Nepal
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
The Netherlands
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
New Zealand
NSO
2024
2014
CG, LG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
115
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan córdoba
CB
2024
2006
SNA 2008
From 2006
CB
2024
Niger
CFA franc
NSO
2022
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NSO
2024
2019
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
North Macedonia
Macedonian denar
NSO
2024
2005
ESA 2010
NSO
2024
Norway
Norwegian krone
NSO
2024
2022
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
Oman
Omani rial
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Pakistan
Pakistan rupee
NSO
2024/25
2015/16
SNA 2008
From 2016
NSO
2024/25
Palau
US dollar
MoF
2023/24
2018/19
SNA 1993
MoF
2023/24
Panama
US dollar
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 1993
From 2018
NSO
2024
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea 
kina
Other
2023
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Paraguay
Paraguayan guaraní
CB
2024
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2024
Peru
Peruvian sol
CB
2024
2007
SNA 2008
CB
2024
Philippines
Philippine peso
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Poland
Polish zloty
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2020
NSO
2024
Portugal
Euro
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2024
Puerto Rico
US dollar
NSO
2023/24
2017
. . .
NSO
2024
Qatar
Qatari riyal
NSO
2023
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Romania
Romanian leu
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2024
Russia
Russian ruble
NSO
2024
2021
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2024
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
NSO
2024
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Samoa
Samoan tala
NSO
2023/24
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
San Marino
Euro
NSO
2022
2007
ESA 2010
NSO
2023
São Tomé and Príncipe São Tomé and 
Príncipe dobra
NSO
2023
2008
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
NSO
2024
2023
SNA 2008
From 2024
NSO
2024
Senegal
CFA franc
NSO
2024
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Serbia
Serbian dinar
NSO
2024
2021
ESA 2010
From 2021
NSO
2024
Seychelles
Seychelles rupee
NSO
2023
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean leone
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2024
Singapore
Singapore dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2024
Slovak Republic
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1997
NSO
2024
Slovenia
Euro
NSO
2024
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2024
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands 
dollar
Other
2022
2012
SNA 1993
CB
2024
Somalia
US dollar
NSO
2022
2022
SNA 2008
NSO
2023
South Africa
South African rand
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
South Sudan
South Sudanese 
pound
IMF staff
2024
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Spain
Euro
NSO
2024
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
Other
2024
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
St. Kitts and Nevis
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2023
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
116
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Nicaragua
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Niger
MoF
2024
1986
CG
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Nigeria
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
North Macedonia
MoF
2024
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Norway
Other
2023
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Oman
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Pakistan
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024/25
BPM 6
Palau
MoF
2023/24
2001
CG
A
MoF
2022/23
BPM 6
Panama
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Papua New Guinea
MoF
2022
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Paraguay
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Peru
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 5
Philippines
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Poland
MoF
2024
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Portugal
NSO
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Puerto Rico
Other
2023/24
2001
CG
A
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Romania
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Russia
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,SS
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Rwanda
MoF
2023/24
2014
CG
. . .
CB
2024
BPM 6
Samoa
MoF
2023/24
2001
CG
A
CB
2023/24
BPM 6
San Marino
MoF
2022
2001
CG
A
Other
2022
BPM 6
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
MoF
2023
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Saudi Arabia
MoF
2024
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Senegal
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2024
BPM 6
Serbia
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Seychelles
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Sierra Leone
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Singapore
NSO
2024/25
2014
CG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Slovak Republic
Other
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Slovenia
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Solomon Islands
CB
2022
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Somalia
MoF
2023
2001
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 5
South Africa
MoF
2024/25
2001
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
South Sudan
MoF
2024
2014
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Spain
MoF
2024
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Sri Lanka
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
St. Kitts and Nevis
MoF
2024
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
117
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Country
Currency
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
St. Lucia
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2024
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2022
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Sudan
Sudanese pound
NSO
2019
1982
. . .
NSO
2024
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2023
Sweden
Swedish krona
NSO
2024
2024
ESA 2010
From 1993
NSO
2024
Switzerland
Swiss franc
NSO
2024
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
Syria
Syrian pound
NSO
2010
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2011
Taiwan Province of 
China
New Taiwan dollar
NSO
2024
2021
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Tajikistan
Tajik somoni
NSO
2023
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2023
Tanzania
Tanzanian shilling
NSO
2023
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2023
Thailand
Thai baht
Other
2024
2002
SNA 1993
From 1993
MOC
2024
Timor-Leste
US dollar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Togo
CFA franc
NSO
2022
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Tonga
Tongan pa’anga
CB
2022/23
2016/17
SNA 2008
CB
2024/25
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and Tobago 
dollar
NSO
2023
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
From 2009
NSO
2024
Türkiye
Turkish lira
NSO
2024
2009
ESA 2010
From 2009
NSO
2024
Turkmenistan
New Turkmen manat
IMF staff
2024
2023
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2024
Tuvalu
Australian dollar
Other
2024
2016
SNA 2008
Other
2024
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
NSO
2024
2016
SNA 2008
CB
2024
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
NSO
2024
2021
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2024
United Arab Emirates
U.A.E. dirham
NSO
2023
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
United Kingdom
British pound
NSO
2024
2022
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2024
United States
US dollar
NSO
2024
2017
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2024
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
CB
2024
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Uzbekistan
Uzbek som
NSO
2024
2020
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
NSO
2022
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolívar
CB
2018
1997
SNA 1993
CB
2023
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2024
West Bank and Gaza
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2024
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Yemen
Yemeni rial
IMF staff
2022
1990
SNA 1993
IMF staff
2022
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
NSO
2024
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe gold
NSO
2023
2023
SNA 2008
NSO
2024
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
118
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Country
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
Subsectors Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in Use 
at Source
St. Lucia
MoF
2024/25
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Sudan
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Suriname
MoF
2023
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2023
BPM 6
Sweden
MoF
2024
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Switzerland
MoF
2024
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Syria
MoF
2009
1986
CG
C
CB
2009
BPM 5
Taiwan Province of 
China
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Tajikistan
MoF
2023
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Tanzania
MoF
2023
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Thailand
MoF
2023/24
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Timor-Leste
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Togo
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2023
BPM 6
Tonga
MoF
2023/24
2014
CG
C
CB
2023/24
BPM 6
Trinidad and Tobago
MoF
2023/24
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Tunisia
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Türkiye
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2024
BPM 6
Turkmenistan
MoF
2024
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Tuvalu
MoF
2024
. . .
CG
C
IMF staff
2023
BPM 6
Uganda
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Ukraine
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
United Arab Emirates
MoF
2023
2014
CG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2023
BPM 6
United Kingdom
NSO
2024
2014
CG,LG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
United States
MEP
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Uruguay
MoF
2024
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Uzbekistan
MoF
2024
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB and MEP
2024
BPM 6
Vanuatu
MoF
2024
2001
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Venezuela
MoF
2017
2001
NFPC,other
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Vietnam
MoF
2023
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
West Bank and Gaza
MoF
2024
2001
CG
Mixed
NSO
2024
BPM 6
Yemen
MoF
2024
2001
CG,LG
C
IMF staff
2022
BPM 5
Zambia
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB
2024
BPM 6
Zimbabwe
MoF
2024
1986
CG
C
CB and MoF
2023
BPM 6
Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CFA = Communaute Financière Africaine (African Financial Community); CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National 
Accounts; SAR = Special Administrative Region; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1 CB = central bank; GAD = General Administration Department; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, Commerce, and/or Development; MOC = Ministry of Commerce; MoF = Ministry 
of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office.
2 National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to calculate 
the index. 
3 Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers 
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4 CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; SG = state government; 
SS = social security fund.
5 Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.
6 Base year deflator is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
119
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for  
Selected Economies
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in 
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally 
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for 
differences between the national authorities and the 
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions 
and projected fiscal outturns. When no official bud-
get has been announced, projections incorporate 
policy measures judged likely to be implemented. 
The medium-term fiscal projections are similarly 
based on a judgment about policies’ most likely 
path. For cases in which the IMF staff has insuffi-
cient information to assess the authorities’ budget 
intentions and prospects for policy implementation, 
an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed 
unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions 
used in regard to selected economies follow. (See 
also Tables B5 through B9 in the online section 
of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net 
lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the avail-
able information regarding budget outturn, budget 
plans, and IMF-supported program targets for the 
federal government; on fiscal measures announced 
by the authorities; and on the IMF staff’s macroeco-
nomic projections. The interest bill excludes interest 
payments of zero-coupon bonds issued prior to 
September 2025, which are recorded below the line.
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on 
data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 
the FY2025/26 budgets published by the 
Commonwealth Government and the FY2024/25 
1The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a 
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed 
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the 
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output 
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, 
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition 
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include 
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in 
interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluctu-
ations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of structural 
balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of potential GDP 
and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of the 
October 1993 World Economic Outlook.) Estimates of the output 
gap and of the structural balance are subject to significant mar-
gins of uncertainty. Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus 
financial assets corresponding to debt instruments.
budgets published by the state/territory gov-
ernments, and the IMF staff’s estimates and 
projections.
Austria: The IMF staff’s fiscal projections are 
based on the authorities’ latest medium-term plans, 
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic 
assumptions and assuming some moderate expen-
diture restraint over the medium term in line with 
historical patterns.
Belgium: Projections are based on the Budgetary 
Plan 2025, the Belgian Monitoring Committee’s 
reports, and other available information on the 
authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the 
IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections reflect current and 
expected policies.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts 
from the Government of Canada’s 2024 Fall Eco-
nomic Statement and the latest provincial budget 
updates. The IMF staff makes some adjustments 
to these forecasts, including those for differences 
in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff’s 
forecast also incorporates the most recent data 
releases from Statistics Canada’s National Economic 
Accounts, including quarterly federal, provincial, 
and territorial budgetary outturns.
Chile: Fiscal projections are based on the authori-
ties’ budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF 
staff’s macroeconomic projections.
China: The IMF staff’s fiscal projections incor-
porate the 2025 budget as well as estimates of 
off-budget financing.
Colombia: Fiscal projections are based on the 
authorities’ policies and projections reflected in 
the 2025–36 Medium-Term Fiscal Framework, 
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic 
assumptions.
Denmark: Estimates for the current year are 
aligned with the latest official budget numbers, 
adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff’s 
macroeconomic assumptions. Beyond the current 
year, the projections incorporate key features of 
the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the 
authorities’ latest budget. Structural balances are 
net of temporary fluctuations in some revenues 
(for example, North Sea revenue, pension yield tax 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
120
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Box A1 (continued)
revenue) and one-offs (COVID-19–related one-offs 
are, however, included).
France: Projections for 2025 onward are based 
on the 2025 budget and other clearly specified 
measures in the authorities’ 2023–27 multiannual 
budget programming bill and fiscal plans, adjusted 
for differences in revenue projections and assump-
tions on macroeconomic and financial variables.
Germany: Fiscal projections are based on the 
IMF staff’s macroeconomic framework and assume 
a gradual increase in infrastructure and defense 
spending over the medium term, in line with the 
authorities’ stated intentions. The projections also 
assume that additional fiscal room generated by 
reforms to Germany’s fiscal rule (the “debt brake”) 
in March 2025 is mostly used.
Greece: Data since 2010 reflect adjustments in 
line with the primary balance definition under the 
enhanced surveillance framework for Greece.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Pro-
jections are based on the authorities’ medium-term 
fiscal projections for expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF 
staff’s projections for the macroeconomic frame-
work and fiscal policy plans announced in the 2025 
budget.
India: Projections are based on available informa-
tion on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions. General 
government data cover only central and state gov-
ernments. State government data are incorporated 
with a lag of up to two years; general government 
data are thus finalized well after central government 
data. IMF and Indian presentations differ, partic-
ularly regarding disinvestment and license auction 
proceeds, net versus gross recording of revenues in 
certain minor categories, and some public sector 
lending. Starting with FY2020/21 data, expenditure 
also includes the off-budget component of food 
subsidies, consistent with the revised treatment 
of food subsidies in the budget. In FY2020/21 
the IMF staff adjusted expenditure to take out 
payments for FY2019/20 food subsidies, which 
FY2020/21 official figures include.
Indonesia: The IMF staff’s projections are based 
on the latest budget, extrapolating using projected 
nominal GDP (and its components as needed) with 
application of judgment to reflect the authorities’ 
spending and revenue policies over the medium 
term.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the coun-
try’s Budget 2025.
Israel: Projections are subject to significant risks 
given the unpredictability of the current conflict 
and its impact on the economy. Fiscal projections 
are for the general government and take the 2025 
budget into account.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the fiscal plans included in the 
government’s Medium-Term Fiscal–Structural 
2025–2029 Plan and the updated national 
accounts. The stock of maturing postal bonds is 
included in the debt projections.
Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures the 
government has already announced, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Korea: The forecast incorporates the authorities’ 
annual budget, any supplementary budget, any 
proposed new budget, the medium-term fiscal plan, 
and the IMF staff’s estimates.
Mexico: The 2020 public sector borrowing 
requirements estimated by the IMF staff adjust for 
some statistical discrepancies between above-the-line 
and below-the-line numbers. Fiscal projections for 
2025 are informed by the estimates in Pre-Criterios 
2025; projections for 2025 onward assume contin-
ued compliance with rules established in the Federal 
Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law.
The Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2025–30 
are based on the IMF staff’s forecast framework and 
are also informed by the authorities’ 2025 budget, 
the 2025 Spring Memorandum, and Bureau for 
Economic Policy Analysis projections.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the 
country’s Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 
2024 and Budget Policy Statement 2025.
Portugal: The projections for the current year are 
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted 
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast. 
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption 
of unchanged policies. Projections for 2025 reflect 
information available in the 2025 budget proposal.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are informed by 
the Certified Fiscal Plan for the Commonwealth of 
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
121
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Box A1 (continued)
Puerto Rico, which was prepared in October 2024, 
certified by the Financial Oversight and Manage-
ment Board.
Russia: The fiscal rule was suspended in March 
2022 by the government in response to the 
sanctions imposed after the invasion of Ukraine, 
allowing for windfall oil and gas revenues above 
benchmark to be used to finance a larger deficit in 
2022 as well as savings accumulated in the Russian 
National Welfare Fund. The 2023–25 budget was 
based on a modified rule with a two-year transition 
period that set the benchmark oil and gas revenues 
fixed in rubles at Rub 8 trillion, compared with 
a fixed benchmark oil price at $40 a barrel under 
the 2019 fiscal rule. During the transition period 
higher deficits than prescribed by the rule were 
allowed, with additional financing coming from 
earlier saved windfall revenues. However, in late 
September 2023, the Ministry of Finance proposed 
reverting to the earlier version of the fiscal rule 
from 2024 onward to determine the price of oil 
and gas revenues but set the benchmark oil price 
at $60 a barrel. The new rule, effective in the 2025 
budget, allows higher oil and gas revenues to be 
spent, but it simultaneously targets a smaller pri-
mary structural deficit.
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff’s baseline fiscal 
projections are based primarily on its understand-
ing of government policies as outlined in the 
2025 budget and recent official announcements. 
Export oil revenues are based on WEO baseline 
oil price assumptions and the IMF staff’s under-
standing of oil production adjustments under the 
OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC 
oil exporters) agreement and those unilaterally 
announced by Saudi Arabia.
Singapore: FY2024 projections are revised figures 
based on budget execution through the end of 
2024. FY2025 projections are based on the initial 
budget of February 18, 2025.
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions are informed 
by the 2025 budget. Nontax revenue excludes 
transactions in financial assets and liabilities, as 
they involve primarily revenues associated with 
the realized exchange rate valuation gains from the 
holding of foreign currency deposits, sale of assets, 
and conceptually similar items. Eskom debt relief is 
treated as a capital transfer above-the-line item.
Spain: Figures for 2021–28 reflect disbursements 
of grants and loans under the EU Recovery and 
Resilience Facility.
Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2024 are based on 
the authorities’ budget bill and have been updated 
with the authorities’ latest interim forecast. The 
impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal 
accounts is calculated using the 2014 OECD study 
to take into account output gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal pol-
icy is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in 
line with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal rules.
Türkiye: The basis for the projections is the 
IMF-defined fiscal balance, which excludes some 
revenue and expenditure items that are included in 
the authorities’ headline balance.
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on 
the March 2025 forecast of the Office for Budget 
Responsibility and the January 2025 release on pub-
lic sector finances from the Office for National Sta-
tistics. The IMF staff’s projections take the Office 
for Budget Responsibility forecast as a reference and 
overlay adjustments for differences in assumptions. 
Data are presented on a calendar year basis.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the 
January 2025 Congressional Budget Office baseline, 
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeco-
nomic assumptions. Projections incorporate the 
effects of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act signed on 
July 4, 2025.
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the 
established policy framework in each economy. 
In most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative 
stance over the business cycle: Official interest rates 
will increase when economic indicators suggest 
that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or 
range; they will decrease when indicators suggest 
that inflation will not exceed the acceptable rate 
or range, that output growth is below its potential 
rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy is 
significant. With regard to interest rates, please refer 
to the “Assumptions” section at the beginning of 
the Statistical Appendix.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
122
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Box A1 (continued)
Argentina: Monetary projections are consistent 
with the overall macroeconomic framework, the 
fiscal and financing plans, and the monetary and 
foreign exchange policies.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are 
based on the IMF staff’s analysis and the expected 
inflation path.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with the convergence of inflation to target.
Canada: Projections reflect the gradual unwind-
ing of monetary policy tightening by the Bank of 
Canada as inflation slowly returns to its midrange 
target of 2 percent by the end of 2026.
Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with attaining the inflation target.
China: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with inflation gradually rising and the output 
gap closing over the medium term.
Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg 
to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro 
area member countries are drawn from a suite of 
models (semi-structural, DSGE [dynamic stochastic 
general equilibrium], Taylor rule), market expec-
tations, and European Central Bank Governing 
Council communications.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The 
IMF staff assumes that the currency board system 
will remain intact.
Hungary: The IMF staff’s estimates and projec-
tions are informed by expert judgment based on 
recent developments.
India: Monetary policy projections are consistent 
with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation 
target over the medium term.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in 
line with inflation within the central bank’s target 
band over the medium term.
Israel: Monetary policy assumptions are based on 
the gradual normalization of monetary policy.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are based on 
the IMF staff’s assessment of the most likely path 
for interest rates, considering the broader macro-
economic outlook, the Bank of Japan’s communica-
tions, and market expectations.
Korea: Projections assume that the policy rate 
will evolve in line with the Bank of Korea’s forward 
guidance.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with inflation converging to the central bank’s 
target over the projection period.
New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on 
the IMF staff’s analysis and expected inflation path. 
Russia: Monetary policy projections assume 
that the Central Bank of the Russian Federation is 
adopting a tight monetary policy stance.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are 
based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg 
to the US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in 
line with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with maintaining inflation within the 
3–6 percent target band over the medium term.
Sweden: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the IMF staff’s estimates.
Switzerland: Monetary policy assumptions are 
based on the IMF staff’s assessment of the most 
likely path for interest rates, considering the broader 
macroeconomic outlook, the Swiss National Bank’s 
inflation forecasts, and market expectations.
Türkiye: The baseline assumes that the monetary 
policy stance will remain contractionary in line 
with announced and observed policies.
United Kingdom: Monetary policy assumptions 
are based on the IMF staff’s assessment of the 
most likely path for interest rates, considering the 
broader macroeconomic outlook, model results, the 
Bank of England’s inflation forecasts and communi-
cations, and market expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal 
Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the 
federal funds target rate in line with the broader 
macroeconomic outlook.
List of Tables1
Output
A1. Summary of World Output
A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Inflation
A5. Summary of Inflation
A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Financial Policies
A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt
Foreign Trade
A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
1When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
123
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
124
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
World
3.4
3.8
3.6
3.0
–2.7
6.6
3.8
3.5
3.3
3.2
3.1
3.1
Advanced Economies
1.3
2.6
2.3
1.9
–3.9
6.0
3.0
1.7
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.5
United States
1.5
2.5
3.0
2.6
–2.1
6.2
2.5
2.9
2.8
2.0
2.1
1.8
Euro Area
0.7
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.0
6.4
3.6
0.4
0.9
1.2
1.1
1.1
Japan
0.4
1.7
0.6
–0.4
–4.2
2.7
1.0
1.2
0.1
1.1
0.6
0.5
Other Advanced Economies2
2.2
3.1
2.5
1.9
–3.9
6.5
3.4
1.5
2.0
1.6
1.8
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
5.3
4.8
4.6
3.8
–1.8
7.0
4.3
4.7
4.3
4.2
4.0
4.0
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.6
6.6
6.4
5.4
–0.5
7.8
4.7
6.1
5.3
5.2
4.7
4.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.6
4.3
3.8
2.6
–1.8
7.2
0.5
3.6
3.5
1.8
2.2
2.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.4
1.4
1.1
0.2
–6.9
7.4
4.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.6
Middle East and Central Asia
4.1
2.6
2.5
2.1
–2.3
4.7
6.4
2.6
2.6
3.5
3.8
3.7
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.8
2.8
3.2
3.1
–3.1
3.8
4.4
3.7
4.1
4.1
4.4
4.6
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
4.0
0.8
0.7
0.6
–4.6
4.1
6.5
2.9
3.1
3.3
3.6
3.2
Nonfuel
5.5
5.3
5.2
4.2
–1.5
7.4
4.0
4.9
4.5
4.3
4.1
4.0
Of Which, Primary Products
3.8
2.8
3.1
1.7
–4.9
6.5
2.8
1.4
2.2
3.1
3.2
3.3
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
4.5
4.7
4.5
3.3
–3.8
6.9
5.1
5.0
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.8
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
3.7
4.0
3.6
3.2
–0.7
3.8
0.9
3.2
2.9
4.0
4.4
4.8
Other Groups
European Union
0.9
3.0
2.3
2.0
–5.5
6.4
3.7
0.6
1.1
1.4
1.4
1.4
Middle East and North Africa
3.9
2.1
1.8
1.5
–2.5
4.4
6.7
2.5
2.1
3.3
3.7
3.6
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
5.3
4.8
4.7
3.7
–1.9
7.3
4.2
4.8
4.3
4.1
3.9
3.8
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.5
4.2
4.5
4.7
–1.5
3.8
4.9
4.2
4.2
4.4
5.0
5.3
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
1.5
3.0
2.8
2.1
–4.0
6.5
2.9
1.6
1.5
1.2
1.9
1.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.1
3.7
3.5
3.3
–3.6
4.8
4.5
3.6
3.5
3.3
3.6
3.4
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.5
3.1
3.1
2.9
–5.4
5.2
4.5
3.3
3.3
2.9
3.2
2.9
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.0
4.3
4.4
4.6
–1.1
4.8
4.4
4.3
4.2
4.4
4.7
4.7
Output per Capita3
Advanced Economies
0.8
2.2
1.9
1.5
–4.4
5.9
2.4
0.9
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.6
3.2
3.3
2.5
–3.2
5.9
3.2
3.6
3.2
3.7
3.0
2.9
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
3.9
3.6
3.7
2.7
–2.9
6.6
3.5
4.0
3.6
3.5
3.3
3.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
2.8
1.7
2.0
2.3
–3.9
1.2
2.6
1.8
1.7
3.9
2.7
3.1
World Growth Rate Based on Market  
Exchange Rates
2.4
3.4
3.2
2.6
–3.0
6.4
3.3
2.9
2.8
2.6
2.6
2.4
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
71,355
81,952
87,039
88,323
86,051
98,226
102,402
106,940
111,113
117,165
123,585
149,568
At Purchasing Power Parities
96,876
124,699
132,666
140,582
140,263
157,045
174,330
186,977
197,913
208,956
219,220
265,663
1 Real GDP.
2 Excludes euro area countries, Japan, and the United States.
3 Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
125
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Q4 over Q42
Average
Projections
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
2024:Q4
2025:Q4
2026:Q4
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
1.3
2.6
2.3
1.9
–3.9
6.0
3.0
1.7
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.9
1.3
1.8
United States
1.5
2.5
3.0
2.6
–2.1
6.2
2.5
2.9
2.8
2.0
2.1
1.8
2.4
1.9
2.0
Euro Area
0.7
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.0
6.4
3.6
0.4
0.9
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.3
0.7
1.7
Germany
1.3
2.8
1.1
1.0
–4.1
3.9
1.8
–0.9
–0.5
0.2
0.9
0.7
–0.2
0.3
1.0
France
0.8
2.3
1.6
2.1
–7.6
6.8
2.8
1.6
1.1
0.7
0.9
1.2
0.6
0.8
1.0
Italy
–0.6
1.6
0.8
0.4
–8.9
8.9
4.8
0.7
0.7
0.5
0.8
0.7
0.6
1.0
0.1
Spain
0.4
2.9
2.4
2.0
–10.9
6.7
6.4
2.5
3.5
2.9
2.0
1.6
3.7
2.5
1.8
The Netherlands
1.0
2.8
2.3
2.3
–3.9
6.3
5.0
–0.6
1.1
1.4
1.2
1.2
2.2
0.8
1.4
Belgium
1.2
1.5
1.9
2.4
–4.8
6.2
4.3
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.3
1.1
1.2
1.2
Ireland
3.3
10.1
7.7
5.0
7.2
16.3
7.5
–2.5
2.6
9.1
1.3
2.3
11.9
–3.7
14.1
Austria
1.1
2.3
2.5
1.8
–6.3
4.8
5.3
–1.0
–1.0
0.3
0.8
0.7
–0.5
0.7
1.1
Portugal
–0.1
3.3
2.9
2.7
–8.2
5.6
7.0
2.6
1.9
1.9
2.1
1.7
2.8
1.7
1.6
Greece
–2.7
1.5
2.1
2.3
–9.2
8.7
5.7
2.3
2.3
2.0
2.0
1.6
2.5
2.2
1.5
Finland
0.3
3.3
1.2
1.3
–2.5
2.7
0.8
–0.9
0.4
0.5
1.3
1.2
1.7
0.9
1.1
Slovak Republic
3.1
2.9
4.1
2.3
–2.6
5.7
0.4
2.2
2.1
0.9
1.7
2.1
1.4
1.1
1.8
Croatia
0.1
3.3
2.9
3.1
–8.3
12.6
7.3
3.3
3.9
3.1
2.7
2.5
3.9
–0.2
–12.4
Lithuania
2.1
4.7
4.8
4.7
0.0
6.4
2.5
0.4
2.7
2.7
2.9
2.5
3.9
2.1
3.1
Slovenia
0.8
5.2
4.4
3.5
–4.1
8.4
2.7
2.4
1.7
1.1
2.3
2.3
1.0
2.5
0.8
Luxembourg
2.4
1.3
1.6
2.7
–0.5
6.9
–1.1
0.1
0.4
1.2
2.1
2.1
0.1
3.8
0.8
Latvia
0.6
3.4
4.3
0.7
–3.5
6.9
1.8
2.9
–0.4
1.0
2.2
2.4
–0.3
1.9
2.0
Estonia
0.9
5.6
3.7
3.7
–2.9
8.3
–1.2
–2.7
–0.1
0.5
1.5
1.7
–0.4
1.1
1.6
Cyprus 
0.7
5.8
6.3
5.9
–3.2
11.4
7.2
2.8
3.4
2.9
2.8
3.0
3.0
2.9
3.5
Malta
4.7
13.0
7.2
4.1
–3.5
13.4
2.5
10.6
6.8
3.9
3.9
4.0
5.4
4.9
3.8
Japan
0.4
1.7
0.6
–0.4
–4.2
2.7
1.0
1.2
0.1
1.1
0.6
0.5
1.3
0.2
1.1
United Kingdom
1.2
2.7
1.4
1.6
–10.3
8.6
4.8
0.4
1.1
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.4
1.4
Korea
3.5
3.4
3.2
2.3
–0.7
4.6
2.7
1.6
2.0
0.9
1.8
1.9
1.1
2.0
1.1
Canada
1.5
3.0
2.7
1.9
–5.0
6.0
4.2
1.5
1.6
1.2
1.5
1.6
2.3
0.5
2.3
Australia
2.8
2.4
2.8
1.9
–2.0
5.4
4.1
2.1
1.0
1.8
2.1
2.3
1.3
2.0
2.1
Taiwan Province of China
3.3
3.7
2.9
3.1
3.4
6.7
2.7
1.1
4.8
3.7
2.1
2.2
3.3
–1.6
7.4
Singapore
5.1
4.5
3.5
1.3
–3.8
9.8
4.1
1.8
4.4
2.2
1.8
2.5
5.0
0.0
3.1
Switzerland
1.8
1.4
2.9
1.2
–2.3
5.6
3.1
0.7
1.4
0.9
1.3
1.8
1.7
0.1
2.2
Sweden
1.6
1.9
1.8
2.6
–1.9
5.2
1.3
–0.2
0.8
0.7
1.9
1.7
1.9
0.3
3.3
Czech Republic
1.6
5.2
2.8
3.6
–5.3
4.0
2.8
0.0
1.2
2.3
2.0
2.0
1.9
1.9
2.3
Norway
1.2
2.5
0.8
1.1
–1.3
3.9
3.2
0.1
2.1
1.2
1.6
1.3
–0.2
4.9
–0.7
Hong Kong SAR
3.0
3.8
2.8
–1.7
–6.5
6.5
–3.7
3.2
2.5
2.4
2.1
2.3
2.5
1.5
3.8
Israel
3.9
4.3
4.1
3.6
–1.8
9.3
6.4
2.1
1.0
2.5
3.9
3.4
5.8
3.2
3.1
Denmark
0.6
3.1
1.9
1.7
–1.8
6.5
0.4
0.6
3.5
1.8
2.2
1.5
4.2
1.2
1.8
New Zealand
2.2
3.3
3.5
3.0
–1.3
5.7
2.9
1.8
–0.6
0.8
2.2
2.2
–1.3
1.6
3.0
Puerto Rico
–1.0
–2.9
–4.4
1.7
–4.2
0.4
3.0
0.5
3.2
–0.8
–0.1
0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
5.4
9.9
6.4
–2.6
–54.3
23.5
–19.6
75.1
8.8
2.6
2.8
3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iceland
1.7
3.5
4.7
1.1
–6.6
5.2
8.8
5.2
–1.0
1.4
2.3
2.4
–1.8
3.6
2.4
Liechtenstein
0.5
6.4
3.5
–2.2
–5.3
18.7
–5.5
4.8
1.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Andorra
–1.3
0.3
1.6
2.0
–11.2
8.3
9.6
2.6
3.4
2.4
1.6
1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
San Marino
–2.3
0.3
1.5
2.0
–6.8
14.5
7.8
0.4
0.7
1.0
1.3
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.1
2.4
2.1
1.7
–4.2
5.9
2.7
1.8
1.7
1.4
1.6
1.4
1.7
1.3
1.5
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.2
2.6
2.3
2.1
–3.9
6.0
3.4
1.1
1.9
1.9
1.5
1.5
2.5
1.1
2.0
United States
1.4
2.6
3.1
2.6
–1.8
7.2
2.8
2.4
3.1
2.3
1.8
1.7
2.8
1.8
1.9
Euro Area
0.4
2.4
1.9
2.3
–5.7
5.2
3.9
0.0
0.5
1.7
1.3
1.1
1.4
0.9
2.2
Germany
1.2
2.8
2.0
1.5
–3.3
3.3
3.1
–0.9
0.2
1.5
1.3
0.9
2.4
0.5
1.3
France
1.0
2.3
1.4
2.0
–6.3
6.0
2.8
0.7
–0.1
1.3
0.7
1.1
0.5
1.1
1.0
Italy
–0.8
1.6
1.0
–0.2
–8.3
9.2
5.5
0.2
0.4
0.7
0.9
0.6
1.7
0.2
1.4
Spain
–0.5
3.1
3.2
1.6
–9.0
7.0
4.1
1.6
3.4
3.2
2.1
1.6
4.1
2.4
2.0
Japan
0.4
1.1
0.6
0.0
–3.3
1.7
1.5
0.3
0.1
1.3
0.8
0.5
1.0
0.8
1.3
United Kingdom
1.5
2.2
0.9
1.9
–11.5
9.1
5.1
0.0
2.4
1.7
1.3
1.4
4.4
0.1
1.8
Canada
1.8
4.1
2.7
1.1
–6.1
7.0
5.1
0.0
1.6
1.9
1.6
1.6
2.2
1.5
2.4
Other Advanced Economies3
2.6
3.6
2.7
1.7
–2.4
6.1
3.7
0.7
2.0
1.4
1.8
2.1
3.4
0.4
2.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.1
2.4
2.2
1.8
–3.8
6.3
3.2
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.4
1.3
2.4
1.3
1.7
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.
1 In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2 From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
126
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2007–16
2017–26
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.7
2.3
2.1
1.6
–5.4
6.0
4.2
1.7
1.9
1.8
1.6
United States
1.7
2.6
2.6
2.7
2.1
–2.5
8.8
3.0
2.6
2.9
2.5
1.8
Euro Area
0.5
1.0
1.8
1.4
1.4
–7.8
4.6
5.3
0.4
1.2
1.2
1.2
Germany
0.9
0.8
1.5
1.4
1.7
–6.8
2.0
6.5
–0.7
0.5
1.1
1.1
France
1.1
0.9
1.6
1.0
1.7
–6.5
5.3
3.3
0.8
1.0
0.3
0.7
Italy
–0.3
0.3
1.2
0.5
0.0
–10.6
5.8
5.3
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
Spain
–0.2
1.5
3.1
1.7
1.1
–12.1
7.1
4.9
1.8
3.1
3.1
2.2
Japan
0.4
0.1
1.1
0.2
–0.6
–4.4
0.7
2.1
0.8
–0.1
1.0
0.8
United Kingdom
1.5
0.8
1.8
2.0
1.1
–13.1
7.2
7.4
0.5
0.6
1.0
1.3
Canada
2.5
2.2
3.7
2.6
1.6
–6.3
5.8
5.5
1.9
2.4
2.5
2.6
Other Advanced Economies1
2.6
1.9
3.0
2.9
2.0
–5.3
4.5
4.5
2.5
1.7
1.8
1.9
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.2
1.7
2.1
1.9
1.5
–5.0
6.3
3.9
1.6
1.8
1.8
1.5
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
1.2
1.9
0.8
1.6
3.0
2.2
3.4
0.6
1.9
2.7
1.6
1.3
United States
0.4
1.6
–0.1
1.4
3.9
3.0
0.5
–1.3
3.0
3.3
0.9
1.1
Euro Area
1.2
1.8
1.2
1.0
1.9
1.2
4.3
1.3
1.5
2.3
1.6
1.4
Germany
2.3
2.1
1.6
1.0
2.9
4.9
3.1
0.6
–0.2
2.6
2.1
2.5
France
1.5
1.3
1.7
0.8
1.1
–4.4
6.6
2.7
1.5
1.4
1.2
0.9
Italy
–0.4
0.5
0.3
0.0
–0.4
0.3
2.3
0.8
0.6
1.1
0.1
–0.3
Spain
1.1
2.4
1.0
2.1
2.2
3.5
3.6
0.8
4.5
2.9
1.6
1.7
Japan
1.5
1.2
0.1
1.0
1.9
2.4
3.4
1.4
–0.3
0.9
0.3
1.2
United Kingdom
1.1
2.2
0.6
0.6
4.0
–6.8
14.3
0.6
1.6
3.0
3.6
1.4
Canada
1.6
2.6
2.1
3.1
1.1
1.3
5.6
3.2
2.2
3.7
4.0
0.1
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
3.1
2.4
3.5
3.8
4.6
4.6
2.8
1.6
3.2
2.5
1.8
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.9
1.6
0.4
1.2
2.9
1.6
3.0
0.0
1.8
2.6
1.3
1.2
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
0.8
2.3
4.0
3.3
3.2
–3.0
6.1
2.0
2.2
1.1
2.2
2.1
United States
1.2
3.2
4.3
5.0
2.9
–0.8
5.6
1.9
3.8
3.5
3.1
2.8
Euro Area
–0.3
1.7
3.9
3.2
7.1
–5.7
3.8
1.9
1.7
–2.0
1.9
1.7
Germany
1.5
0.0
2.6
3.6
2.0
–3.0
0.8
–0.1
–2.0
–3.3
–1.1
1.0
France
0.2
1.4
4.1
3.4
4.2
–6.2
9.6
–0.2
0.8
–1.3
–0.5
0.3
Italy
–2.8
4.2
3.3
3.3
1.6
–7.1
21.5
7.4
9.0
0.5
2.5
2.8
Spain
–3.1
3.2
6.8
6.5
4.9
–8.9
2.6
4.2
5.9
3.6
5.0
2.1
Japan
–0.3
0.2
1.6
0.6
0.5
–3.7
0.5
–0.4
0.9
0.0
1.5
0.5
United Kingdom
1.6
1.3
3.5
–0.5
2.1
–9.7
7.6
5.1
0.3
1.5
1.4
2.3
Canada
0.6
1.4
3.3
2.4
0.8
–3.8
8.8
–1.2
–1.6
0.1
2.7
3.2
Other Advanced Economies1
2.5
2.1
4.8
2.2
0.9
–1.0
9.2
2.5
0.1
1.0
0.4
1.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.7
2.2
3.6
3.5
2.4
–3.0
6.1
1.7
2.4
1.5
2.0
2.2
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
127
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2007–16
2017–26
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.2
1.9
2.4
2.2
2.3
–3.5
5.6
3.0
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.7
United States
1.4
2.6
2.6
3.0
2.5
–1.4
6.9
2.2
2.9
3.1
2.4
2.0
Euro Area
0.5
1.3
2.1
1.7
2.7
–5.3
4.3
3.6
1.0
0.7
1.4
1.3
Germany
1.3
0.9
1.8
1.8
2.0
–3.4
2.0
3.6
–0.9
0.2
0.9
1.4
France
1.0
1.1
2.2
1.5
2.1
–5.9
6.6
2.3
1.0
0.6
0.4
0.7
Italy
–0.8
1.1
1.4
0.9
0.2
–7.8
8.0
4.8
2.3
0.6
0.9
0.9
Spain
–0.6
2.0
3.4
2.7
2.1
–8.4
5.4
3.9
3.2
3.1
3.2
2.1
Japan
0.4
0.4
1.0
0.5
0.2
–2.9
1.3
1.3
0.6
0.2
1.1
1.0
United Kingdom
1.4
1.2
1.9
1.3
1.8
–11.3
8.7
5.5
0.7
1.3
1.6
1.5
Canada
1.9
2.0
3.3
2.7
1.3
–4.1
6.4
3.3
1.1
2.1
2.3
1.6
Other Advanced Economies1
2.6
2.1
3.4
2.4
1.9
–2.3
5.7
3.6
1.5
1.8
1.5
1.8
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.1
1.8
2.2
2.2
1.9
–3.4
5.8
2.7
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.6
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.3
0.5
0.5
–0.7
0.0
0.0
–0.1
United States
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.3
0.6
–0.4
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
Euro Area
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.2
–0.4
–0.3
0.8
0.4
–0.9
–0.2
0.3
0.0
Germany
–0.1
0.2
1.0
0.1
–0.5
0.1
1.2
–0.4
0.0
0.0
0.6
–0.1
France
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.4
–0.6
0.5
–0.2
–0.7
1.0
0.0
Italy
0.0
–0.1
0.2
0.1
–0.4
–0.5
1.1
0.7
–2.0
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
Spain
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.4
–0.4
–0.6
1.7
0.3
–1.8
0.7
0.1
0.1
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
–0.1
–0.5
0.5
0.2
–0.3
–0.1
0.3
0.0
United Kingdom
0.0
0.0
0.4
–0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.8
–0.9
0.2
–0.1
0.0
Canada
–0.1
0.1
0.9
0.0
–0.2
–0.7
1.1
1.8
–1.2
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.2
–0.1
–0.1
0.4
0.3
–0.7
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.4
0.5
–0.5
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
0.2
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.4
0.6
0.0
–0.2
0.1
United States
0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
–1.3
–0.4
0.5
–0.4
–0.4
0.3
Euro Area
0.3
0.1
0.4
–0.1
–0.6
–0.6
1.4
–0.1
0.4
0.4
–0.4
–0.1
Germany
0.2
–0.4
0.2
–0.6
–0.4
–1.1
0.8
–1.1
–0.1
–0.7
–1.3
–0.3
France
–0.2
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
–1.3
0.7
–0.1
0.9
1.2
–0.7
0.2
Italy
0.2
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.7
–0.9
0.0
–0.5
0.5
0.3
–0.1
–0.1
Spain
1.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.7
0.3
–2.2
–0.3
2.5
1.1
0.3
–0.2
–0.1
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.6
0.0
–0.5
–0.9
1.1
–0.5
0.8
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
United Kingdom
–0.3
0.0
1.0
–0.1
–0.3
1.8
–0.9
–0.3
0.3
–1.3
–0.4
–0.1
Canada
–0.4
–0.2
–1.1
0.0
0.8
0.3
–1.7
–1.0
1.6
–0.1
–0.8
–0.1
Other Advanced Economies1
0.4
0.3
–0.1
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
–0.7
1.1
0.6
0.5
0.4
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.4
–0.5
–0.5
0.5
–0.3
–0.5
0.1
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2 Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
128
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.6
6.6
6.4
5.4
–0.5
7.8
4.7
6.1
5.3
5.2
4.7
4.5
Bangladesh
6.2
6.6
7.3
7.9
3.4
6.9
7.1
5.8
4.2
3.8
4.9
6.5
Bhutan
7.4
5.9
3.5
4.6
–2.5
–3.3
4.8
5.0
4.2
6.8
7.4
6.5
Brunei Darussalam
–1.0
1.3
0.1
3.9
1.1
–1.6
–1.6
1.1
4.1
1.8
2.4
2.9
Cambodia
7.3
8.1
8.8
7.9
–3.6
3.1
5.1
5.0
6.0
4.8
4.0
5.5
China
9.0
6.9
6.8
6.1
2.3
8.6
3.1
5.4
5.0
4.8
4.2
3.4
Fiji
2.3
5.4
3.8
7.6
–17.2
–4.4
17.7
9.4
3.5
3.2
3.1
3.2
India1
6.8
6.8
6.5
3.9
–5.8
9.7
7.6
9.2
6.5
6.6
6.2
6.5
Indonesia
5.8
5.1
5.2
5.0
–2.1
3.7
5.3
5.0
5.0
4.9
4.9
5.1
Kiribati
3.7
3.7
3.5
3.3
–1.5
8.5
4.6
2.7
5.3
3.9
3.2
2.1
Lao P.D.R.
7.7
6.9
6.2
4.7
–0.4
2.1
2.3
3.7
4.3
3.5
2.5
2.5
Malaysia
4.8
5.8
4.8
4.4
–5.5
3.3
9.0
3.5
5.1
4.5
4.0
4.0
Maldives
5.0
7.1
8.7
7.3
–32.9
37.5
13.8
4.9
3.3
4.8
4.5
4.0
Marshall Islands
1.0
3.6
5.5
10.5
–2.8
1.2
–1.1
–4.0
3.0
2.5
4.1
1.6
Micronesia
0.0
2.3
0.5
3.4
–2.0
3.1
–2.9
0.5
0.7
1.0
1.4
0.7
Mongolia
7.4
5.6
7.7
5.6
–4.6
1.6
5.0
7.4
5.1
5.5
5.5
5.0
Myanmar
7.0
6.1
6.3
6.6
–9.0
–12.0
4.0
1.0
–1.1
–2.7
3.0
1.8
Nauru
5.0
–6.0
–1.2
8.5
2.0
7.2
3.0
0.6
1.6
2.1
1.9
1.8
Nepal
4.1
9.0
7.6
6.7
–2.4
4.8
5.6
2.0
3.7
4.3
5.2
5.0
Palau
0.5
–3.4
–0.4
0.3
–6.0
–11.9
–0.5
1.2
12.0
4.5
3.3
2.2
Papua New Guinea
5.9
3.5
–0.3
4.5
–3.2
–0.5
5.7
3.8
3.8
4.7
3.5
3.1
Philippines
5.7
6.9
6.3
6.1
–9.5
5.7
7.6
5.5
5.7
5.4
5.7
6.0
Samoa
1.8
1.4
–0.6
4.5
–3.1
–5.1
2.3
15.2
4.6
2.7
3.2
2.0
Solomon Islands
4.3
3.1
2.7
1.7
–3.4
2.6
2.4
2.7
2.5
2.7
2.8
3.0
Sri Lanka1
6.1
6.5
2.3
–0.2
–4.6
4.2
–7.3
–2.3
5.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Thailand
3.2
4.2
4.2
2.1
–6.1
1.5
2.6
2.0
2.5
2.0
1.6
2.5
Timor-Leste1
6.5
–3.2
–0.5
2.7
–8.5
3.0
4.0
2.4
4.1
3.9
3.3
3.2
Tonga
1.5
3.2
0.7
–0.2
1.8
0.4
–2.3
2.1
2.1
2.7
2.3
1.2
Tuvalu
2.9
3.3
1.7
13.4
–3.3
0.1
–11.8
4.0
3.1
3.0
2.6
1.8
Vanuatu
2.7
4.4
2.9
3.2
–5.0
–1.6
5.2
2.1
0.9
1.7
2.8
2.3
Vietnam
6.2
6.9
7.5
7.4
2.9
2.6
8.5
5.1
7.1
6.5
5.6
5.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.6
4.3
3.8
2.6
–1.8
7.2
0.5
3.6
3.5
1.8
2.2
2.4
Albania
3.3
3.3
3.7
2.1
–3.3
9.0
4.8
4.0
4.0
3.4
3.6
3.5
Belarus
3.0
2.5
3.1
1.4
–0.7
2.3
–4.5
4.1
4.0
2.1
1.4
0.8
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2.0
3.2
3.8
2.9
–3.0
7.4
4.2
2.0
3.0
2.4
2.7
3.0
Bulgaria
2.0
2.7
2.5
3.8
–3.2
7.8
4.0
1.9
2.8
3.0
3.1
2.6
Hungary
0.8
4.1
5.6
5.1
–4.3
7.2
4.3
–0.8
0.5
0.6
2.1
2.5
Kosovo
4.8
4.8
3.4
4.8
–5.3
10.7
4.3
4.1
4.6
3.9
4.0
3.9
Moldova
3.4
4.2
4.1
3.6
–8.3
13.9
–4.6
1.2
0.1
1.7
2.2
3.5
Montenegro
2.3
3.2
4.7
4.4
–15.0
13.0
7.7
6.5
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.0
North Macedonia
3.0
1.1
2.9
3.9
–4.7
4.5
2.8
2.1
2.8
3.4
3.2
3.0
Poland
3.6
5.2
6.2
4.6
–2.0
6.9
5.3
0.2
2.9
3.2
3.1
2.6
Romania
2.3
8.2
6.1
3.9
–3.7
5.5
4.0
2.4
0.8
1.0
1.4
3.3
Russia 
1.8
1.8
2.8
2.2
–2.7
5.9
–1.4
4.1
4.3
0.6
1.0
1.1
Serbia
1.4
2.4
4.6
4.8
–1.0
7.9
2.6
3.8
3.9
2.4
3.6
4.0
Türkiye
4.7
7.8
3.5
1.3
1.8
11.8
5.4
5.0
3.3
3.5
3.7
3.8
Ukraine1
–1.1
2.4
3.5
3.2
–3.8
3.4
–28.8
5.5
2.9
2.0
4.5
4.1
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.4
1.4
1.1
0.2
–6.9
7.4
4.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.6
Antigua and Barbuda
–0.4
2.7
6.7
3.2
–18.9
8.2
9.1
2.4
3.7
2.5
2.5
2.5
Argentina
2.2
2.8
–2.6
–2.0
–9.9
10.4
6.0
–1.9
–1.3
4.5
4.0
3.2
Aruba
0.4
3.5
3.2
1.2
–24.0
14.7
5.1
7.7
6.8
2.0
2.2
1.3
The Bahamas
0.0
3.4
2.4
–0.8
–20.1
17.6
10.9
3.0
3.4
2.2
2.1
1.5
Barbados
–0.5
0.1
–1.2
0.7
–15.1
–0.3
17.8
4.1
4.0
2.7
2.1
2.0
Belize
1.7
–1.8
0.8
4.3
–13.5
18.0
9.3
0.5
3.5
1.5
2.4
2.0
Bolivia1
5.0
4.2
4.2
2.2
–8.7
6.1
3.6
3.1
0.7
0.6
. . .
. . .
Brazil
2.1
1.3
1.8
1.2
–3.3
4.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
2.4
1.9
2.5
Chile
3.5
1.4
4.0
0.6
–6.1
11.3
2.2
0.5
2.6
2.5
2.0
2.2
Colombia
4.1
1.4
2.6
3.2
–7.2
10.8
7.3
0.7
1.6
2.5
2.3
2.8
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
129
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
2.4
1.4
1.1
0.2
–6.9
7.4
4.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.6
Costa Rica
4.0
4.2
2.6
2.4
–4.3
7.9
4.6
5.1
4.3
3.6
3.3
3.5
Dominica
1.5
–6.6
3.5
5.5
–16.6
6.9
5.6
4.7
3.5
4.2
3.3
2.5
Dominican Republic
5.2
3.9
7.1
4.9
–7.9
14.0
5.2
2.2
5.0
3.0
4.5
5.0
Ecuador
3.8
6.0
1.0
0.2
–9.2
9.4
5.9
2.0
–2.0
3.2
2.0
3.0
El Salvador
1.9
2.2
2.4
2.4
–7.9
11.9
2.9
3.5
2.6
2.5
2.5
2.8
Grenada
1.9
4.4
4.4
0.7
–13.8
4.7
7.3
4.5
3.3
3.3
3.4
2.7
Guatemala
3.5
3.1
3.4
4.0
–1.8
8.0
4.2
3.5
3.7
3.8
3.6
3.9
Guyana
3.7
3.7
4.4
5.4
43.5
20.1
63.3
33.8
43.6
10.3
23.0
1.1
Haiti
2.3
2.5
1.7
–1.7
–3.3
–1.8
–1.7
–1.9
–4.2
–3.1
–1.2
1.5
Honduras
3.3
4.8
3.8
2.6
–9.0
12.6
4.1
3.6
3.6
3.8
3.5
3.8
Jamaica
0.2
2.3
2.5
1.8
–8.3
5.7
6.4
2.7
–0.5
2.1
1.5
1.5
Mexico
1.6
1.9
2.0
–0.4
–8.4
6.0
3.7
3.4
1.4
1.0
1.5
2.1
Nicaragua
4.1
4.6
–3.4
–2.9
–2.2
10.5
3.6
4.4
3.6
3.0
2.9
3.4
Panama
7.2
5.6
3.7
3.1
–17.8
16.5
11.0
7.2
2.7
4.0
4.0
4.0
Paraguay
4.7
4.8
3.2
–0.4
–0.8
4.0
0.2
5.0
4.2
4.4
3.7
3.5
Peru
5.5
2.5
4.0
2.2
–10.9
13.4
2.8
–0.4
3.3
2.9
2.7
2.5
St. Kitts and Nevis
2.6
0.2
2.0
2.9
–15.3
0.4
10.3
4.7
2.0
1.7
2.2
2.6
St. Lucia
1.2
3.4
2.9
–0.7
–23.8
11.3
20.6
3.3
4.7
2.4
2.1
1.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
0.9
1.5
3.2
0.7
–4.7
2.2
5.0
5.5
5.2
4.4
2.7
2.7
Suriname
2.0
1.6
4.9
1.2
–16.0
–2.4
2.4
2.5
3.0
2.7
3.7
3.0
Trinidad and Tobago
0.9
–4.9
–0.9
0.5
–8.8
–0.7
0.9
1.5
2.5
1.0
1.2
1.8
Uruguay1
4.4
1.7
0.2
0.9
–7.4
5.8
4.5
0.7
3.1
2.5
2.4
2.2
Venezuela1
–0.9
–15.7
–19.7
–27.7
–30.0
1.0
8.0
4.0
5.3
0.5
–3.0
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
4.1
2.6
2.5
2.1
–2.3
4.7
6.4
2.6
2.6
3.5
3.8
3.7
Afghanistan1
7.7
2.6
1.2
3.9
–2.4
–14.5
–6.2
2.3
1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
3.1
1.5
1.4
0.9
–5.0
3.8
3.6
4.1
3.7
3.4
2.9
2.5
Armenia
2.9
7.5
5.2
7.6
–7.1
5.8
12.6
8.3
5.9
4.8
4.9
4.5
Azerbaijan
5.6
0.2
1.5
2.5
–4.2
5.6
4.7
1.4
4.1
3.0
2.5
2.5
Bahrain
4.3
5.0
2.1
2.1
–5.9
4.4
6.2
3.9
2.6
2.9
3.3
3.2
Djibouti
5.5
5.5
4.8
5.5
1.2
4.4
5.2
7.4
6.5
6.0
6.0
5.5
Egypt
4.3
4.2
5.3
5.5
3.6
3.3
6.7
3.8
2.4
4.3
4.5
5.3
Georgia
4.8
5.2
6.1
5.4
–6.3
10.6
11.0
7.8
9.4
7.2
5.3
5.0
Iran
2.5
3.0
–3.7
–2.4
4.4
4.1
4.4
5.3
3.7
0.6
1.1
2.0
Iraq
6.7
–1.5
2.6
5.6
–12.4
1.4
7.7
0.9
–0.2
0.5
3.6
4.1
Jordan
3.9
2.5
1.9
1.8
–1.1
3.7
2.6
2.9
2.5
2.7
2.9
3.0
Kazakhstan
4.5
3.9
4.1
4.5
–2.6
4.1
3.2
5.1
4.8
5.9
4.8
3.4
Kuwait
1.9
–4.7
2.7
2.3
–4.8
1.7
6.8
–1.7
–2.6
2.6
3.9
2.3
Kyrgyz Republic
4.7
4.7
3.5
4.6
–7.1
5.5
9.0
9.0
9.0
8.0
5.3
5.3
Lebanon1
4.8
0.9
–1.9
–6.8
–24.6
2.0
1.0
–0.7
–7.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya
–4.8
32.5
7.9
–11.2
–29.5
28.3
–8.3
10.2
1.9
15.6
4.2
2.2
Mauritania
2.4
6.3
4.8
3.1
–0.4
0.7
6.8
6.8
6.3
4.0
4.3
3.0
Morocco
3.7
5.1
3.1
2.9
–7.2
8.2
1.8
3.7
3.8
4.4
4.2
3.8
Oman
5.0
0.3
1.3
–1.1
–3.4
2.6
8.0
1.2
1.7
2.9
4.0
3.6
Pakistan1
3.5
4.6
6.1
3.1
–0.9
5.8
6.2
–0.2
2.5
2.7
3.6
4.5
Qatar
10.0
–1.5
1.2
0.7
–3.6
1.6
4.2
1.5
2.4
2.9
6.1
3.4
Saudi Arabia
4.3
1.2
3.2
1.7
–3.8
6.5
12.0
0.5
2.0
4.0
4.0
3.3
Somalia
. . .
9.5
1.4
2.8
–2.8
3.5
2.7
4.2
4.1
3.0
3.3
4.1
Sudan1
0.4
0.8
–2.3
–2.5
–3.6
0.5
–2.5
–20.8
–23.4
3.2
9.5
5.5
Syria1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
6.8
7.1
7.6
7.4
4.4
9.4
8.0
8.3
8.4
7.5
5.5
4.5
Tunisia
2.7
2.3
2.6
1.6
–9.0
4.7
2.7
0.2
1.6
2.5
2.1
1.4
Turkmenistan1
10.6
4.4
4.8
5.1
–1.6
9.8
3.3
4.2
3.0
2.3
2.3
2.3
United Arab Emirates
4.2
–1.1
1.5
1.3
–8.7
4.6
7.5
4.3
4.0
4.8
5.0
3.9
Uzbekistan
7.6
4.4
5.6
6.8
1.6
8.0
6.0
6.3
6.5
6.8
6.0
5.7
West Bank and Gaza1
5.8
1.4
1.2
1.4
–11.3
7.0
4.1
–4.6
–26.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Yemen
–3.1
–5.1
0.8
2.1
–8.5
–1.0
1.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.5
0.0
5.0
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
130
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.8
2.8
3.2
3.1
–3.1
3.8
4.4
3.7
4.1
4.1
4.4
4.6
Angola
5.1
–0.1
–0.6
–0.2
–4.0
2.1
4.2
1.3
4.4
2.1
2.1
3.1
Benin
4.2
5.6
6.6
7.1
3.8
7.2
6.3
6.4
7.5
7.0
6.7
6.0
Botswana
2.8
4.1
4.2
3.0
–8.7
11.9
5.5
3.2
–3.0
–0.9
2.3
4.9
Burkina Faso
5.4
6.2
6.6
5.9
2.0
6.9
1.6
3.0
4.8
4.0
4.8
4.7
Burundi
3.0
0.5
1.6
1.8
0.3
3.1
1.8
2.7
3.5
4.4
4.1
4.5
Cabo Verde
3.3
4.6
3.7
6.9
–20.8
7.0
15.8
4.8
7.2
5.2
4.8
4.5
Cameroon 
4.1
3.5
4.0
3.4
0.5
3.0
3.7
3.2
3.5
3.8
4.1
4.6
Central African Republic
–1.3
4.5
3.2
4.1
1.0
–0.3
0.8
–0.1
1.9
3.0
3.3
3.9
Chad
3.7
–2.1
5.2
5.9
0.0
2.0
4.7
5.0
3.5
3.3
3.6
4.1
Comoros
3.0
3.8
3.6
1.8
–0.2
2.0
2.6
3.0
3.3
3.8
4.0
3.8
Democratic Republic of the Congo
6.4
3.7
4.8
4.5
1.7
1.7
9.2
8.5
6.5
5.3
5.3
5.4
Republic of Congo
2.9
–5.6
–2.3
1.1
–6.3
1.1
1.8
2.0
2.1
2.7
2.8
3.6
Côte d’Ivoire
4.9
7.4
4.8
6.7
0.7
7.1
6.4
6.5
6.0
6.4
6.4
6.8
Equatorial Guinea
1.4
–5.7
–6.2
–5.5
–4.8
0.9
3.2
–5.1
0.9
–1.6
0.5
2.1
Eritrea1
2.7
–10.0
13.0
3.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eswatini
3.0
1.5
0.3
6.1
–2.9
3.4
1.1
3.4
2.8
4.3
4.6
2.8
Ethiopia
10.2
10.2
7.7
9.0
6.1
6.3
6.4
7.2
8.1
7.2
7.1
7.5
Gabon
3.7
0.5
0.9
3.8
–1.8
1.5
3.0
2.4
3.4
1.9
2.6
2.8
The Gambia
2.6
4.8
7.2
6.2
0.6
5.3
5.5
5.0
5.3
6.0
5.1
5.0
Ghana
6.4
8.1
6.2
6.5
0.5
5.1
3.8
3.1
5.7
4.0
4.8
5.0
Guinea
4.7
10.3
6.4
5.6
4.7
5.6
4.0
6.2
6.1
7.2
10.5
7.8
Guinea-Bissau
3.7
4.8
3.8
4.5
1.5
6.2
4.6
5.2
4.8
5.1
5.0
4.2
Kenya
4.6
3.8
5.7
5.1
–0.3
7.6
4.9
5.7
4.7
4.8
4.9
5.0
Lesotho
3.2
–2.7
–1.5
–2.9
–5.3
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
1.4
1.1
1.5
Liberia
5.4
2.5
1.2
–2.5
–3.0
5.0
4.8
4.6
4.0
4.6
5.4
5.5
Madagascar
2.6
3.9
3.2
4.4
–7.1
4.7
4.2
4.2
4.2
3.8
4.3
5.0
Malawi
5.5
4.0
4.4
5.4
1.0
4.6
0.9
1.9
1.8
2.4
2.7
3.4
Mali
4.2
5.3
4.7
4.8
–1.2
3.1
3.5
4.7
4.7
5.0
5.4
5.1
Mauritius
4.1
3.9
4.0
2.9
–14.5
3.4
8.7
5.0
4.9
3.2
3.4
3.4
Mozambique
6.9
2.6
3.5
2.3
–1.2
2.4
4.4
5.5
2.1
2.5
3.5
11.3
Namibia
3.9
–1.0
1.1
–0.8
–8.1
3.6
5.4
4.4
3.7
3.6
3.8
3.0
Niger
5.6
5.0
7.0
6.1
3.5
1.4
11.9
2.4
10.3
6.6
6.7
6.0
Nigeria1
5.6
0.8
1.9
2.2
–6.4
1.1
4.3
3.3
4.1
3.9
4.2
4.0
Rwanda
7.5
3.9
8.5
9.4
–3.4
10.9
8.2
8.3
8.9
7.1
7.5
7.0
São Tomé and Príncipe
3.8
4.1
4.4
2.0
2.6
1.9
0.2
0.4
1.1
2.9
4.7
3.5
Senegal
3.9
7.4
6.2
4.6
1.3
6.5
4.0
4.3
6.4
6.0
3.0
4.6
Seychelles
5.4
7.0
4.9
5.5
–11.7
0.6
12.7
2.3
2.9
3.9
3.2
3.5
Sierra Leone
4.2
3.9
3.4
5.5
–1.3
5.9
5.3
5.7
4.4
4.4
4.9
4.6
South Africa
2.1
1.2
1.6
0.3
–6.2
4.9
2.1
0.8
0.5
1.1
1.2
1.8
South Sudan
. . .
–5.8
–2.1
0.9
–6.5
5.3
–5.2
3.0
–26.1
24.3
22.4
3.8
Tanzania
6.5
6.7
7.0
6.9
4.5
4.8
4.7
5.1
5.5
6.0
6.3
6.2
Togo
5.1
4.0
4.8
4.9
2.0
6.0
5.8
5.6
5.3
5.2
5.5
5.5
Uganda
6.1
6.8
5.6
7.6
–1.1
5.5
6.2
4.9
6.3
6.4
7.6
6.1
Zambia
6.5
3.5
4.1
1.4
–2.8
6.2
5.2
5.4
4.0
5.8
6.4
4.8
Zimbabwe1
4.1
5.2
5.0
–6.3
–7.8
8.5
6.1
5.3
1.7
6.0
4.6
3.5
1 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Bolivia, Eritrea, India, Lebanon, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Timor-Leste, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela, West Bank 
and Gaza, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.  
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
131
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)
Average
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.4
1.7
1.5
1.6
3.3
5.8
4.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.0
United States
1.6
1.8
2.3
1.7
1.3
4.6
7.1
3.7
2.5
2.4
1.8
1.9
Euro Area
1.3
1.1
1.5
1.7
1.8
2.1
5.2
6.0
3.0
2.2
2.0
2.1
Japan
–0.3
–0.1
0.0
0.6
0.9
–0.2
0.4
4.1
2.9
2.8
2.0
2.0
Other Advanced Economies1
1.7
1.9
1.7
1.3
2.0
3.9
6.2
2.8
3.4
2.2
1.9
2.1
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.3
4.6
2.6
2.5
2.2
2.1
United States
1.8
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.3
4.7
8.0
4.1
3.0
2.7
2.4
2.2
Euro Area2
1.5
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.4
5.4
2.4
2.1
1.9
2.0
Japan
0.3
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.5
3.3
2.7
3.3
2.1
2.0
Other Advanced Economies1
2.0
1.8
1.9
1.4
0.6
2.6
6.6
4.9
2.4
2.3
2.1
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies3
5.9
4.5
4.9
5.2
5.3
5.9
9.7
8.2
7.9
5.3
4.7
3.9
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.5
2.4
2.7
3.3
3.2
2.3
3.9
2.4
1.9
1.3
2.1
2.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
7.8
5.6
6.3
6.5
5.2
9.1
25.4
17.3
16.9
13.5
9.3
6.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.9
6.3
6.7
7.6
6.5
9.9
14.2
14.8
16.6
7.6
5.0
3.6
Middle East and Central Asia
8.2
6.9
9.6
7.4
10.5
11.9
13.3
15.4
14.0
10.9
9.5
6.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.5
11.0
8.7
9.6
12.4
12.4
16.1
19.4
20.3
13.1
10.9
6.6
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
8.2
6.7
8.5
6.8
9.8
11.9
13.6
12.9
12.5
12.2
11.8
7.2
Nonfuel
5.5
4.2
4.5
5.0
4.8
5.2
9.2
7.7
7.4
4.6
3.9
3.5
Of Which, Primary Products4
6.7
7.0
7.8
9.1
15.9
15.6
17.6
17.4
15.9
9.4
6.7
4.9
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
6.8
6.0
6.0
5.9
6.5
7.8
13.2
12.1
10.9
7.5
6.6
4.8
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
10.7
15.1
14.3
12.5
15.1
16.1
21.4
24.8
25.6
15.8
10.1
6.0
Other Groups
European Union
1.6
1.6
1.9
1.4
0.7
2.9
9.3
6.3
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.1
Middle East and North Africa
8.0
6.9
10.6
7.7
11.0
12.8
13.5
14.7
14.2
12.2
10.3
6.4
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
5.6
4.0
4.5
4.8
4.6
5.2
9.1
7.4
7.0
4.7
4.2
3.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
9.1
10.4
10.0
10.2
14.0
15.0
17.0
18.8
19.6
13.8
11.5
6.6
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
1.7
1.5
1.7
1.3
0.3
2.5
8.1
5.2
2.4
2.3
2.1
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
4.6
3.3
3.1
2.6
2.6
4.0
7.9
5.9
3.7
3.7
3.5
3.0
1 Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3 Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4 Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
132
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
2024
2025
2026
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.3
4.6
2.6
2.5
2.2
2.1
2.5
2.4
2.1
United States
1.8
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.3
4.7
8.0
4.1
3.0
2.7
2.4
2.2
2.7
2.6
2.2
Euro Area3
1.5
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.4
5.4
2.4
2.1
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.8
1.9
Germany
1.4
1.7
1.9
1.4
0.4
3.2
8.7
6.0
2.5
2.1
1.8
2.2
2.5
1.7
1.9
France
1.3
1.2
2.1
1.3
0.5
2.1
5.9
5.7
2.3
1.1
1.5
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.1
Italy
1.6
1.3
1.2
0.6
–0.1
1.9
8.7
5.9
1.1
1.7
2.0
2.0
1.4
1.5
2.7
Spain
1.5
2.0
1.7
0.8
–0.3
3.0
8.3
3.4
2.9
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.1
1.9
The Netherlands
1.4
1.3
1.6
2.7
1.1
2.8
11.6
4.1
3.2
2.9
2.4
2.0
4.0
2.5
2.1
Belgium
1.9
2.2
2.3
1.3
0.4
3.2
10.3
2.3
4.3
2.6
1.3
1.9
4.4
0.3
2.1
Ireland
0.6
0.3
0.7
0.9
–0.5
2.4
8.1
5.2
1.3
1.7
1.7
2.0
1.0
1.6
1.7
Austria
1.9
2.2
2.1
1.5
1.4
2.8
8.6
7.7
2.9
3.6
2.3
2.1
2.1
3.6
2.1
Portugal
1.3
1.6
1.2
0.3
–0.1
0.9
8.1
5.3
2.7
2.2
2.1
2.0
3.1
2.1
2.2
Greece
1.4
1.1
0.8
0.5
–1.3
0.6
9.3
4.2
3.0
3.1
2.5
2.0
2.9
2.8
2.3
Finland
1.9
0.8
1.2
1.1
0.4
2.1
7.2
4.3
1.0
1.8
1.9
2.0
1.6
2.0
2.0
Slovak Republic
1.6
1.4
2.5
2.8
2.0
2.8
12.1
11.0
3.2
4.2
3.3
2.0
3.2
3.9
2.7
Croatia
1.9
1.3
1.6
0.8
0.0
2.7
10.7
8.4
4.0
4.4
2.8
2.4
4.5
3.8
2.4
Lithuania
3.0
3.7
2.5
2.2
1.1
4.6
18.9
8.7
0.9
3.6
3.1
2.5
1.9
3.7
2.8
Slovenia
1.8
1.4
1.7
1.6
–0.1
1.9
8.8
7.4
2.0
2.5
2.4
2.1
1.9
2.8
2.2
Luxembourg
1.9
2.1
2.0
1.7
0.0
3.5
8.1
2.9
2.3
2.3
2.2
2.0
1.6
1.2
4.2
Latvia
3.4
2.9
2.6
2.7
0.1
3.2
17.2
9.1
1.3
3.8
2.6
2.2
3.4
3.4
2.5
Estonia
3.4
3.7
3.4
2.3
–0.6
4.5
19.4
9.1
3.7
5.1
4.3
2.3
3.9
5.3
3.7
Cyprus
1.3
0.7
0.8
0.5
–1.1
2.3
8.1
3.9
2.3
0.7
1.3
2.0
3.1
–0.4
2.0
Malta
1.9
1.3
1.7
1.5
0.8
0.7
6.1
5.6
2.4
2.4
2.0
2.0
1.8
2.2
2.1
Japan
0.3
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.5
3.3
2.7
3.3
2.1
2.0
2.9
2.8
2.0
United Kingdom 
2.3
2.7
2.5
1.8
0.9
2.6
9.1
7.3
2.5
3.4
2.5
2.0
2.5
3.4
2.0
Korea
2.3
1.9
1.5
0.4
0.5
2.5
5.1
3.6
2.3
2.0
1.8
2.0
1.9
1.9
1.9
Canada
1.6
1.6
2.3
1.9
0.7
3.4
6.8
3.9
2.4
2.0
2.0
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
Australia
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.6
0.9
2.8
6.7
5.6
3.2
2.6
3.0
2.5
2.4
3.2
2.8
Taiwan Province of China
1.2
0.6
1.4
0.6
–0.2
2.0
2.9
2.5
2.2
1.7
1.6
1.5
2.1
2.0
1.6
Singapore
2.4
0.6
0.4
0.6
–0.2
2.3
6.1
4.8
2.4
0.9
1.3
2.0
1.5
1.1
1.3
Switzerland
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.4
–0.7
0.6
2.8
2.1
1.1
0.1
0.6
0.7
0.6
0.1
0.6
Sweden
1.4
1.9
2.0
1.7
0.7
2.7
8.1
5.9
2.0
2.3
1.6
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.8
Czech Republic
2.0
2.5
2.1
2.8
3.2
3.8
15.1
10.7
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.0
3.0
2.4
2.0
Norway
2.1
1.9
2.8
2.2
1.3
3.5
5.8
5.5
3.1
2.4
2.4
2.0
2.2
2.2
2.0
Hong Kong SAR
3.3
1.5
2.4
2.9
0.3
1.6
1.9
2.1
1.7
1.7
2.1
2.5
0.0
3.8
2.4
Israel
1.7
0.2
0.8
0.8
–0.6
1.5
4.4
4.2
3.1
3.2
2.2
2.1
3.2
2.8
2.4
Denmark
1.5
1.1
0.7
0.7
0.3
1.9
8.5
3.4
1.3
1.9
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.9
New Zealand
1.9
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.7
3.9
7.2
5.7
2.9
2.7
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.8
1.9
Puerto Rico
1.7
1.8
1.3
0.1
–0.5
2.4
6.0
3.5
2.0
1.4
2.2
2.1
1.9
1.9
2.5
Macao SAR
4.8
1.2
3.0
2.8
0.8
0.0
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.5
1.2
2.2
0.2
0.5
1.2
Iceland
5.3
1.8
2.7
3.0
2.8
4.5
8.3
8.7
5.9
4.2
3.1
2.5
4.7
4.3
2.5
Liechtenstein
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.4
–0.7
0.6
2.8
2.1
1.1
0.1
0.6
0.7
1.0
0.1
0.6
Andorra
1.0
2.6
1.0
0.5
0.1
1.7
6.2
5.6
3.1
2.2
1.8
1.7
2.6
2.0
1.7
San Marino
2.0
1.0
1.2
0.5
–0.1
1.6
5.3
5.9
1.2
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.6
2.0
2.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.5
1.8
2.1
1.5
0.8
3.3
7.3
4.7
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.1
2.5
2.4
2.1
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2 Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
133
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
2024
2025
2026
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.5
2.4
2.7
3.3
3.2
2.3
3.9
2.4
1.9
1.3
2.1
2.7
1.6
1.8
2.2
Bangladesh
7.5
5.4
5.8
5.5
5.6
5.6
6.1
9.0
9.7
10.0
8.7
5.5
9.7
8.5
8.4
Bhutan
7.0
4.3
3.6
2.8
3.0
8.2
5.9
4.5
4.3
2.4
3.4
4.0
1.7
3.1
3.7
Brunei Darussalam
0.4
–1.3
1.0
–0.4
1.9
1.7
3.7
0.4
–0.4
0.4
0.6
1.0
–0.5
0.6
0.6
Cambodia
5.3
2.9
2.4
2.0
2.9
2.9
5.3
2.1
0.9
1.6
1.8
3.0
3.0
1.6
1.8
China
2.9
1.6
2.1
2.9
2.5
0.9
2.0
0.2
0.2
0.0
0.7
2.0
0.0
0.5
0.8
Fiji
3.9
3.3
4.1
1.8
–2.6
0.2
4.3
2.3
4.5
0.1
1.1
3.5
1.3
0.5
2.1
India
7.8
3.6
3.4
4.8
6.2
5.5
6.7
5.4
4.6
2.8
4.0
4.0
3.7
3.3
4.4
Indonesia
5.8
3.8
3.3
2.8
2.0
1.6
4.1
3.7
2.3
1.8
2.9
2.5
1.6
2.6
2.6
Kiribati
2.3
0.4
0.6
–1.8
2.6
2.1
5.3
9.3
2.5
7.8
3.5
2.0
2.9
6.5
3.0
Lao P.D.R.
4.3
0.8
2.0
3.3
5.1
3.8
23.0
31.2
23.1
7.8
5.5
9.9
16.9
5.0
6.2
Malaysia
2.4
3.8
1.0
0.7
–1.1
2.5
3.4
2.5
1.8
1.6
2.2
2.0
1.7
2.4
2.0
Maldives
6.0
2.3
1.4
1.3
–1.6
0.2
2.6
2.6
1.4
3.9
2.5
2.0
4.3
3.0
2.0
Marshall Islands
2.7
0.1
0.8
–0.1
–0.7
2.2
2.8
7.4
5.2
5.2
5.9
2.4
5.7
4.7
7.0
Micronesia
3.4
0.1
1.0
2.2
1.0
1.8
5.0
6.2
5.4
4.1
3.4
2.2
3.0
4.1
3.4
Mongolia
10.5
4.3
6.8
7.3
3.7
7.4
15.1
10.4
6.2
8.3
8.1
6.6
8.3
8.2
8.0
Myanmar
9.7
4.0
7.3
9.1
2.2
9.6
28.0
25.5
26.5
31.0
28.0
7.8
28.0
30.0
28.0
Nauru
3.9
4.5
1.1
4.1
0.9
2.0
1.1
4.8
9.3
6.1
4.5
2.5
12.3
4.1
3.6
Nepal
8.9
4.5
4.1
4.6
6.1
3.6
6.4
7.7
5.4
4.1
4.2
5.0
3.6
2.6
5.1
Palau
3.4
1.1
2.4
0.4
0.7
–0.5
13.2
12.4
3.6
1.8
2.9
2.2
2.3
1.7
4.1
Papua New Guinea
5.5
5.4
4.4
3.9
4.9
4.5
5.3
2.3
0.6
4.8
4.6
4.5
0.7
4.5
4.3
Philippines
3.5
2.9
5.3
2.4
2.4
3.9
5.8
6.0
3.2
1.6
2.6
3.2
2.9
1.5
2.8
Samoa
3.4
1.3
3.7
2.2
1.5
–3.0
8.7
12.0
3.6
1.8
3.2
3.0
0.8
1.4
3.1
Solomon Islands
5.6
0.5
3.6
2.2
2.9
0.2
5.4
5.1
4.2
3.4
3.7
3.3
5.6
4.0
3.4
Sri Lanka3
7.6
6.6
4.3
4.3
4.6
6.0
45.2
17.4
1.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
–1.5
. . .
. . .
Thailand
2.0
0.7
1.1
0.7
–0.8
1.2
6.1
1.2
0.4
0.2
0.7
1.8
1.2
0.6
0.8
Timor-Leste
5.3
0.5
2.3
0.9
0.5
3.8
7.0
8.4
2.1
0.9
1.8
2.0
–0.4
1.9
1.7
Tonga
3.3
7.2
6.1
4.1
0.2
0.6
6.5
12.6
8.0
2.9
2.2
3.2
6.4
1.4
3.1
Tuvalu
2.2
4.1
2.2
3.5
1.6
6.7
12.2
7.2
1.2
2.0
2.3
2.5
4.5
2.0
2.3
Vanuatu
2.4
3.1
2.4
2.7
5.3
2.3
6.7
11.2
1.2
1.7
2.2
2.2
–0.7
2.2
2.3
Vietnam
8.7
3.5
3.5
2.8
3.2
1.8
3.2
3.3
3.6
3.4
3.2
3.3
2.9
3.4
3.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
7.8
5.6
6.3
6.5
5.2
9.1
25.4
17.3
16.9
13.5
9.3
6.3
15.4
11.9
7.9
Albania 
2.4
2.0
2.0
1.4
1.6
2.0
6.7
4.8
2.2
2.3
2.8
3.0
2.1
2.7
3.0
Belarus
20.7
6.0
4.9
5.6
5.5
9.5
15.2
5.0
5.7
7.0
7.5
5.2
5.1
8.1
7.1
Bosnia and Herzegovina
1.3
0.8
1.4
0.6
–1.1
2.0
14.0
6.1
1.7
4.0
2.6
2.0
2.9
3.2
2.0
Bulgaria
2.6
1.2
2.6
2.5
1.2
2.8
13.0
8.6
2.6
3.6
3.4
2.4
2.1
4.0
3.0
Hungary
3.4
2.4
2.8
3.4
3.3
5.1
14.6
17.1
3.7
4.5
3.5
3.0
4.6
4.1
3.1
Kosovo
2.6
1.5
1.1
2.7
0.2
3.3
11.6
4.9
1.6
3.5
2.7
2.0
1.1
4.1
2.4
Moldova
7.0
6.5
3.6
4.8
3.8
5.1
28.7
13.4
4.7
7.7
5.5
5.0
7.0
6.2
5.0
Montenegro
2.6
2.4
2.6
0.4
–0.3
2.4
13.0
8.6
3.3
4.1
2.3
2.0
2.1
5.0
2.0
North Macedonia
2.0
1.4
1.5
0.8
1.2
3.2
14.2
9.4
3.5
3.9
3.0
2.0
4.3
3.5
2.4
Poland
2.1
2.0
1.8
2.3
3.4
5.1
14.2
11.5
3.7
3.8
2.8
2.5
4.7
2.8
2.7
Romania
3.6
1.3
4.6
3.8
2.6
5.0
13.8
10.4
5.6
7.3
6.7
2.6
6.1
8.5
3.5
Russia 
9.2
3.7
2.9
4.5
3.4
6.7
13.7
5.9
8.4
9.0
5.2
4.0
9.5
7.6
4.5
Serbia
6.3
3.1
2.0
1.8
1.6
4.1
12.0
12.4
4.7
4.6
4.0
3.0
4.3
4.7
3.4
Türkiye
8.1
11.1
16.3
15.2
12.3
19.6
72.3
53.9
58.5
34.9
24.7
15.0
44.4
31.0
21.0
Ukraine
13.9
14.4
10.9
7.9
2.7
9.4
20.2
12.9
6.5
12.6
7.6
5.0
12.0
9.0
7.0
Latin America and the Caribbean4
4.9
6.3
6.7
7.6
6.5
9.9
14.2
14.8
16.6
7.6
5.0
3.6
12.2
6.5
4.2
Antigua and Barbuda
1.9
2.4
1.2
1.4
1.1
1.6
7.5
5.1
6.2
3.5
2.4
2.0
5.4
3.0
2.0
Argentina3
13.6
25.7
34.3
53.5
42.0
48.4
72.4
133.5
219.9
41.3
16.4
7.5
117.8
28.0
10.0
Aruba
1.6
–1.0
3.6
3.9
–1.3
0.7
5.5
3.4
1.7
0.8
2.1
2.3
0.3
1.9
2.1
The Bahamas
1.8
1.5
2.3
2.5
0.0
2.9
5.6
3.1
0.4
0.5
1.0
2.0
0.0
0.6
1.4
Barbados
3.9
4.4
3.0
1.7
0.6
1.5
4.4
3.2
1.4
2.3
2.5
2.4
0.4
3.3
2.4
Belize
1.3
1.1
0.3
0.2
0.1
3.2
6.3
4.4
3.3
1.4
1.9
1.3
2.6
1.5
1.3
Bolivia3
6.2
2.8
2.3
1.8
0.9
0.7
1.7
2.6
5.1
20.8
. . .
. . .
10.0
26.2
. . .
Brazil
6.1
3.4
3.7
3.7
3.2
8.3
9.3
4.6
4.4
5.2
4.0
2.9
4.8
4.9
3.7
Chile
3.7
2.2
2.3
2.3
3.0
4.5
11.6
7.6
3.9
4.3
3.1
3.0
4.5
3.7
3.0
Colombia
4.3
4.3
3.2
3.5
2.5
3.5
10.2
11.7
6.6
4.9
3.5
3.0
5.2
4.4
3.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
134
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
2024
2025
2026
Latin America and the 
Caribbean (continued)4
4.9
6.3
6.7
7.6
6.5
9.9
14.2
14.8
16.6
7.6
5.0
3.6
12.2
6.5
4.2
Costa Rica
5.6
1.6
2.2
2.1
0.7
1.7
8.3
0.5
–0.4
0.4
2.0
3.0
0.8
0.1
3.0
Dominica
1.5
0.3
1.0
1.5
–0.7
1.6
7.7
4.2
3.1
2.8
2.3
2.2
2.1
3.1
2.3
Dominican Republic
4.7
3.3
3.6
1.8
3.8
8.2
8.8
4.8
3.3
3.7
4.2
4.0
3.3
3.7
4.0
Ecuador
4.1
0.4
–0.2
0.3
–0.3
0.1
3.5
2.2
1.5
1.1
2.8
1.5
0.5
3.6
1.7
El Salvador
2.2
1.0
1.1
0.1
–0.4
3.5
7.2
4.0
0.9
0.3
1.0
1.8
0.3
0.7
1.2
Grenada
2.0
0.9
0.8
0.6
–0.7
1.2
2.6
2.7
1.1
1.2
1.1
2.0
0.8
1.0
1.6
Guatemala
4.8
4.4
3.8
3.7
3.2
4.3
6.9
6.2
2.9
1.7
3.3
4.0
1.7
2.2
4.0
Guyana
3.6
1.9
1.3
2.1
1.2
3.3
6.5
4.5
2.5
3.6
4.4
5.5
2.9
4.3
4.5
Haiti
6.4
10.6
11.4
17.3
22.9
15.9
27.6
44.1
25.8
27.8
26.2
8.0
27.9
29.4
24.1
Honduras
5.7
3.9
4.3
4.4
3.5
4.5
9.1
6.7
4.6
4.6
4.2
4.0
3.9
4.9
4.0
Jamaica
9.0
4.4
3.7
3.9
5.2
5.9
10.3
6.5
5.5
4.2
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.5
5.0
Mexico
3.9
6.0
4.9
3.6
3.4
5.7
7.9
5.5
4.7
3.9
3.3
3.0
4.2
3.7
3.0
Nicaragua
7.5
3.9
4.9
5.4
3.7
4.9
10.5
8.4
4.6
2.0
2.7
2.7
2.8
2.0
2.7
Panama
3.8
0.9
0.8
–0.4
–1.6
1.6
2.9
1.5
0.8
–0.1
2.0
2.0
–0.2
0.7
2.0
Paraguay
5.2
3.6
4.0
2.8
1.8
4.8
9.8
4.6
3.8
3.9
3.7
3.5
3.8
4.0
3.5
Peru
3.2
2.8
1.3
2.1
1.8
4.0
7.9
6.3
2.4
1.7
1.9
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
1.7
0.7
–1.0
–0.3
–1.2
1.2
2.7
3.6
1.0
1.7
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.7
2.1
St. Lucia
1.9
0.1
2.6
0.5
–1.8
2.4
6.4
4.5
–0.5
0.4
1.5
2.0
1.6
1.3
–0.9
St. Vincent and the  
Grenadines
2.3
2.2
2.3
0.9
–0.6
1.6
5.7
4.6
3.6
2.1
2.1
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.0
Suriname
10.9
22.0
6.9
4.4
34.9
59.1
52.4
51.6
16.2
9.0
9.6
5.0
10.1
10.6
8.2
Trinidad and Tobago
7.0
1.9
1.0
1.0
0.6
2.1
5.8
4.6
0.5
1.5
2.2
2.0
0.5
2.2
2.3
Uruguay
8.2
6.2
7.6
7.9
9.8
7.7
9.1
5.9
4.8
4.7
4.5
4.5
5.5
4.0
4.5
Venezuela3
52.7
438.1
65,374.1
19,906.0
2,355.1
1,588.5
186.5
337.5
49.0
269.9
682.1
. . .
47.2
548.6
628.8
Middle East and  
Central Asia
8.2
6.9
9.6
7.4
10.5
11.9
13.3
15.4
14.0
10.9
9.5
6.2
12.0
10.1
8.9
Afghanistan3
6.1
5.0
0.6
2.3
5.6
7.8
10.6
–7.7
–4.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
0.3
. . .
. . .
Algeria
4.9
5.6
4.3
2.0
2.4
7.2
9.3
9.3
4.0
3.5
3.9
3.3
3.0
4.6
3.9
Armenia
4.6
0.9
2.5
1.5
1.5
7.5
8.8
2.0
0.4
3.3
2.8
3.0
1.7
3.2
3.0
Azerbaijan
7.2
12.9
2.3
2.6
2.8
6.7
13.9
8.8
2.2
5.7
4.5
4.0
4.9
5.2
4.0
Bahrain
2.4
1.4
2.1
1.0
–2.3
–0.6
3.6
0.1
0.9
0.3
0.8
2.0
0.5
0.5
0.8
Djibouti
3.6
0.6
0.1
3.3
1.8
1.2
5.2
1.4
2.1
1.5
1.4
1.3
–0.6
1.8
1.6
Egypt
10.8
23.5
20.9
13.9
5.7
4.5
8.5
24.4
33.3
20.4
11.8
5.3
27.5
14.9
11.3
Georgia
4.4
6.0
2.6
4.9
5.2
9.6
11.9
2.5
1.1
3.9
3.4
3.0
1.9
4.4
3.0
Iran
18.4
8.2
26.9
34.8
36.5
40.2
45.8
40.7
32.5
42.4
41.6
25.0
37.1
45.0
35.0
Iraq
4.7
0.2
0.4
–0.2
0.6
6.0
5.0
4.4
2.6
1.5
2.5
3.6
2.7
1.8
2.5
Jordan
3.7
3.3
4.5
0.8
0.3
1.3
4.2
2.1
1.6
2.2
2.6
2.3
1.8
2.2
2.6
Kazakhstan
8.9
7.5
6.0
5.3
6.8
8.0
15.0
14.5
8.7
11.4
11.2
5.9
8.6
12.7
11.4
Kuwait
. . .
1.6
0.6
1.1
2.1
3.4
4.0
3.6
2.9
2.2
2.2
1.7
2.6
2.2
2.2
Kyrgyz Republic
8.8
3.2
1.5
1.1
6.3
11.9
13.9
10.8
5.0
8.0
6.9
5.0
6.3
8.0
6.0
Lebanon3
3.3
4.5
6.1
2.9
84.9
154.8
171.2
221.3
45.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
18.1
. . .
. . .
Libya
8.2
25.8
13.2
–2.2
1.4
2.9
4.5
2.4
2.1
1.8
1.6
1.6
2.3
1.6
1.6
Mauritania
4.3
2.3
3.1
2.3
2.4
3.6
9.6
4.9
2.5
2.5
3.5
4.0
1.5
3.5
3.6
Morocco
1.4
0.8
1.6
0.2
0.7
1.4
6.6
6.1
0.9
1.2
1.8
2.0
0.7
1.2
2.0
Oman
3.5
1.5
0.7
0.5
–0.4
1.7
2.5
1.0
0.6
0.9
1.5
2.0
0.7
0.5
1.5
Pakistan3
9.7
4.8
4.7
6.8
10.7
8.9
12.2
29.2
23.4
4.5
6.0
6.5
12.6
3.2
8.0
Qatar
3.5
0.6
0.1
–0.9
–2.5
2.3
5.0
3.1
1.2
0.1
2.6
2.0
–1.6
0.1
2.6
Saudi Arabia
3.5
–0.8
2.5
–2.1
3.4
3.1
2.5
2.3
1.7
2.1
2.0
2.0
0.3
2.1
2.0
Somalia
. . .
4.0
4.3
4.7
4.1
4.6
6.8
6.2
5.5
3.6
3.5
3.0
5.6
3.7
3.5
Sudan3
21.1
32.4
63.3
51.0
163.3
359.1
138.8
77.2
185.7
87.2
54.6
16.1
151.1
49.0
41.6
Syria3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
8.7
7.3
3.8
7.8
8.6
9.0
6.6
3.7
3.5
3.8
4.5
5.0
3.7
4.0
5.0
Tunisia
4.2
5.3
7.3
6.7
5.6
5.7
8.3
9.3
7.0
5.9
6.1
8.8
6.2
5.4
6.5
Turkmenistan
5.6
8.0
13.3
5.1
6.1
19.5
11.2
–1.6
4.6
3.9
5.0
8.0
3.8
4.0
6.0
United Arab Emirates
2.9
2.0
3.1
–1.9
–2.1
–0.1
4.8
1.6
1.7
1.6
2.0
2.0
1.7
1.6
2.0
Uzbekistan
11.1
13.9
17.5
14.5
12.9
10.8
11.4
10.0
9.6
9.1
7.3
5.0
9.8
8.5
6.5
West Bank and Gaza3
2.8
0.2
–0.2
1.6
–0.7
1.2
3.7
5.9
53.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
88.0
. . .
. . .
Yemen
13.2
30.4
33.6
15.7
21.7
31.5
29.5
0.9
33.9
20.4
18.5
10.0
8.9
31.0
9.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
135
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
2024
2025
2026
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.5
11.0
8.7
9.6
12.4
12.4
16.1
19.4
20.3
13.1
10.9
6.6
14.7
11.2
9.3
Angola
13.1
29.8
19.6
17.1
22.3
25.8
21.4
13.6
28.2
21.6
16.3
9.8
27.5
20.0
13.4
Benin
2.0
1.8
0.8
–0.9
3.0
1.7
1.4
2.7
1.2
2.1
2.0
2.0
–0.4
2.1
2.0
Botswana
6.7
3.3
3.2
2.7
1.9
6.7
12.2
5.1
2.8
3.4
4.7
4.5
1.7
5.0
4.5
Burkina Faso
1.9
1.5
2.0
–3.2
1.9
3.9
13.8
0.9
4.2
1.3
2.4
2.0
4.9
1.3
2.5
Burundi
9.9
15.8
–2.8
–0.8
7.5
8.4
18.9
27.1
20.2
37.3
26.3
13.4
36.4
29.2
25.9
Cabo Verde
2.1
0.8
1.3
1.1
0.6
1.9
7.9
3.7
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.0
1.5
2.0
2.0
Cameroon
2.4
0.6
1.1
2.5
2.5
2.3
6.3
7.4
4.5
3.7
3.3
3.0
5.0
3.6
2.8
Central African Republic
4.9
4.2
1.6
2.8
0.9
4.3
5.6
3.0
1.5
4.6
3.3
3.3
4.2
1.3
3.5
Chad
1.5
–0.9
4.0
–1.0
4.5
–0.8
5.8
2.3
5.1
4.0
3.6
3.0
5.1
1.9
4.7
Comoros
2.8
0.1
1.7
3.7
0.8
0.0
12.4
8.5
5.0
3.3
1.9
2.1
6.0
1.7
3.2
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
11.8
35.7
29.3
4.7
11.4
9.0
9.3
19.9
17.7
8.8
7.1
7.0
11.7
7.9
7.0
Republic of Congo
3.2
0.4
1.2
0.4
1.4
2.0
3.0
4.3
3.1
3.6
3.2
3.0
6.3
3.4
3.2
Côte d’Ivoire
1.7
0.7
0.6
0.8
2.3
4.2
5.2
4.4
3.4
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.1
1.0
1.5
Equatorial Guinea
3.7
0.7
1.3
1.2
4.8
–0.1
4.9
2.4
3.4
2.9
2.9
2.5
3.4
2.9
3.5
Eritrea3
12.0
–13.3
–14.4
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eswatini
7.2
6.2
4.8
2.6
3.9
3.7
4.8
4.9
4.0
3.5
4.0
3.0
3.9
3.5
4.0
Ethiopia
16.1
10.7
13.8
15.8
20.4
26.8
33.9
30.2
21.0
13.0
9.4
9.4
17.0
9.8
8.2
Gabon
2.4
2.7
4.8
2.0
1.7
1.1
4.3
3.6
1.2
1.4
2.5
2.0
0.9
2.0
2.6
The Gambia
5.4
8.0
6.5
7.1
5.9
7.4
11.5
17.0
11.6
7.5
4.9
5.0
10.2
4.8
5.0
Ghana
12.3
12.4
9.8
7.2
9.9
10.0
31.9
39.2
22.9
16.6
9.9
8.0
23.8
12.0
8.0
Guinea
13.4
8.9
9.8
9.5
10.6
12.6
10.5
5.4
4.7
3.1
3.0
3.0
3.1
3.3
3.2
Guinea-Bissau
2.5
–0.2
0.4
0.3
1.5
3.3
7.9
7.2
3.7
2.0
2.0
2.0
5.7
2.0
2.0
Kenya
8.2
8.0
4.7
5.2
5.3
6.1
7.6
7.7
4.5
4.0
5.2
5.0
3.0
4.4
5.3
Lesotho
6.0
4.5
4.7
4.9
5.4
6.5
8.2
6.5
5.2
4.5
4.8
4.8
4.2
4.8
5.1
Liberia
9.3
12.4
23.5
27.0
17.0
7.8
7.6
10.1
8.2
9.8
7.7
5.1
10.7
8.1
7.3
Madagascar
7.8
8.6
8.6
5.6
4.2
5.8
8.2
9.9
7.6
8.4
7.2
6.0
8.6
8.3
7.3
Malawi
15.4
11.5
9.2
9.4
8.6
9.3
20.8
28.8
32.2
28.2
24.1
14.6
28.1
27.7
23.3
Mali
2.2
2.4
1.9
–3.0
0.5
3.8
9.7
2.1
3.2
3.5
2.0
2.0
4.9
3.2
2.0
Mauritius
4.3
3.7
3.2
0.5
2.5
4.0
10.8
7.0
3.6
3.9
3.6
3.5
2.9
4.0
3.5
Mozambique
8.2
15.8
3.2
5.7
0.9
6.6
10.4
7.0
3.2
4.9
5.4
5.5
4.1
5.0
5.5
Namibia
6.3
6.1
4.3
3.7
2.2
3.6
6.1
5.9
4.2
3.7
3.6
3.0
3.4
3.9
3.6
Niger
1.8
0.2
2.8
–2.5
2.9
3.8
4.2
3.7
9.1
4.2
3.2
2.0
4.7
3.6
2.5
Nigeria
10.7
16.5
12.1
11.4
13.2
17.0
18.8
24.7
31.4
23.0
22.0
10.0
15.4
21.0
18.0
Rwanda
6.3
4.8
1.4
2.4
7.7
0.8
13.9
14.0
4.8
7.0
4.7
5.0
6.8
6.3
4.1
São Tomé and Príncipe
13.0
5.7
7.9
7.7
9.8
8.1
18.0
21.2
14.4
9.7
7.0
5.0
11.6
7.8
6.1
Senegal
1.7
1.1
0.5
1.0
2.5
2.2
9.7
5.9
0.8
2.0
2.0
2.0
0.2
2.0
2.0
Seychelles
8.3
2.8
3.7
1.8
1.0
10.0
2.6
–0.9
0.3
0.4
1.1
3.0
1.7
0.8
1.5
Sierra Leone
8.0
18.2
16.0
14.8
13.4
11.9
27.2
47.7
28.4
9.4
10.5
9.0
13.8
9.0
9.0
South Africa
6.3
5.3
4.6
4.1
3.3
4.6
6.9
5.9
4.4
3.4
3.7
3.0
3.0
4.0
3.6
South Sudan
. . .
213.0
83.4
49.3
24.0
30.2
–3.2
39.7
99.8
97.5
15.8
5.2
195.5
27.2
15.1
Tanzania
9.0
5.3
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.7
4.4
3.8
3.1
3.3
3.5
4.0
3.1
3.2
4.1
Togo
2.5
–0.2
0.9
0.7
1.8
4.5
7.6
5.3
2.9
2.4
4.5
2.2
1.2
5.6
3.9
Uganda
8.5
5.6
2.5
2.1
2.8
2.2
7.2
5.4
3.3
3.8
4.3
5.0
3.3
3.8
4.8
Zambia
10.3
6.6
7.5
9.2
15.7
22.0
11.0
10.9
15.0
14.2
9.2
7.0
16.7
11.1
7.9
Zimbabwe
–2.2
0.9
10.6
255.3
557.2
98.5
193.4
667.4
736.1
89.0
18.2
8.0
686.8
30.7
12.7
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2 Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia, Eritrea, Lebanon, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, and West Bank and Gaza in the “Country Notes” section of the 
Statistical Appendix.
4 Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
136
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
Average
Projections
2007–16
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.3
–3.4
–3.4
–3.8
–11.7
–8.9
–3.7
–6.1
–6.2
–5.6
–6.0
–5.9
Output Gap2
–1.2
–0.6
–0.1
0.1
–3.9
–0.6
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.6
–3.1
–3.2
–3.7
–8.7
–8.0
–5.1
–5.9
–5.8
–5.7
–5.8
–5.9
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
–6.8
–4.8
–5.3
–5.8
–14.1
–11.4
–3.7
–7.8
–8.0
–7.4
–7.9
–7.6
Output Gap2
–1.4
–1.3
–0.6
0.1
–3.4
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.1
0.0
0.0
Structural Balance2
–5.8
–4.3
–4.9
–5.7
–10.5
–10.5
–6.0
–7.4
–7.6
–7.7
–7.7
–7.6
Net Debt 
69.6
79.2
80.0
81.7
96.1
95.9
92.0
94.5
97.4
99.6
103.0
116.8
Gross Debt 
94.8
106.4
107.6
108.8
132.5
125.0
119.1
119.8
122.3
125.0
128.7
143.4
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.3
–1.0
–0.5
–0.5
–7.0
–5.1
–3.4
–3.5
–3.1
–3.2
–3.4
–3.7
Output Gap2
–1.2
–0.4
0.1
0.4
–5.3
–1.6
0.8
0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
0.1
Structural Balance2
–2.4
–0.6
–0.3
–0.5
–3.5
–4.0
–3.6
–3.7
–3.1
–3.0
–3.4
–3.8
Net Debt
68.4
72.0
70.2
68.6
78.5
76.7
74.0
73.2
73.9
75.0
76.4
81.0
Gross Debt
84.6
87.5
85.5
83.6
96.5
93.8
89.3
87.1
87.2
87.8
88.9
92.2
Germany 
Net Lending/Borrowing
–0.6
1.3
1.9
1.3
–4.4
–3.2
–1.9
–2.5
–2.7
–2.5
–3.4
–4.0
Output Gap2
0.0
1.0
0.9
0.4
–3.1
–0.8
1.3
–0.2
–1.3
–1.4
–0.9
0.6
Structural Balance2
–0.3
1.1
1.5
1.1
–3.0
–2.8
–1.9
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
–2.9
–4.4
Net Debt
55.7
44.7
42.1
39.8
45.3
46.2
45.9
45.9
47.4
48.7
50.7
60.2
Gross Debt
73.2
64.0
60.8
58.7
68.0
68.0
64.4
62.4
63.5
64.4
66.0
73.6
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.9
–3.4
–2.3
–2.4
–8.9
–6.6
–4.7
–5.4
–5.8
–5.4
–5.8
–6.3
Output Gap2
–1.3
–1.5
–0.8
0.0
–4.5
–2.1
–0.7
–0.4
–0.1
–0.3
–0.3
0.1
Structural Balance2
–4.1
–2.3
–1.6
–1.4
–5.9
–5.1
–4.2
–5.3
–5.8
–5.3
–5.7
–6.4
Net Debt
77.9
89.5
89.4
89.0
101.6
100.5
101.1
101.5
104.9
108.2
111.3
121.1
Gross Debt
87.2
98.7
98.5
98.1
114.9
112.8
111.4
109.6
113.1
116.5
119.6
129.4
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.0
–2.5
–2.2
–1.5
–9.4
–8.9
–8.1
–7.2
–3.4
–3.3
–2.8
–2.5
Output Gap2
–3.4
–2.3
–1.8
–1.8
–11.1
–3.8
0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
Structural Balance2
–1.5
–1.3
–1.3
–0.5
–3.1
–7.8
–8.7
–7.7
–3.5
–3.1
–2.7
–2.3
Net Debt
111.1
120.9
121.6
121.5
141.0
133.7
127.2
124.2
125.1
126.9
128.6
128.3
Gross Debt
122.5
133.7
134.2
133.9
154.4
145.8
138.3
134.6
135.3
136.8
138.3
137.0
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.3
–3.1
–2.5
–3.0
–9.1
–6.1
–4.2
–2.3
–1.5
–1.3
–2.0
–4.4
Output Gap2
–0.1
1.0
1.9
0.7
–3.0
–1.6
–0.9
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.0
Structural Balance2
–6.2
–3.7
–3.0
–3.3
–8.1
–5.4
–4.2
–2.4
–1.6
–1.4
–2.1
–4.4
Net Debt
131.5
148.1
151.1
151.6
162.0
156.0
149.5
136.3
133.9
130.1
128.9
129.9
Gross Debt4
212.7
231.3
232.4
236.4
258.4
253.7
248.2
240.5
236.1
229.6
226.8
222.2
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.1
–2.5
–2.3
–2.5
–13.2
–7.7
–4.6
–6.1
–5.7
–4.3
–3.6
–2.2
Output Gap2
–1.9
–0.3
–0.3
0.0
–3.5
0.5
1.9
–0.1
–0.3
–0.4
–0.4
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.7
–2.1
–2.1
–2.4
–11.1
–7.2
–5.6
–6.3
–5.5
–4.0
–3.3
–2.2
Net Debt
67.3
77.2
76.6
75.8
93.1
91.6
89.8
91.8
93.7
94.6
95.9
96.4
Gross Debt
74.9
86.7
86.3
85.7
105.8
105.1
99.6
100.4
101.2
103.4
104.8
105.4
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.4
–0.1
0.4
0.0
–10.9
–3.1
0.6
0.1
–2.0
–2.2
–2.4
–1.5
Output Gap2
–0.3
0.4
0.6
0.4
–3.4
–1.4
0.8
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–0.9
0.0
Structural Balance2
–1.3
–0.3
0.0
–0.2
–8.2
–2.0
0.0
0.0
–0.8
–1.6
–1.9
–1.4
Net Debt5
24.2
12.7
11.7
8.7
16.3
14.2
13.6
14.4
12.5
13.3
14.1
15.9
Gross Debt
83.2
90.9
90.8
90.2
118.1
112.6
104.2
107.7
111.3
113.9
113.0
107.9
Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the 
relevant individual countries. 
1 Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the 
System of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ 
defined-benefit pension plans.
2 Percent of potential GDP.
3 Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4 Nonconsolidated basis.
5 Includes equity shares.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
137
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2007–16
2017–26
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
3.4
2.8
5.4
4.0
1.1
–8.3
10.8
5.8
1.0
3.5
3.6
2.3
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
0.1
2.5
4.6
5.5
–2.4
–1.6
12.7
6.8
–2.6
0.2
1.0
1.3
In SDRs
0.7
2.6
4.8
3.3
0.0
–2.4
10.2
13.8
–2.3
0.7
–0.7
–0.3
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.0
2.2
4.8
3.4
1.4
–8.7
9.7
6.0
0.9
1.8
2.1
1.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.1
3.8
6.2
4.1
0.7
–6.6
12.7
4.6
1.4
6.5
5.9
3.3
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.5
2.4
4.7
3.8
2.0
–8.2
10.2
7.4
–0.7
2.1
3.1
1.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.5
3.4
7.0
5.2
–0.5
–9.5
12.1
4.0
3.7
5.6
4.3
4.0
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
0.2
0.1
–0.2
–0.4
0.1
0.9
1.1
–1.6
0.4
0.9
0.4
–0.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.1
0.0
1.4
1.3
–1.2
–1.0
1.2
1.2
–0.9
0.0
–1.2
–0.3
Trade in Goods 
World Trade1
Volume
3.1
2.5
5.4
3.7
0.1
–5.5
11.0
3.3
–0.9
2.8
3.4
2.0
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
–0.1
2.5
5.1
5.9
–2.9
–2.2
14.6
8.6
–4.0
–0.5
0.6
1.0
In SDRs
0.4
2.6
5.3
3.8
–0.5
–3.0
12.0
15.7
–3.8
–0.1
–1.1
–0.6
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
0.4
1.6
0.1
2.0
0.4
–3.2
6.7
10.3
–1.7
1.3
0.6
–0.1
Oil
–3.9
4.3
22.5
29.4
–10.4
–32.0
65.8
39.2
–16.4
–1.8
–12.9
–4.5
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
1.4
5.6
6.4
1.3
0.7
6.6
26.7
7.9
–5.7
3.7
7.4
4.1
Food
2.0
2.7
3.8
–1.2
–3.1
1.7
27.0
14.8
–6.8
–3.1
–4.4
2.3
Beverages
3.8
8.5
–3.8
–9.2
–5.7
2.4
22.4
14.1
4.0
64.4
21.0
–7.0
Agricultural Raw Materials
0.2
0.6
5.4
2.0
–5.4
–3.4
15.5
5.7
–15.6
4.3
–1.2
1.9
Metal
–2.6
6.7
22.2
6.6
3.9
3.5
46.7
–5.6
–2.8
–1.9
0.3
3.0
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
1.0
1.7
0.4
–0.1
2.9
–3.9
4.3
17.5
–1.5
1.7
–1.2
–1.8
Oil
–3.4
4.4
22.8
26.7
–8.2
–32.6
62.1
48.2
–16.2
–1.3
–14.4
–6.0
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
2.0
5.8
6.7
–0.8
3.2
5.7
23.9
14.9
–5.4
4.2
5.6
2.4
Food
2.5
2.8
4.1
–3.3
–0.7
0.9
24.1
22.3
–6.5
–2.7
–6.1
0.6
Beverages
4.3
8.7
–3.5
–11.1
–3.4
1.6
19.7
21.6
4.2
65.2
18.9
–8.6
Agricultural Raw Materials
0.8
0.7
5.7
–0.1
–3.1
–4.2
12.9
12.6
–15.4
4.8
–2.9
0.3
Metal
–2.0
6.8
22.5
4.4
6.4
2.6
43.4
0.6
–2.5
–1.4
–1.4
1.4
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
1.7
1.0
–1.9
–2.5
5.9
–5.0
2.9
23.9
–4.2
1.2
–3.7
–3.3
Oil
–2.7
3.7
20.0
23.6
–5.4
–33.3
59.9
56.3
–18.5
–1.8
–16.6
–7.6
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
2.7
5.1
4.3
–3.2
6.2
4.5
22.2
21.2
–8.1
3.7
2.9
0.8
Food
3.2
2.1
1.7
–5.6
2.3
–0.2
22.4
29.0
–9.1
–3.2
–8.5
–1.0
Beverages
5.1
8.0
–5.7
–13.2
–0.5
0.5
18.1
28.2
1.3
64.3
15.9
–10.0
Agricultural Raw Materials
1.5
0.1
3.3
–2.5
–0.2
–5.2
11.3
18.8
–17.7
4.3
–5.4
–1.4
Metal
–1.4
6.1
19.7
1.9
9.6
1.5
41.5
6.0
–5.2
–2.0
–3.9
–0.3
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
138
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2007–16
2017–26
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Trade in Goods (continued)
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
2.6
1.8
4.5
3.0
0.4
–6.5
9.9
3.7
–0.9
0.6
2.2
1.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.9
3.4
6.2
3.9
–0.2
–3.6
12.0
1.7
0.4
6.3
5.7
2.8
Fuel Exporters
2.1
1.3
1.4
–0.5
–3.7
–8.4
2.3
6.1
1.9
2.3
5.6
6.8
Nonfuel Exporters
4.3
3.8
7.0
4.7
0.5
–2.8
13.3
1.0
0.2
7.0
5.8
2.1
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.1
2.1
4.5
3.9
0.4
–6.0
11.5
5.1
–3.2
1.3
3.4
0.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.3
3.0
7.7
4.3
–0.6
–5.4
10.6
1.8
1.5
4.2
2.8
4.0
Fuel Exporters
4.9
2.4
–0.6
–3.2
2.8
–12.1
0.8
11.2
10.7
6.8
5.1
5.1
Nonfuel Exporters
5.3
3.1
9.0
5.4
–1.0
–4.5
11.8
0.8
0.5
3.9
2.5
3.8
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
0.1
2.4
4.5
2.9
–1.2
–2.3
10.4
12.9
–2.5
0.5
0.5
–0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.3
2.7
7.6
4.9
0.0
–3.3
15.3
18.5
–6.4
–0.9
–4.0
–1.6
Fuel Exporters
–1.1
4.6
16.3
15.2
–3.5
–20.4
39.9
36.9
–11.5
1.3
–7.0
–4.3
Nonfuel Exporters
1.7
2.4
6.0
3.0
0.7
–0.2
12.0
15.7
–5.4
–1.2
–3.4
–1.1
Imports
Advanced Economies
–0.1
2.3
4.7
3.4
–1.2
–3.3
9.0
15.2
–2.8
–0.2
–0.4
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.2
3.2
5.4
4.5
1.2
–3.2
15.7
17.2
–4.1
0.2
–1.3
–1.2
Fuel Exporters
1.8
3.5
3.5
2.0
3.3
–0.8
12.2
15.1
–1.6
2.5
1.0
–0.5
Nonfuel Exporters
1.2
3.2
5.7
4.8
0.9
–3.6
16.1
17.5
–4.4
–0.1
–1.6
–1.3
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
0.2
0.1
–0.2
–0.5
0.0
1.1
1.3
–2.0
0.3
0.7
0.9
–0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.0
–0.5
2.1
0.4
–1.2
–0.1
–0.3
1.1
–2.3
–1.1
–2.7
–0.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
0.9
–2.0
–2.0
–3.8
–0.7
5.5
–9.2
–1.4
–1.7
–3.8
–2.6
–0.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.6
1.1
3.2
4.1
0.4
–4.4
7.6
2.8
–4.9
4.5
–1.6
0.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
0.0
1.3
4.5
–0.8
–0.5
2.5
5.3
–3.8
5.6
0.5
–1.2
0.8
Middle East and Central Asia
–2.4
1.0
10.6
11.1
–5.0
–17.9
21.6
15.5
–8.2
–0.7
–6.6
–3.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
0.3
2.1
9.0
3.5
–1.7
2.5
9.0
–1.0
–5.8
3.4
1.7
1.1
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
–2.9
1.0
12.4
13.0
–6.6
–19.8
24.7
19.0
–10.0
–1.2
–7.9
–3.8
Nonfuel
0.6
–0.7
0.3
–1.8
–0.2
3.5
–3.6
–1.5
–1.0
–1.2
–1.8
0.2
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
20,563
28,587
22,877
25,078
24,696
22,310
27,981
31,466
30,940
32,192
33,593 
34,738 
Goods
16,101
21,348
17,324
18,977
18,417
17,058
21,663
24,128
22,950
23,478
24,390 
25,094 
Average Oil Price3
–3.9
4.3
22.5
29.4
–10.4
–32.0
65.8
39.2
–16.4
–1.8
–12.9
–4.5
In US Dollars a Barrel
81.2
68.5
53.0
68.5
61.4
41.8
69.2
96.4
80.6
79.2
68.9
65.8
Export Unit Value of Manufactures4
0.4
1.6
0.1
2.0
0.4
–3.2
6.7
10.3
–1.7
1.3
0.6
–0.1
Note: SDRs = special drawing rights.
1 Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
2 As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 82 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) 
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16 
shares in world commodity imports.
3 Percent change of the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 
4 Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. 
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
139
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Advanced Economies
482.9
409.5
374.2
128.1
448.0
–264.6
–16.5
49.5
–52.5
39.7
92.7
United States
–367.6
–439.0
–442.0
–593.5
–858.6
–993.1
–928.0
–1,185.3
–1,220.8
–1,153.2
–1,282.4
Euro Area
430.4
412.0
324.7
242.2
410.8
–20.3
264.5
430.6
409.3
419.4
454.1
Germany
303.5
341.7
311.8
248.8
301.1
160.2
251.8
263.8
271.7
271.3
254.0
France
–14.1
–19.4
16.3
–54.2
8.2
–39.6
–31.8
2.9
–2.6
–6.0
1.6
Italy
48.1
52.5
63.8
71.7
45.8
–36.3
3.2
26.8
24.7
25.7
59.0
Spain
36.9
26.9
29.9
10.2
11.3
6.1
44.3
54.8
50.2
53.9
42.0
Japan
203.5
177.8
176.3
149.9
196.2
89.9
155.9
193.7
166.9
162.0
177.0
United Kingdom
–93.7
–112.9
–76.7
–79.2
–13.7
–65.7
–118.3
–96.8
–122.3
–125.1
–114.7
Canada
–46.2
–41.0
–34.1
–33.4
–0.4
–6.7
–13.6
–10.3
–32.3
–31.5
–7.2
Other Advanced Economies1
324.5
325.2
330.7
369.9
581.6
567.6
485.3
591.3
606.5
621.8
707.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–9.5
–33.0
22.6
166.5
382.6
696.2
303.8
445.4
477.1
332.5
206.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
164.5
–51.0
93.7
323.6
288.1
337.2
253.8
421.9
602.4
492.0
392.4
Emerging and Developing Europe
–20.9
67.9
53.5
2.9
71.1
128.5
–18.3
–4.4
–71.7
–68.4
–61.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
–98.6
–145.6
–108.6
–9.9
–92.3
–128.2
–78.0
–64.1
–77.9
–83.5
–103.7
Middle East and Central Asia
–23.2
130.4
35.3
–106.0
131.2
403.0
196.6
119.9
59.8
31.9
33.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
–31.2
–34.7
–51.2
–44.1
–15.5
–44.2
–50.4
–27.9
–35.6
–39.6
–54.1
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
54.9
218.8
85.3
–86.1
192.2
506.7
263.2
213.7
133.8
110.4
130.1
Nonfuel
–62.3
–249.7
–60.9
254.5
192.2
191.6
42.9
234.6
346.2
224.9
79.1
Of Which, Primary Products
–29.7
–45.6
–41.3
–3.7
–20.0
–60.7
–38.4
–19.5
–26.3
–28.6
–54.1
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–304.6
–384.5
–297.4
–127.9
–297.6
–449.6
–272.4
–276.9
–354.5
–399.4
–521.8
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
–63.1
–52.0
–51.1
–34.0
–40.4
–41.6
–50.3
–59.5
–85.9
–85.6
–73.1
Memorandum
World
473.4
376.5
396.8
294.7
830.7
431.7
287.3
494.9
424.5
372.2
299.0
European Union
493.2
512.3
460.2
375.7
572.9
135.0
471.0
621.4
604.0
626.3
672.9
Middle East and North Africa
–4.1
147.1
54.3
–87.7
133.5
395.1
217.2
131.3
71.5
56.3
73.0
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
22.0
24.2
86.8
227.5
450.0
803.6
388.7
493.9
513.0
388.9
296.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
–31.5
–57.2
–64.2
–61.0
–67.3
–107.3
–84.9
–48.5
–35.9
–56.4
–90.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
140
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Advanced Economies
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.2
0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.1
United States
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.3
–4.0
–4.0
–3.6
–3.5
Euro Area
3.4
3.0
2.4
1.8
2.8
–0.1
1.7
2.6
2.3
2.2
2.1
Germany
8.1
8.4
7.9
6.3
6.9
3.8
5.5
5.6
5.4
5.1
4.2
France
–0.5
–0.7
0.6
–2.0
0.3
–1.4
–1.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
Italy
2.4
2.5
3.2
3.8
2.1
–1.7
0.1
1.1
1.0
1.0
2.0
Spain
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.8
0.4
2.7
3.2
2.7
2.6
1.8
Japan
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.0
3.9
2.1
3.7
4.8
3.9
3.6
3.5
United Kingdom
–3.5
–3.9
–2.7
–2.9
–0.4
–2.1
–3.5
–2.7
–3.1
–3.0
–2.2
Canada
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–2.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.6
–0.5
–1.4
–1.3
–0.2
Other Advanced Economies1
4.5
4.3
4.4
5.0
6.7
6.5
5.5
6.5
6.3
6.1
5.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.0
–0.1
0.1
0.5
0.9
1.6
0.7
1.0
1.0
0.6
0.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
0.9
–0.3
0.4
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.6
1.8
1.4
0.1
1.6
2.6
–0.4
–0.1
–1.1
–1.0
–0.8
Latin America and the Caribbean
–1.8
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
–1.2
Middle East and Central Asia
–0.6
3.3
0.9
–3.0
3.1
8.0
4.0
2.3
1.1
0.6
0.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
–1.7
–1.8
–2.5
–2.4
–0.7
–2.0
–2.4
–1.5
–1.7
–1.8
–1.8
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
1.5
5.6
2.2
–2.6
5.0
10.6
5.7
4.7
3.0
2.3
2.2
Nonfuel
–0.2
–0.8
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.6
0.8
0.5
0.1
Of Which, Primary Products
–2.1
–3.1
–2.8
–0.3
–1.3
–3.8
–2.3
–1.1
–1.4
–1.4
–2.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–2.2
–2.7
–2.0
–0.9
–1.9
–2.7
–1.5
–1.5
–1.8
–1.9
–1.8
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
–4.7
–3.7
–3.5
–2.3
–2.4
–2.4
–2.9
–3.3
–4.6
–4.3
–2.7
Memorandum
World
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.2
European Union
3.3
3.2
2.9
2.4
3.3
0.8
2.5
3.2
2.9
2.8
2.6
Middle East and North Africa
–0.1
4.5
1.7
–3.1
4.0
9.6
5.4
3.2
1.7
1.3
1.3
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.7
1.2
2.0
0.9
1.1
1.1
0.8
0.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
–1.6
–2.7
–2.9
–2.8
–2.9
–4.2
–3.4
–2.1
–1.4
–2.1
–2.4
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
141
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Advanced Economies
3.3
2.6
2.4
0.9
2.6
–1.4
–0.1
0.2
–0.3
0.2
0.4
United States
–15.4
–17.3
–17.3
–27.3
–33.2
–32.5
–30.0
–36.7
–36.4
–35.2
–36.1
Euro Area
12.3
10.8
8.6
7.0
9.8
–0.5
5.8
9.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
19.0
19.7
18.6
16.1
16.2
8.3
12.9
13.6
13.1
12.7
10.9
France
–1.7
–2.1
1.8
–7.3
0.9
–3.9
–3.0
0.3
–0.2
–0.6
0.1
Italy
8.1
8.1
10.2
13.1
6.7
–4.9
0.4
3.4
3.1
3.1
6.5
Spain
8.0
5.4
6.1
2.6
2.3
1.1
7.2
8.6
7.1
7.1
4.5
Japan
23.2
19.1
19.5
18.9
21.3
9.7
16.9
21.0
17.8
17.0
17.0
United Kingdom
–11.3
–12.4
–8.5
–9.9
–1.5
–6.3
–11.0
–8.7
–10.3
–9.9
–7.7
Canada
–8.9
–7.4
–6.0
–6.8
–0.1
–0.9
–1.9
–1.4
–4.6
–4.3
–0.8
Other Advanced Economies1
8.0
7.4
7.8
9.4
11.7
10.3
9.2
10.7
10.3
10.0
9.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–0.2
–0.5
0.2
2.1
3.5
5.5
2.5
3.6
3.7
2.5
1.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.0
–1.1
2.1
7.4
5.1
5.5
4.3
6.7
9.2
7.3
4.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
–1.6
4.5
3.6
0.2
4.1
6.6
–1.0
–0.2
–3.7
–3.4
–2.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
–8.3
–11.4
–8.6
–0.9
–6.6
–7.7
–4.7
–3.7
–4.3
–4.5
–4.7
Middle East and Central Asia
–2.1
7.7
2.1
–9.1
8.3
18.6
9.4
5.9
2.8
1.4
1.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
–8.4
–8.2
–12.3
–13.1
–3.5
–8.4
–10.2
–5.4
–6.4
–6.7
–7.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
3.9
13.5
5.7
–7.8
12.7
24.2
13.3
10.9
6.7
5.3
5.0
Nonfuel
–0.9
–3.3
–0.8
3.5
2.1
1.9
0.4
2.2
3.1
2.0
0.6
Of Which, Primary Products
–7.9
–11.2
–10.5
–1.0
–4.1
–11.5
–7.5
–3.6
–4.5
–4.6
–7.3
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–9.0
–10.3
–8.0
–3.9
–7.1
–9.0
–5.4
–5.3
–6.5
–7.0
–7.5
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
–17.9
–12.9
–12.7
–9.9
–9.3
–8.5
–10.7
–12.3
–16.5
–15.5
–10.1
Memorandum
World
2.0
1.5
1.6
1.3
2.9
1.3
0.9
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.7
European Union
7.0
6.6
6.0
5.3
6.6
1.4
4.9
6.3
5.8
5.7
5.4
Middle East and North Africa
–0.7
9.9
3.8
–8.5
9.6
20.7
11.8
7.3
3.8
2.8
2.9
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
0.2
0.1
0.9
2.9
4.3
6.7
3.3
4.1
4.1
3.0
1.9
Low-Income Developing Countries
–9.3
–14.9
–15.8
–17.9
–16.3
–21.7
–17.4
–9.4
–6.3
–9.0
–10.9
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
142
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Advanced Economies
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.2
0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.1
United States
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.3
–4.0
–4.0
–3.6
–3.5
Euro Area1
3.4
3.0
2.4
1.8
2.8
–0.1
1.7
2.6
2.3
2.2
2.1
Germany
8.1
8.4
7.9
6.3
6.9
3.8
5.5
5.6
5.4
5.1
4.2
France
–0.5
–0.7
0.6
–2.0
0.3
–1.4
–1.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
Italy
2.4
2.5
3.2
3.8
2.1
–1.7
0.1
1.1
1.0
1.0
2.0
Spain
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.8
0.4
2.7
3.2
2.7
2.6
1.8
The Netherlands
8.1
8.8
6.8
5.7
10.2
6.8
9.4
9.1
9.5
9.3
9.4
Belgium
0.7
–0.9
0.1
0.9
1.8
–1.3
–0.7
–0.9
–0.9
–0.9
–0.2
Ireland
1.1
4.3
–20.7
–7.1
12.2
8.8
7.0
16.2
11.1
11.5
9.6
Austria
1.3
0.8
2.4
3.4
1.7
–0.9
1.3
2.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
Portugal
1.5
0.8
0.8
–0.7
–0.7
–2.0
0.6
2.1
1.8
1.9
1.1
Greece
–2.6
–3.6
–2.2
–7.2
–7.0
–10.7
–6.7
–7.0
–5.8
–5.3
–3.1
Finland
–0.7
–1.6
–0.1
0.4
0.3
–2.4
–0.8
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.3
Slovak Republic
–1.7
–1.6
–3.5
–0.5
–4.8
–9.6
–1.7
–2.8
–2.9
–2.5
–1.0
Croatia
3.4
1.1
2.5
–1.3
0.5
–3.5
0.4
–1.2
–1.6
–2.0
–0.7
Lithuania
1.0
0.4
3.8
7.2
1.4
–6.1
1.1
2.5
2.1
2.1
2.0
Slovenia
6.8
6.5
6.4
7.3
3.5
–0.9
4.8
4.5
2.9
2.9
2.8
Luxembourg
6.4
8.3
8.5
4.9
6.4
6.5
5.5
6.9
12.2
12.4
12.0
Latvia
1.5
–0.4
–0.2
3.0
–4.1
–5.5
–3.8
–1.6
–2.1
–2.3
–2.5
Estonia
1.7
0.6
2.0
–2.5
–3.7
–3.1
–1.2
–1.2
–0.9
–2.2
–1.4
Cyprus
–5.0
–3.9
–5.5
–9.7
–5.5
–6.9
–11.3
–8.4
–8.5
–9.1
–10.0
Malta
18.9
13.3
17.9
16.0
9.4
–0.8
6.3
5.5
5.1
4.4
3.4
Japan
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.0
3.9
2.1
3.7
4.8
3.9
3.6
3.5
United Kingdom
–3.5
–3.9
–2.7
–2.9
–0.4
–2.1
–3.5
–2.7
–3.1
–3.0
–2.2
Korea
4.4
4.2
3.4
4.4
4.4
1.4
1.8
5.3
4.8
3.9
4.7
Canada
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–2.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.6
–0.5
–1.4
–1.3
–0.2
Australia
–2.8
–2.6
0.0
1.7
2.4
0.4
–0.2
–1.9
–1.8
–1.7
–2.0
Taiwan Province of China
14.0
11.6
10.7
14.4
15.0
13.2
14.0
14.1
13.8
13.1
12.8
Singapore
18.6
15.7
15.4
17.5
19.8
18.4
17.7
17.5
17.4
17.3
16.9
Switzerland
5.3
6.1
4.1
0.6
7.7
9.3
5.9
7.7
7.0
7.0
7.5
Sweden
2.2
2.1
5.2
5.6
6.2
4.0
5.8
5.9
5.8
5.7
4.5
Czech Republic
1.5
0.4
0.3
1.8
–2.1
–4.7
–0.1
1.7
0.6
0.4
0.0
Norway
6.3
9.0
3.8
1.1
14.9
29.6
17.4
16.7
16.2
15.9
12.9
Hong Kong SAR
4.6
3.7
5.9
7.0
11.8
10.2
8.5
13.0
12.5
12.2
11.5
Israel
3.2
2.6
2.8
3.7
3.2
2.7
3.1
2.8
2.8
3.0
2.8
Denmark
7.3
6.3
7.4
7.2
8.5
11.2
11.0
12.2
12.2
11.7
11.2
New Zealand
–2.9
–4.2
–2.9
–1.1
–6.0
–9.2
–6.9
–6.1
–4.7
–4.4
–3.4
Puerto Rico
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
30.8
32.9
33.5
14.8
8.7
13.9
31.4
35.8
35.5
34.9
33.2
Iceland
4.9
4.4
7.4
1.9
–2.6
–1.7
–1.0
–2.6
–3.6
–1.1
0.7
Liechtenstein
31.1
24.0
16.1
17.7
17.0
14.3
15.5
14.6
13.2
12.9
11.9
Andorra
. . .
. . .
18.0
15.5
15.0
11.6
14.2
15.0
15.2
15.3
15.4
San Marino
–0.4
–1.9
2.0
2.8
5.4
13.6
22.0
18.3
17.5
17.8
15.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.7
–0.7
–2.0
–1.4
–1.6
–1.8
–1.6
–1.4
Euro Area2
3.6
3.6
3.1
2.4
3.6
1.0
2.5
3.4
3.1
3.0
2.9
Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.
1 Data are corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
2 Data are calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
143
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Emerging and Developing Asia
0.9
–0.3
0.4
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.0
Bangladesh
–0.5
–3.0
–1.3
–1.5
–1.1
–4.0
–2.6
–1.4
0.0
–0.9
–2.0
Bhutan
–22.0
–17.4
–19.2
–14.8
–11.2
–29.5
–37.0
–23.6
–16.8
–18.0
–22.3
Brunei Darussalam
16.4
6.9
6.6
4.3
11.1
19.5
12.9
14.4
16.4
16.6
16.4
Cambodia
–6.4
–8.9
–8.2
–1.0
–29.6
–19.4
1.3
0.5
–2.5
–3.9
–2.6
China
1.5
0.2
0.7
1.6
1.9
2.4
1.4
2.3
3.3
2.8
2.1
Fiji
–6.6
–8.4
–11.8
–12.0
–6.5
–15.3
–6.6
–7.8
–7.5
–7.1
–5.6
India
–1.8
–2.1
–0.9
0.9
–1.2
–2.0
–0.7
–0.6
–1.0
–1.4
–1.9
Indonesia
–1.6
–2.9
–2.7
–0.4
0.3
1.0
–0.1
–0.6
–1.1
–1.2
–1.1
Kiribati
31.6
32.6
40.0
32.2
7.1
–12.0
–1.8
–19.3
–10.5
–8.6
–7.5
Lao P.D.R.
–7.4
–9.1
–7.0
–1.6
2.3
–3.0
2.7
3.3
5.3
2.7
0.1
Malaysia
2.8
2.2
3.5
4.2
3.9
3.2
1.1
1.4
1.5
1.8
2.1
Maldives
–20.7
–27.8
–26.1
–35.1
–8.7
–16.3
–21.2
–17.8
–12.5
–11.2
–8.4
Marshall Islands
–0.9
–2.0
–31.2
14.9
22.7
10.0
16.8
14.0
10.3
4.0
3.4
Micronesia
10.4
21.4
16.1
–5.8
2.3
8.9
3.9
1.1
–0.9
–3.5
–4.6
Mongolia
–10.1
–16.7
–15.2
–5.1
–13.8
–13.4
0.6
–10.4
–14.4
–13.0
–12.5
Myanmar
–5.5
–1.3
–2.5
–0.4
–2.2
–2.9
–1.9
–1.1
–2.3
–3.6
–4.3
Nauru
12.4
7.6
4.6
2.5
3.8
1.9
1.3
6.2
2.7
2.4
2.0
Nepal
–0.3
–7.1
–6.9
–1.0
–7.7
–12.6
–0.9
3.9
6.6
–0.8
–3.5
Palau
–22.9
–18.6
–30.4
–43.8
–43.8
–49.2
–48.9
–22.2
–15.0
–14.2
–14.0
Papua New Guinea
15.9
13.6
14.4
14.4
12.6
14.4
9.1
15.2
10.8
12.7
11.5
Philippines
–0.7
–2.6
–0.8
3.2
–1.5
–4.5
–2.8
–4.0
–3.8
–3.5
–2.8
Samoa
–1.8
0.8
2.8
0.9
–14.6
–10.6
–3.0
4.4
4.5
–1.5
–2.1
Solomon Islands
–4.3
–3.0
–9.5
–1.6
–5.1
–13.7
–10.4
–3.7
–4.6
–7.4
–7.5
Sri Lanka1
–2.4
–3.0
–2.1
–1.4
–3.7
–1.0
2.9
1.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Thailand
9.6
5.6
7.0
4.2
–2.1
–3.5
1.4
2.5
1.7
1.3
2.7
Timor-Leste1
–17.9
–12.3
21.9
23.8
46.8
12.7
–8.5
–28.0
–31.1
–32.3
–33.9
Tonga
–7.1
–7.0
–3.8
–5.7
–6.3
–5.4
–5.9
–3.8
–5.2
–6.4
–6.9
Tuvalu
1.7
59.3
–16.5
16.2
29.8
–0.3
40.0
7.3
15.1
5.7
–4.9
Vanuatu
–8.4
2.8
5.2
–6.4
–11.7
–17.6
–6.6
–15.4
–11.6
–11.6
–5.0
Vietnam
–0.6
1.9
3.8
4.3
–2.2
0.3
6.4
6.6
4.0
2.4
1.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.6
1.8
1.4
0.1
1.6
2.6
–0.4
–0.1
–1.1
–1.0
–0.8
Albania
–7.5
–6.7
–7.5
–8.6
–7.7
–5.8
–1.2
–2.4
–2.4
–2.7
–2.6
Belarus
–1.7
0.0
–1.9
–0.3
3.2
3.4
–1.8
–3.2
–1.8
–3.1
–2.5
Bosnia and Herzegovina
–4.8
–3.2
–2.6
–2.8
–1.8
–4.4
–2.3
–4.0
–3.9
–3.9
–3.9
Bulgaria
3.2
0.7
1.7
0.4
–1.1
–2.7
–0.9
–1.6
–3.8
–3.2
–0.1
Hungary
1.8
0.2
–0.6
–0.9
–4.1
–8.5
0.3
2.2
1.2
0.9
1.7
Kosovo
–5.3
–7.6
–5.7
–7.0
–8.7
–10.5
–7.5
–8.7
–9.2
–8.3
–7.3
Moldova
–5.8
–10.8
–9.4
–7.7
–12.4
–17.1
–11.3
–16.0
–19.3
–20.4
–14.8
Montenegro
–16.3
–17.2
–14.4
–26.3
–9.3
–12.9
–11.2
–17.1
–18.1
–17.5
–15.6
North Macedonia
–0.8
0.2
–3.0
–2.9
–2.8
–6.1
0.4
–2.3
–3.6
–3.1
–2.5
Poland
–1.2
–2.0
–0.3
2.4
–1.3
–2.3
1.8
0.0
–0.7
–0.8
–1.6
Romania
–3.2
–4.6
–4.9
–5.1
–7.2
–9.5
–6.6
–8.4
–8.0
–6.6
–5.0
Russia 
2.0
7.0
3.9
2.4
6.8
10.4
2.4
2.9
1.7
1.6
1.4
Serbia
–5.0
–4.6
–6.6
–3.9
–4.1
–6.5
–2.3
–4.7
–5.3
–5.3
–4.8
Türkiye
–4.1
–1.8
1.9
–4.2
–0.8
–5.0
–3.6
–0.8
–1.4
–1.3
–1.3
Ukraine
–2.2
–3.3
–2.7
3.3
–1.9
4.9
–5.3
–7.2
–16.5
–12.6
–4.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
–1.8
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
–1.2
Antigua and Barbuda
–7.7
–14.0
–6.5
–15.6
–17.8
–15.6
–13.5
–8.2
–11.0
–10.4
–8.7
Argentina
–4.8
–5.2
–0.8
0.7
1.4
–0.6
–3.2
0.9
–1.2
–0.4
0.3
Aruba
1.0
–0.5
0.2
–17.3
–2.3
6.5
5.6
9.5
10.1
9.2
6.7
The Bahamas
–13.3
–9.4
–2.1
–22.0
–20.2
–8.9
–7.0
–7.6
–7.6
–7.3
–6.0
Barbados
–3.4
–3.6
–1.6
–5.0
–10.3
–9.9
–8.8
–4.5
–6.3
–5.7
–5.0
Belize
–7.0
–6.6
–7.8
–6.2
–6.5
–8.3
–0.6
–1.6
–1.7
–1.6
–1.4
Bolivia1
–5.0
–4.3
–3.3
0.0
3.9
2.6
–2.5
–3.0
–3.4
. . .
. . .
Brazil
–1.2
–2.8
–3.5
–1.7
–2.4
–2.2
–1.3
–2.7
–2.5
–2.3
–1.7
Chile
–2.8
–4.5
–5.2
–1.9
–7.3
–8.8
–3.1
–1.5
–2.5
–2.2
–2.9
Colombia
–3.2
–4.2
–4.6
–3.4
–5.6
–6.0
–2.3
–1.7
–2.3
–2.6
–3.6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
144
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
–1.8
–2.7
–2.1
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
–1.2
Costa Rica
–3.6
–3.0
–1.2
–1.0
–3.2
–3.3
–1.4
–1.4
–1.9
–2.1
–1.7
Dominica
–11.0
–46.7
–38.1
–37.0
–33.5
–27.0
–34.2
–33.4
–32.9
–26.4
–13.8
Dominican Republic
–0.2
–1.6
–1.3
–1.7
–2.8
–5.8
–3.7
–3.3
–2.5
–2.5
–2.5
Ecuador
–0.4
–1.5
–0.5
2.1
2.8
1.9
1.9
5.7
4.9
3.4
2.8
El Salvador
–1.9
–3.3
–0.4
1.1
–4.3
–6.7
–1.1
–1.8
–0.8
–1.8
–1.4
Grenada
–11.5
–12.8
–10.3
–16.1
–14.4
–12.1
–18.2
–16.3
–15.9
–13.9
–12.3
Guatemala
1.2
0.9
2.4
5.0
2.2
1.2
3.1
2.9
3.9
2.2
0.0
Guyana
–4.9
–29.0
–68.8
–17.3
–24.8
25.9
9.9
16.4
7.9
11.8
25.3
Haiti
–2.2
–2.9
–1.1
0.4
0.4
–2.5
–3.5
–0.6
0.0
–0.6
–2.0
Honduras
–1.2
–6.6
–2.6
2.9
–5.5
–6.7
–3.9
–4.4
–0.4
–2.5
–4.0
Jamaica
–2.5
–1.4
–1.8
–1.0
0.9
–0.7
2.7
3.1
1.8
0.4
0.3
Mexico
–1.8
–2.1
–0.3
2.4
–0.3
–1.3
–0.7
–0.9
–0.2
–0.3
–0.6
Nicaragua
–7.2
–1.8
5.9
3.8
–2.8
–2.9
8.2
4.2
7.1
2.1
–2.9
Panama
–5.8
–7.9
–5.1
0.2
–1.2
0.0
–3.1
1.9
–0.9
–1.7
–2.5
Paraguay
3.4
–0.2
–0.6
1.9
–1.1
–7.0
–0.4
–3.9
–3.5
–3.7
–1.2
Peru
–0.9
–1.2
–0.7
0.7
–2.2
–4.0
0.3
2.2
1.8
1.2
–1.5
St. Kitts and Nevis
–10.3
–5.8
–4.8
–10.8
–3.4
–11.4
–11.5
–14.4
–14.5
–14.0
–12.5
St. Lucia
–1.9
1.5
3.3
–18.8
–11.3
–3.6
–1.6
–1.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
–11.9
–10.3
–2.4
–15.9
–23.2
–20.6
–16.9
–18.4
–15.8
–13.5
–8.9
Suriname
1.9
–2.8
–11.2
9.0
5.7
1.9
4.3
0.2
–33.4
–51.8
28.2
Trinidad and Tobago
5.9
6.8
4.3
–6.5
10.9
17.5
11.8
4.8
4.9
2.9
7.0
Uruguay
0.0
–0.5
1.3
–0.6
–2.4
–3.8
–3.4
–1.0
–1.4
–1.5
–1.7
Venezuela1
7.5
8.4
5.9
–3.2
–0.9
4.0
5.8
4.9
4.2
2.5
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
–0.6
3.3
0.9
–3.0
3.1
8.0
4.0
2.3
1.1
0.6
0.5
Afghanistan1
7.6
12.1
11.7
14.0
–0.1
–18.5
–20.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
–11.8
–8.7
–8.7
–11.3
–2.4
8.4
2.4
–1.1
–3.7
–3.8
–2.7
Armenia
–1.3
–7.2
–7.1
–4.0
–3.4
0.7
–2.8
–4.6
–4.7
–4.7
–4.3
Azerbaijan
4.1
12.8
9.1
–0.5
15.1
29.8
11.5
6.3
4.3
2.3
–0.8
Bahrain
–3.9
–6.2
–2.0
–9.1
6.4
14.7
5.8
4.8
3.5
3.8
2.7
Djibouti
–4.8
14.7
18.3
11.7
–6.6
19.0
18.1
14.1
8.1
7.6
8.3
Egypt
–5.8
–2.3
–3.4
–2.9
–4.4
–3.5
–1.2
–5.4
–5.1
–4.3
–3.8
Georgia
–7.9
–6.7
–6.0
–12.4
–10.3
–4.4
–5.6
–4.4
–4.5
–4.6
–4.9
Iran
2.9
7.6
–0.7
–1.7
3.6
3.5
2.0
3.2
1.8
2.0
3.0
Iraq
1.4
10.5
6.2
–5.6
6.1
15.8
7.5
–0.2
0.4
–1.1
0.9
Jordan
–10.6
–6.8
–1.7
–5.7
–8.0
–8.1
–3.6
–5.9
–5.5
–5.9
–4.7
Kazakhstan
–2.1
–1.0
–3.9
–6.5
–1.4
2.9
–3.6
–1.7
–3.8
–4.0
–2.6
Kuwait
8.0
14.3
12.7
4.4
25.2
34.4
31.1
29.1
26.5
24.4
19.2
Kyrgyz Republic
–6.2
–12.1
–11.5
4.5
–8.0
–41.9
–44.9
–25.3
–8.4
–7.7
–6.2
Lebanon1
–22.9
–24.3
–21.8
–11.1
–23.0
–30.0
–24.9
–19.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya
6.6
14.7
6.7
–10.2
16.1
23.2
18.3
–4.2
0.9
0.6
0.4
Mauritania
–10.0
–13.1
–10.5
–6.8
–8.6
–14.9
–8.7
–9.4
–7.2
–7.1
–7.4
Morocco
–3.2
–4.9
–3.4
–1.2
–2.3
–3.5
–1.0
–1.2
–2.3
–2.6
–3.0
Oman
–13.6
–4.9
–4.9
–16.5
–5.5
3.7
2.3
2.9
–1.0
–0.7
2.0
Pakistan1
–3.6
–5.4
–4.2
–1.5
–0.8
–4.7
–1.0
–0.6
0.5
–0.4
–1.1
Qatar
4.0
9.1
2.4
–2.1
14.6
26.8
17.1
17.4
10.8
10.2
11.6
Saudi Arabia
1.6
8.2
4.3
–3.3
4.1
12.1
2.9
–0.5
–2.1
–2.5
–2.8
Somalia
–3.6
–3.2
–9.7
–4.7
–7.1
–8.6
–8.9
–9.2
–9.5
–8.8
–10.1
Sudan1
–9.4
–13.9
–15.2
–16.6
–7.5
–11.3
–3.8
–3.3
–3.1
–7.7
–10.7
Syria1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
2.1
–4.9
–2.2
4.3
8.2
15.3
4.8
6.2
3.4
–0.4
–2.0
Tunisia
–9.7
–10.8
–8.1
–6.0
–6.0
–9.0
–2.7
–1.7
–3.1
–3.3
–4.1
Turkmenistan
–16.4
7.4
3.4
–1.4
4.6
9.7
5.9
4.4
2.3
0.7
–3.6
United Arab Emirates
6.8
9.4
8.6
5.9
11.4
13.0
13.1
14.5
13.2
12.3
10.9
Uzbekistan
2.1
–6.1
–5.0
–4.6
–6.3
–3.2
–7.6
–5.0
–2.4
–4.6
–4.8
West Bank and Gaza1
–13.2
–13.2
–10.4
–12.3
–9.8
–10.6
–13.0
–21.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Yemen
–1.5
–3.2
–4.2
–15.7
–13.9
–15.1
–11.8
–17.1
–9.6
–9.5
4.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
145
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2030
Sub-Saharan Africa
–1.7
–1.8
–2.5
–2.4
–0.7
–2.0
–2.4
–1.5
–1.7
–1.8
–1.8
Angola
–0.5
6.5
5.4
1.3
10.0
8.3
3.7
5.4
0.9
0.5
0.9
Benin
–4.2
–4.5
–3.9
–1.7
–4.2
–5.7
–8.2
–6.6
–5.5
–5.0
–4.2
Botswana
5.6
0.4
–6.9
–9.8
–1.8
–0.6
1.5
–4.2
–7.6
–5.9
–1.1
Burkina Faso
–5.0
–4.2
–3.3
4.2
0.4
–7.5
–5.1
–5.7
–1.6
–1.3
–3.9
Burundi
–11.8
–12.8
–11.6
–11.2
–12.6
–16.8
–14.8
–8.6
–6.7
–5.8
–8.9
Cabo Verde
–7.0
–4.8
0.2
–15.4
–12.1
–3.5
–2.7
3.8
–0.9
–2.3
–3.4
Cameroon
–2.6
–3.5
–4.3
–3.7
–4.0
–3.4
–4.1
–3.1
–3.4
–3.9
–3.6
Central African Republic
–7.4
–7.7
–4.6
–7.9
–10.8
–12.6
–8.8
–9.1
–7.1
–4.1
–2.5
Chad
–5.7
–4.0
–3.0
–2.5
–0.5
6.3
1.6
1.0
–2.3
–2.9
–2.8
Comoros
–2.2
–3.0
–3.5
–1.8
–0.3
–0.4
–1.5
–2.2
–2.2
–3.2
–2.2
Democratic Republic of the Congo
–3.1
–3.5
–3.2
–2.0
–1.0
–4.9
–6.2
–3.9
–3.3
–2.1
–3.2
Republic of Congo
–6.4
18.5
11.7
12.6
12.8
17.0
4.7
0.1
–5.9
–7.0
–7.5
Côte d’Ivoire 
–2.0
–3.9
–2.2
–3.1
–3.9
–7.6
–8.2
–4.2
–2.1
–1.7
–2.4
Equatorial Guinea
–7.8
–2.7
–7.5
–0.8
5.7
6.6
–3.5
–3.3
–3.0
–3.8
–3.0
Eritrea1
24.8
15.5
13.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eswatini
6.2
1.4
3.8
6.8
2.7
–2.7
2.4
1.3
–1.7
–1.4
0.5
Ethiopia
–8.5
–6.5
–5.3
–4.6
–3.2
–4.3
–2.9
–4.2
–2.9
–2.6
–1.8
Gabon
–0.7
7.1
4.6
–0.5
3.5
10.9
8.0
4.0
1.8
–0.3
–3.5
The Gambia
–7.4
–9.5
–6.1
–5.8
–4.2
–4.2
–5.6
–6.7
–4.9
–4.6
–1.3
Ghana
–3.3
–3.0
–2.2
–2.5
–2.7
–2.3
–1.6
1.1
1.8
1.7
–0.1
Guinea
–6.7
–18.5
–15.5
–16.1
4.1
–5.7
–9.7
–14.0
–9.7
–2.3
–0.1
Guinea-Bissau
0.3
–3.5
–8.5
–2.6
–0.8
–8.6
–8.6
–8.2
–6.0
–5.3
–4.0
Kenya
–5.6
–4.0
–2.2
–3.7
–5.1
–5.1
–3.6
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
–3.0
Lesotho
–7.0
–7.0
–6.3
–5.7
–9.1
–14.0
–0.8
2.3
–3.9
–2.5
–1.1
Liberia
–22.3
–21.3
–19.6
–16.3
–17.6
–19.6
–25.2
–10.9
–13.1
–11.8
–12.3
Madagascar
–0.4
0.7
–2.3
–5.4
–4.9
–5.4
–4.1
–5.4
–6.0
–6.5
–5.0
Malawi
–15.5
–12.0
–12.6
–13.8
–15.2
–17.6
–17.3
–21.9
–18.3
–16.4
–10.1
Mali
–7.3
–4.9
–7.5
–2.2
–7.6
–7.7
–7.6
–4.6
–4.6
–2.6
–4.5
Mauritius
–4.5
–3.8
–5.0
–8.9
–13.1
–11.1
–5.1
–6.5
–4.8
–5.7
–1.7
Mozambique
–19.5
–29.5
–16.1
–26.5
–21.3
–36.4
–10.9
–11.0
–39.9
–36.6
–15.0
Namibia
–4.4
–3.6
–1.8
3.0
–11.2
–12.8
–15.3
–15.4
–14.7
–12.1
–9.9
Niger
–11.4
–12.7
–12.2
–13.2
–14.1
–16.2
–13.9
–6.0
–3.3
–5.2
–4.0
Nigeria1
2.6
1.2
–2.0
–2.7
–0.5
0.2
1.3
6.8
5.7
3.6
1.3
Rwanda
–9.5
–10.1
–11.9
–12.1
–10.9
–9.4
–11.5
–12.7
–13.8
–15.9
–7.6
São Tomé and Príncipe
–15.3
–13.0
–12.8
–11.2
–13.1
–14.5
–12.3
–1.9
–3.3
–3.6
–3.7
Senegal
–7.3
–8.8
–7.9
–10.9
–12.1
–20.0
–19.8
–12.5
–8.0
–5.4
–4.9
Seychelles
0.3
–2.4
–2.8
–12.5
–10.5
–7.5
–6.5
–8.1
–6.6
–6.9
–8.0
Sierra Leone
–11.7
–9.3
–7.8
–5.8
–7.3
–6.4
–9.5
–3.8
–3.4
–2.0
–3.3
South Africa
–2.4
–2.9
–2.6
2.0
3.7
–0.3
–1.1
–0.7
–0.9
–1.2
–1.9
South Sudan
23.7
–11.4
–4.8
–31.7
–0.1
–7.9
–18.4
–13.9
–3.8
4.4
6.0
Tanzania
–2.8
–4.2
–2.3
–2.3
–3.5
–7.4
–3.8
–2.6
–2.6
–2.7
–2.8
Togo
–1.5
–2.6
–0.8
–0.3
–2.2
–3.5
–4.0
–3.2
–1.8
–0.6
0.2
Uganda
–4.8
–6.1
–6.9
–9.5
–8.4
–8.6
–7.6
–7.5
–5.0
–3.7
–1.6
Zambia
–1.7
–1.3
0.5
11.8
11.9
3.7
–3.0
–2.6
1.3
2.7
3.3
Zimbabwe
–0.9
–2.6
2.3
1.7
0.7
0.6
0.3
1.0
3.1
3.6
3.1
1 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Bolivia, Eritrea, Lebanon, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Timor-Leste, Venezuela, and West Bank and Gaza in the “Country Notes” 
section of the Statistical Appendix.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
146
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
398.4
477.3
126.2
–42.8
445.5
–118.1
–139.2
165.7
–76.3
42.6
Direct Investment, Net
231.8
–117.0
1.0
48.7
678.9
484.8
324.9
436.6
268.4
333.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
24.0
503.0
61.1
121.9
274.4
–763.1
–415.8
–352.8
–682.6
–393.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
37.9
50.9
3.7
71.1
42.5
5.4
–15.4
60.6
103.6
59.5
Other Investment, Net
–144.6
–90.7
–8.2
–643.8
–1,184.1
366.3
10.7
–1.9
79.3
–127.4
Change in Reserves
249.1
131.2
69.9
360.5
635.3
–210.8
–42.5
23.7
155.5
171.0
United States
Financial Account Balance 
–373.2
–302.9
–558.4
–672.0
–825.6
–875.6
–1,073.0
–1,128.6
–1,240.8
–1,154.5
Direct Investment, Net
28.6
–345.4
–201.1
145.3
–135.8
–28.0
–10.9
25.1
–145.0
–95.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–250.1
78.8
–244.9
–540.2
97.4
–438.3
–1,184.1
–961.1
–966.0
–639.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
24.0
–20.4
–41.7
–5.1
–39.0
–80.7
–15.6
–42.3
32.5
–26.0
Other Investment, Net
–174.1
–20.8
–75.4
–280.9
–862.2
–334.4
137.5
–152.4
–164.3
–392.9
Change in Reserves
–1.7
5.0
4.7
9.0
114.0
5.8
0.0
2.1
2.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Financial Account Balance 
377.0
358.1
237.8
226.0
420.4
61.4
337.4
508.1
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
18.6
130.1
67.7
–191.2
488.1
266.0
51.3
172.4
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
407.0
268.3
–104.9
525.7
300.0
–263.5
–59.1
–80.4
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
7.6
60.8
–9.8
21.7
75.5
112.8
8.8
51.2
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–54.7
–131.0
278.2
–145.4
–597.5
–72.7
349.8
359.8
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
–1.5
29.9
6.6
15.2
154.3
18.9
–13.4
5.0
. . .
. . .
Germany
Financial Account Balance
310.3
308.5
224.9
192.8
242.7
158.8
211.4
273.8
271.7
271.3
Direct Investment, Net
41.7
46.7
95.5
–31.4
86.7
64.2
26.1
32.8
46.8
39.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
220.7
177.4
82.9
19.7
237.7
14.6
2.3
34.0
21.5
20.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
12.6
26.8
23.0
106.3
58.3
47.0
38.7
45.5
47.1
46.0
Other Investment, Net
36.8
57.1
24.1
98.2
–177.7
28.4
143.3
163.1
156.3
165.4
Change in Reserves
–1.4
0.5
–0.6
–0.1
37.7
4.7
1.0
–1.6
0.0
0.0
France
Financial Account Balance
–30.4
–13.3
0.4
–69.9
1.8
–43.9
–39.4
–7.5
3.5
0.3
Direct Investment, Net
2.8
60.9
31.0
10.5
21.0
–10.5
51.9
–10.5
14.2
28.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
11.8
7.8
–75.1
–33.2
11.0
–90.2
–129.6
55.1
53.6
44.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.4
–30.5
4.1
–27.2
21.0
–41.3
–18.0
–28.0
–18.6
–13.8
Other Investment, Net
–40.2
–63.7
37.1
–24.6
–78.2
96.0
78.1
–25.6
–49.3
–64.0
Change in Reserves
–3.4
12.3
3.2
4.6
27.0
2.0
–21.7
1.5
3.7
5.0
Italy
Financial Account Balance
63.5
44.6
61.6
85.6
53.5
–8.3
34.0
55.2
26.1
27.2
Direct Investment, Net
2.9
–3.6
4.0
23.9
31.2
–14.3
–11.5
12.3
3.7
4.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
103.1
157.1
–55.7
133.5
148.8
178.5
–26.9
–79.8
–16.9
–24.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
–8.4
–3.3
3.0
–2.9
–0.2
12.2
–5.0
3.8
2.2
1.4
Other Investment, Net
–37.1
–108.7
106.7
–73.4
–150.7
–186.8
74.4
116.5
37.2
45.9
Change in Reserves
3.0
3.1
3.6
4.6
24.5
2.1
3.0
2.3
0.0
0.0
Spain
Financial Account Balance
40.2
36.7
30.0
12.1
30.6
19.5
58.7
90.8
66.5
75.2
Direct Investment, Net
14.9
–21.2
10.4
18.8
–13.7
0.9
3.8
28.9
30.7
32.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
36.9
28.3
–56.7
87.8
44.5
29.7
–24.8
–6.4
32.4
33.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
8.7
–1.1
–6.2
–8.1
1.0
2.1
–7.1
1.3
0.0
0.0
Other Investment, Net
–24.5
28.1
81.7
–86.0
–13.4
–17.9
80.3
65.6
3.4
9.4
Change in Reserves
4.1
2.6
0.8
–0.4
12.2
4.7
6.5
1.4
0.0
0.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
147
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Japan
Financial Account Balance
168.3
183.9
228.3
132.2
153.3
53.1
174.3
170.7
164.8
159.8
Direct Investment, Net
155.0
134.6
218.9
87.5
174.7
126.7
176.1
190.6
178.2
183.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–50.6
92.2
87.4
38.5
–198.3
–142.6
195.3
93.0
–22.6
–20.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
30.4
0.9
3.2
7.8
19.9
38.0
44.6
29.1
27.9
31.9
Other Investment, Net
10.0
–67.9
–106.7
–12.4
94.1
78.4
–271.5
–77.7
–30.2
–46.4
Change in Reserves
23.6
24.0
25.5
10.9
62.8
–47.4
29.8
–64.4
11.5
11.5
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
–102.4
–124.0
–98.5
–93.8
–14.2
–78.6
–114.5
–79.6
–128.5
–132.1
Direct Investment, Net
46.1
–4.9
–42.2
–140.4
156.8
80.7
15.0
65.3
7.9
8.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–92.8
–354.9
34.9
36.5
–261.9
–44.9
217.2
–41.8
–214.8
–229.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
19.3
10.3
2.5
33.1
–37.5
–59.8
1.3
–7.6
6.9
7.4
Other Investment, Net
–83.7
200.7
–92.5
–19.7
104.0
–53.2
–343.3
–92.6
62.5
74.1
Change in Reserves
8.8
24.8
–1.1
–3.3
24.4
–1.3
–4.6
–3.0
9.0
7.2
Canada
Financial Account Balance
–44.2
–35.8
–37.9
–34.3
4.4
–7.6
–11.7
–14.0
–31.1
–31.9
Direct Investment, Net
53.4
20.4
26.9
18.1
44.5
38.2
46.8
27.7
3.7
26.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–74.9
3.4
–1.6
–67.7
–43.2
–115.3
15.4
–58.4
–13.5
–20.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–23.5
–58.2
–63.3
14.0
–17.1
59.0
–81.0
11.2
–21.3
–38.1
Change in Reserves
0.8
–1.5
0.1
1.3
20.2
10.6
7.0
5.4
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
308.1
358.6
315.8
377.2
617.4
492.7
490.9
586.1
605.4
622.8
Direct Investment, Net
–163.8
39.4
–35.6
70.1
–49.1
–14.8
–1.0
–64.3
–29.4
–47.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
153.5
367.7
308.1
263.0
501.8
313.1
416.0
581.0
469.4
471.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.8
23.3
14.1
–16.5
–11.0
29.7
–30.2
31.3
1.7
7.3
Other Investment, Net
105.3
–122.9
–2.0
–262.9
–79.2
362.4
165.7
–38.3
41.7
50.0
Change in Reserves
214.8
51.2
32.3
324.8
256.4
–196.9
–58.5
76.9
122.4
141.7
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Financial Account Balance
–278.9
–263.4
–141.8
47.7
218.5
560.4
198.0
380.3
488.3
360.2
Direct Investment, Net
–297.1
–366.1
–345.1
–313.8
–486.9
–247.1
–129.4
–125.9
–164.9
–246.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–212.3
–106.9
–75.9
–10.5
121.9
508.8
207.8
264.7
205.6
155.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
47.0
97.8
103.9
253.3
69.3
176.1
–69.9
141.8
–115.2
–77.3
Change in Reserves
186.4
113.8
170.1
89.7
520.7
111.1
175.9
62.8
538.3
508.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
148
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
–58.8
–261.0
–51.6
157.1
141.2
207.3
214.9
411.5
604.3
498.9
Direct Investment, Net
–108.4
–168.2
–143.4
–163.6
–258.6
–64.2
116.9
92.5
57.8
21.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–70.0
–100.4
–71.6
–106.8
–20.3
309.6
39.2
215.3
174.3
132.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
2.3
4.7
–2.5
15.8
–2.3
18.3
21.2
34.5
24.8
24.8
Other Investment, Net
–81.9
–18.5
69.5
243.5
147.3
–104.7
–37.6
126.3
–15.6
–43.3
Change in Reserves
199.1
22.0
96.8
168.5
275.8
49.1
74.9
–57.3
361.8
364.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
–26.7
105.2
58.9
9.9
94.0
158.3
–22.5
–26.8
–52.6
–37.9
Direct Investment, Net
–28.0
–26.3
–51.3
–38.6
–40.8
–40.7
–31.4
–34.6
–43.5
–60.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–34.9
9.9
–2.8
21.5
49.2
32.2
–16.1
–25.9
–25.2
–11.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
–2.2
–3.0
1.3
0.3
–4.6
–5.6
5.0
4.8
0.2
0.8
Other Investment, Net
25.0
79.0
19.5
31.2
–37.2
140.7
–27.8
–4.9
–39.3
–16.1
Change in Reserves
13.4
45.6
92.2
–4.4
127.2
31.6
47.9
33.7
55.2
49.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
–111.1
–166.6
–124.5
–13.4
–107.7
–147.3
–98.2
–97.4
–98.7
–103.6
Direct Investment, Net
–120.7
–148.2
–114.3
–94.4
–102.9
–120.2
–132.6
–119.9
–114.0
–132.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–45.7
–16.5
–1.9
–9.5
–16.5
12.3
24.2
13.1
1.2
–6.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
3.9
4.0
4.9
5.7
2.0
2.3
–7.1
1.6
–1.4
–2.8
Other Investment, Net
33.9
–17.0
19.3
69.4
–41.1
–24.1
15.7
–0.6
–37.8
–2.2
Change in Reserves
17.3
11.0
–32.3
15.4
50.8
–17.8
1.5
8.3
52.9
40.1
Middle East and Central Asia
Financial Account Balance
–37.4
96.9
30.2
–86.0
109.0
394.3
167.1
116.6
64.8
32.9
Direct Investment, Net
–4.0
–11.0
–8.3
–9.3
–22.0
–4.0
–40.3
–24.4
–15.3
–22.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–37.7
5.5
19.1
82.3
67.6
153.4
161.3
72.2
63.3
44.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
71.5
78.6
8.2
–82.5
17.4
192.4
–10.6
1.6
–45.8
–34.2
Change in Reserves
–60.0
30.4
9.2
–83.1
46.9
56.7
60.0
70.7
61.9
46.3
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
–44.9
–38.0
–54.6
–19.9
–18.0
–52.2
–63.2
–23.6
–29.4
–30.1
Direct Investment, Net
–35.9
–12.4
–27.9
–7.8
–62.7
–18.0
–41.9
–39.5
–49.9
–51.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–24.1
–5.4
–18.6
2.1
41.9
1.3
–0.9
–10.0
–8.0
–4.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.0
–0.6
0.2
0.9
–0.2
1.4
–2.4
–0.9
–1.0
–0.8
Other Investment, Net
–1.4
–24.4
–12.6
–8.4
–17.1
–28.2
–9.6
19.4
23.3
18.6
Change in Reserves
16.5
4.8
4.3
–6.7
20.0
–8.6
–8.4
7.3
6.3
7.9
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
149
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
16.5
165.1
63.0
–51.8
163.2
476.6
194.0
192.1
126.0
102.8
Direct Investment, Net
23.7
17.5
6.1
6.8
–7.4
26.0
–22.3
33.9
11.2
7.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–32.4
6.1
16.9
81.7
83.6
118.9
152.7
76.8
63.3
44.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
99.3
108.0
27.7
–61.4
38.1
258.0
11.6
25.8
4.2
21.4
Change in Reserves
–67.1
40.0
10.6
–85.7
49.8
78.1
55.6
59.5
46.9
31.9
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
–295.5
–428.6
–204.8
99.5
55.3
83.8
4.0
188.2
362.3
257.4
Direct Investment, Net
–320.8
–383.7
–351.2
–320.6
–479.6
–273.1
–107.2
–159.8
–176.1
–253.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–180.0
–113.0
–92.8
–92.1
38.2
389.9
55.1
187.9
142.3
111.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
4.1
5.0
3.9
22.8
–5.1
16.4
16.8
40.1
22.6
22.1
Other Investment, Net
–52.2
–10.2
76.1
314.7
31.1
–81.9
–81.5
116.1
–119.4
–98.7
Change in Reserves
253.5
73.9
159.5
175.4
470.9
32.9
120.3
3.3
491.4
476.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
–330.2
–356.6
–296.0
–115.8
–290.8
–421.9
–281.7
–299.5
–331.9
–366.1
Direct Investment, Net
–256.5
–287.8
–273.3
–233.5
–285.0
–292.8
–270.2
–296.9
–275.5
–321.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–129.1
–38.3
–35.4
–55.8
–18.9
75.6
–35.5
–44.0
–39.8
–37.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
11.9
11.3
Other Investment, Net
–27.0
–27.2
–64.7
33.7
–199.5
–161.5
–132.9
–57.5
–168.5
–156.2
Change in Reserves
78.4
–3.3
78.3
131.5
208.1
–48.0
149.6
72.5
138.5
138.3
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears  
and/or Rescheduling  
during 2020–24
Financial Account Balance
–57.7
–43.6
–48.2
–28.1
–39.5
–38.6
–42.4
–43.2
–76.1
–74.9
Direct Investment, Net
–26.2
–24.6
–32.4
–22.6
–33.8
–22.3
–35.3
–76.5
–49.6
–57.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–36.9
–21.3
–17.4
3.9
–22.3
31.2
7.8
3.2
2.0
1.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–11.2
–1.6
2.4
11.3
5.7
–25.5
–24.8
10.0
–53.1
–34.9
Change in Reserves
17.2
4.2
–0.9
–20.4
10.5
–21.7
9.6
20.4
25.1
16.5
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance
119.5
213.9
–15.6
5.0
664.0
442.3
58.9
545.9
412.0
402.8
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available 
because of data constraints.
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
150
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2007–16
2011–18
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027–30
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.0
0.5
0.6
0.2
0.8
–0.2
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.0
Current Account Balance
0.0
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.1
Savings
21.6
22.3
23.2
22.6
23.5
23.0
22.0
21.8
21.9
22.0
22.1
Investment
21.7
21.7
22.7
22.5
22.8
23.4
22.5
22.2
22.1
22.0
22.1
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.0
–2.3
–2.1
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.4
–4.0
–4.0
–3.6
–3.6
Current Account Balance
–2.9
–2.2
–2.1
–2.8
–3.6
–3.8
–3.3
–4.0
–4.0
–3.6
–3.6
Savings
17.2
18.6
19.3
18.2
17.6
18.2
17.0
16.5
17.3
17.6
17.7
Investment
20.3
20.7
21.7
21.4
21.4
22.0
21.6
21.5
21.4
21.2
21.3
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.0
2.2
2.2
1.8
3.1
0.9
2.0
2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
0.9
2.2
2.4
1.8
2.8
–0.1
1.7
2.6
2.3
2.2
2.1
Savings
22.5
23.3
25.4
24.4
26.4
24.9
24.9
24.8
24.7
24.6
24.6
Investment
20.9
20.4
22.4
22.0
22.8
23.9
22.4
21.3
21.5
21.5
21.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.4
1.1
0.3
0.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
6.8
7.5
7.7
6.0
6.8
3.3
4.9
5.1
5.4
5.1
4.5
Current Account Balance
6.8
7.6
7.9
6.3
6.9
3.8
5.5
5.6
5.4
5.1
4.5
Savings
26.7
27.9
29.3
28.0
29.6
27.1
27.5
27.1
26.7
25.8
25.6
Investment
19.9
20.3
21.4
21.7
22.7
23.3
22.0
21.5
21.3
20.7
21.2
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
–0.5
–0.6
–0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.7
–0.8
0.7
–2.0
0.6
–1.0
–0.8
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
Current Account Balance
–0.7
–0.8
0.6
–2.0
0.3
–1.4
–1.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
Savings
21.3
21.1
23.6
20.8
23.7
22.6
21.9
21.6
21.6
21.1
20.8
Investment
22.0
22.0
23.0
22.8
23.4
24.0
23.0
21.5
21.7
21.3
20.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.5
1.1
3.1
3.8
2.2
–1.2
0.9
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.8
Current Account Balance
–0.6
1.1
3.2
3.8
2.1
–1.7
0.1
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.7
Savings
18.7
19.1
21.5
21.7
24.1
22.9
23.1
23.5
23.7
24.7
26.1
Investment
19.3
18.1
18.4
17.9
22.0
24.6
22.9
22.4
22.7
23.8
24.4
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.5
0.8
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.5
1.8
2.5
1.2
1.6
1.3
3.9
4.3
3.5
3.7
2.4
Current Account Balance
–1.9
1.4
2.1
0.8
0.8
0.4
2.7
3.2
2.7
2.6
2.2
Savings
19.9
20.6
23.0
21.4
22.6
23.1
23.9
24.4
24.3
24.4
23.6
Investment
21.8
19.2
20.9
20.6
21.9
22.7
21.1
21.2
21.7
21.8
21.5
Capital Account Balance
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.9
0.9
1.1
1.1
0.9
1.0
0.2
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.5
2.4
3.4
2.9
3.8
2.1
3.6
4.8
3.9
3.6
3.5
Current Account Balance
2.6
2.4
3.4
3.0
3.9
2.1
3.7
4.8
3.9
3.6
3.5
Savings
27.0
27.2
29.2
28.2
29.7
28.9
29.8
30.9
30.4
30.1
29.9
Investment
24.4
24.7
25.8
25.2
25.8
26.8
26.1
26.1
26.5
26.5
26.3
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.9
–4.2
–2.7
–3.1
–0.5
–2.2
–3.7
–2.8
–3.2
–3.1
–2.6
Current Account Balance
–3.8
–4.0
–2.7
–2.9
–0.4
–2.1
–3.5
–2.7
–3.1
–3.0
–2.4
Savings
13.0
13.2
15.6
14.6
17.2
16.6
14.3
15.0
13.8
14.1
14.6
Investment
16.8
17.2
18.2
17.6
17.7
18.7
17.8
17.7
16.9
17.1
17.0
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
151
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2007–16
2011–18
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027–30
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.4
–2.9
–2.0
–2.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.6
–0.5
–1.4
–1.3
–0.8
Current Account Balance
–2.4
–2.9
–2.0
–2.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.6
–0.5
–1.4
–1.3
–0.8
Savings
21.5
21.1
21.1
20.7
24.3
25.0
23.3
22.7
21.8
21.9
22.0
Investment
23.9
24.0
23.0
22.7
24.3
25.3
23.9
23.2
23.2
23.2
22.8
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.2
4.5
4.4
5.1
6.6
6.6
5.7
6.6
6.4
6.2
6.1
Current Account Balance
4.3
4.6
4.4
5.0
6.7
6.5
5.5
6.5
6.3
6.1
6.0
Savings
30.5
30.5
30.0
31.2
33.3
33.1
31.3
32.1
31.2
30.9
31.0
Investment
26.0
25.8
25.5
25.9
26.3
26.3
25.6
25.3
24.8
24.8
25.1
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.3
0.5
0.1
0.6
1.0
1.6
0.7
1.0
1.0
0.7
0.5
Current Account Balance
1.3
0.4
0.1
0.5
0.9
1.6
0.7
1.0
1.0
0.6
0.4
Savings
32.4
32.2
32.0
32.6
34.1
34.4
32.7
32.5
31.6
31.7
32.1
Investment
31.2
31.9
32.1
32.2
33.3
32.9
32.1
31.6
30.8
31.1
31.8
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.5
1.0
0.5
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.2
Current Account Balance
2.5
1.0
0.4
1.5
1.2
1.3
1.0
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.2
Savings
42.6
41.3
39.3
39.9
40.6
40.6
39.0
39.1
38.2
38.0
38.3
Investment
40.2
40.3
38.8
38.3
39.4
39.2
38.0
37.6
36.1
36.4
37.0
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.5
0.2
1.8
0.6
2.0
2.8
–0.1
0.2
–0.8
–0.6
–0.5
Current Account Balance
–0.6
–0.1
1.4
0.1
1.6
2.6
–0.4
–0.1
–1.1
–1.0
–0.7
Savings
23.9
24.7
25.0
24.6
26.9
29.1
26.4
25.3
24.8
25.2
25.8
Investment
24.4
24.6
23.5
24.5
25.3
26.3
26.5
25.3
25.9
26.2
26.5
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.0
–2.6
–2.1
–0.1
–1.9
–2.3
–1.3
–1.1
–1.3
–1.3
–1.3
Current Account Balance
–2.0
–2.6
–2.1
–0.2
–1.8
–2.2
–1.2
–0.9
–1.1
–1.1
–1.2
Savings
19.6
18.2
16.8
17.7
18.7
18.1
18.3
18.6
18.0
18.2
18.6
Investment
21.7
20.8
18.9
18.0
20.6
20.4
19.5
19.5
19.2
19.4
19.9
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
Middle East and Central Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
5.9
4.0
0.7
–3.0
2.9
7.8
3.7
2.3
1.2
0.6
0.4
Current Account Balance
5.9
3.9
0.9
–3.0
3.1
8.0
4.0
2.3
1.1
0.6
0.4
Savings
34.2
31.2
27.4
22.7
28.6
33.4
30.8
28.8
27.9
27.5
27.4
Investment
28.2
27.0
26.6
25.6
25.8
26.1
27.6
27.1
27.3
27.6
28.1
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.0
–1.9
–2.2
–2.0
–0.4
–1.7
–2.0
–1.0
–1.3
–1.4
–1.4
Current Account Balance
–1.6
–2.3
–2.5
–2.4
–0.7
–2.0
–2.4
–1.5
–1.7
–1.8
–1.8
Savings
17.8
17.3
19.2
19.0
20.4
19.7
18.5
19.2
19.2
19.8
20.0
Investment
19.3
19.4
21.8
21.4
21.0
21.5
20.8
20.5
21.0
21.7
21.8
Capital Account Balance
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
152
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2007–16
2011–18
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027–30
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
7.1
5.1
2.0
–2.7
4.6
10.3
5.4
4.6
2.9
2.3
2.2
Current Account Balance
7.2
5.1
2.2
–2.6
5.0
10.6
5.7
4.7
3.0
2.3
2.2
Savings
33.9
31.2
28.9
24.2
31.2
36.3
33.2
32.6
31.2
30.7
30.2
Investment
26.6
25.6
26.6
26.7
26.6
26.2
28.2
28.5
29.0
29.2
29.4
Capital Account Balance
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.3
–0.3
–0.1
0.9
0.6
0.5
0.2
0.6
0.8
0.5
0.3
Current Account Balance
0.2
–0.4
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.6
0.8
0.5
0.3
Savings
32.1
32.3
32.4
33.5
34.4
34.1
32.6
32.4
31.7
31.8
32.2
Investment
31.9
32.7
32.6
32.7
34.0
33.7
32.5
31.9
30.9
31.3
32.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.3
–2.5
–1.8
–0.7
–1.8
–2.6
–1.4
–1.4
–1.6
–1.7
–1.7
Current Account Balance
–2.6
–2.7
–2.0
–0.9
–1.9
–2.7
–1.5
–1.5
–1.8
–1.9
–1.8
Savings
23.0
22.5
22.6
23.0
23.7
23.5
23.7
23.5
23.1
23.3
23.8
Investment
25.6
25.2
24.6
23.9
25.7
26.2
25.1
25.0
24.9
25.2
25.6
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or  
Rescheduling during 2020–24
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.2
–3.9
–3.0
–1.8
–2.0
–2.0
–2.4
–2.5
–4.2
–3.8
–2.6
Current Account Balance
–4.0
–4.5
–3.5
–2.3
–2.4
–2.4
–2.9
–3.3
–4.6
–4.3
–3.0
Savings
20.6
19.4
19.3
18.3
19.1
19.1
17.2
15.9
14.9
16.1
17.8
Investment
24.9
24.1
23.5
21.1
21.8
21.7
20.4
19.5
19.9
20.6
21.0
Capital Account Balance
0.8
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.4
0.4
0.4
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.9
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Current Account Balance
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.2
Savings
25.5
26.2
26.8
26.6
27.9
27.8
26.4
26.2
25.9
26.0
26.4
Investment
25.1
25.7
26.4
26.3
27.1
27.4
26.5
26.1
25.6
25.7
26.2
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted 
by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’ 
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of 
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to 
the current account balance (CAB) (S – I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In 
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
153
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
Averages
2007–16
2017–26
2023
2024
2025
2026
2023–26
2027–30
Annual Percent Change
World Real GDP
3.4
3.1
3.5
3.3
3.2
3.1
3.3
3.2
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.8
1.7
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.3
4.0
4.7
4.3
4.2
4.0
4.3
4.1
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
1.4
1.6
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.7
1.5
World Trade, Volume1
3.4
2.8
1.0
3.5
3.6
2.3
2.6
3.1
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.5
2.4
–0.7
2.1
3.1
1.3
1.4
2.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.5
3.4
3.7
5.6
4.3
4.0
4.4
4.4
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.0
2.2
0.9
1.8
2.1
1.7
1.6
2.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.1
3.8
1.4
6.5
5.9
3.3
4.3
4.0
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.9
0.4
–0.5
0.3
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.1
0.0
–0.9
0.0
–1.2
–0.3
–0.6
0.0
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
0.4
1.6
–1.7
1.3
0.6
–0.1
0.0
0.6
Oil
–3.9
4.3
–16.4
–1.8
–12.9
–4.5
–9.1
0.5
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
1.4
5.6
–5.7
3.7
7.4
4.1
2.3
0.2
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.6
2.8
4.6
2.6
2.5
2.2
3.0
2.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
5.9
6.1
8.2
7.9
5.3
4.7
6.5
4.0
Interest Rates 
Percent
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate2
1.0
–0.6
–1.3
0.8
1.2
1.4
0.5
1.5
Current Account Balances
Percent of GDP
Advanced Economies
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.3
0.6
0.7
1.0
1.0
0.6
0.8
0.4
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
27.3
29.3
28.8
28.1
27.9
27.6
28.1
26.4
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.6
9.9
9.9
9.8
9.2
9.1
9.5
8.7
1 Data refer to trade in goods and services.
2 GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the  
United States.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
155
World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors	
April 2015
World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices	
October 2015
World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long	
April 2016
World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies	
October 2016
World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?	
April 2017
World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, 
Long-Term Challenges	
October 2017
World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change	
April 2018
World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth	
October 2018
World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery	
April 2019
World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers	
October 2019
World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown	
April 2020
World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent	
October 2020
World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries	
April 2021
World Economic Outlook: Uncharted Territory: Recovery during a Pandemic	
October 2021
World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery	
April 2022
World Economic Outlook: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis	
October 2022
World Economic Outlook: A Rocky Recovery	
April 2023
World Economic Outlook: Growing Global Divergences	
October 2023
World Economic Outlook: Steady but Slow: Resilience amid Divergence	
April 2024
World Economic Outlook: Policy Pivot, Rising Threats	
October 2024
World Economic Outlook: A Critical Juncture amid Policy Shifts	
April 2025
World Economic Outlook: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim	
October 2025
I. Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Tariff Scenarios	
October 2016, Scenario Box
World Growth Projections over the Medium Term	
October 2016, Box 1.1
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and	
April 2019, Box 1.2  
Commodity Prices
On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices:	
April 2019, Box 3.3  
A Model-Based Analysis
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and	
October 2019, Box 1.3 
Commodity Prices
Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19	
April 2020, Scenario Box
Alternative Scenarios	
October 2020, Scenario Box
Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights	
October 2020, Box 1.1
Scenario Box	
April 2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
156
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Downside Scenarios	
October 2021, Scenario Box
Scenario Box	
April 2022, Scenario Box
Risk Assessment around the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection	
October 2022, Box 1.3
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection	
April 2023, Box 1.3
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
October 2023, Box 1.2
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
April 2024, Box 1.2
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
October 2024, Box 1.2
Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection	
April 2025, Box 1.1
Risk Assessment Surrounding the Baseline Projection	
October 2025, Box 1.2
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations	
October 2025, Commodity  
	
	 Special Feature
II. Historical Surveys
What Is the Effect of Recessions?	
October 2015, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Fragmentation in History: Many Shades of Gray	
October 2023, Box 3.2
III. Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011	
October 2014, Box 1.2
Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	
October 2014, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output	
April 2015, Chapter 3
Steady as She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output	
April 2015, Box 3.1
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries—	
April 2016, Box 1.2 
The Role of External Factors
Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market	
April 2016, Chapter 3 
Reforms in Advanced Economies
Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a	
April 2017, Chapter 3 
Complicated External Environment
Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2017, Box 2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence	
October 2017, Box 1.3 
over the Forecast Horizon
Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality	
April 2018, Chapter 3
Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?	
April 2018, Chapter 4
Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth	
April 2018, Box 1.3
Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.2
Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.3
The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown	
October 2018, Chapter 2
The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle	
October 2019, Box 1.4
Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can	
October 2019, Chapter 3 
Structural Reforms Play?
Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an	
April 2020, Chapter 2 
Era of Low Rates and High Debt
The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects	
October 2020, Chapter 2
An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns	
October 2020, Box 2.1
SELECTED TOPICS
157
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook	
April 2021, Box 1.1
After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage	
April 2021, Chapter 2
A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector	
April 2021, Box 2.1
Research and Innovation: Fighting the Pandemic and Boosting Long-Term Growth	
October 2021, Chapter 3
Dimming Growth Prospects: A Longer Path to Convergence	
October 2023, Box 1.1
The Uneven Economic Effects of Commodity Market Fragmentation	
October 2023, Box 3.3
Slowdown in Global Medium-Term Growth: What Will It Take to Turn the Tide?	
April 2024, Chapter 3
Allocative Efficiency: Concept, Examples, and Measurement	
April 2024, Box 3.1
The Potential Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Global Productivity and	
April 2024, Box 3.3 
Labor Markets
The Rise of the Silver Economy: Global Implications of Population Aging	
April 2025, Chapter 2
IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment	
April 2015, Chapter 1, 
in an Era of Low Oil Prices	
	 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?	
April 2015, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the	
October 2015, Chapter 1, 
World Economy	
	 Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift	
October 2015, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath	
October 2015, Chapter 2 
of the Commodity Boom
The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon	
October 2015, Box 2.1
Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?	
October 2015, Box 2.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the	
April 2016, Chapter 1, 
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	
	 Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and	
October 2016, Chapter 1, 
Markets in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?	
October 2016, Box 3.3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and	
April 2017, Chapter 1, 
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2017, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?	
April 2018, Box 1.2
The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles	
April 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
October 2018, Box 1.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in	
October 2018, Chapter 1, 
Energy Demand	
	 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
October 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
October 2018, Chapter 3
Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 3.1
Commodity Special Feature	
April 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
158
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Is Happening with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2021, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
House Prices and Consumer Price Inflation	
October 2021, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Inflation Scares	
October 2021, Chapter 2
Core Inflation in the COVID-19 Crisis	
October 2021, Box 2.2
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment	
April 2022, Special Feature
Dissecting Recent WEO Inflation Forecast Errors	
October 2022, Box 1.1
Market Power and Inflation during COVID-19	
October 2022, Box 1.2
Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers	
October 2022, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and the Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in	
April 2023, Chapter 1, 
Fossil Fuel Extraction	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Prices and Monetary Policy: High Frequency Analysis	
October 2023, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature 
	
	 Online Annex 1.1
Firms’ Inflation Expectations, Attention, and Monetary Policy Effectiveness	
October 2023, Box 2.1
Energy Subsidies, Inflation, and Expectations: Unpacking Euro Area Measures	
October 2023, Box 2.3
Fragmentation and Commodity Markets: Vulnerabilities and Risks	
October 2023, Chapter 3
Commodity Trade Tensions: Evidence from Tanker Traffic Data	
October 2023, Box 3.1
Market Developments and the Inflationary Effects of Metals Supply Shocks	
October 2024, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature
The Great Tightening: Insights from the Recent Inflation Episode	
October 2024, Chapter 2
Market Developments and the Impact of AI on Energy Demand	
April 2025, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature
Immigration and Inflation	
April 2025, Box 3.4
Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations	
October 2025, Commodity 
	
	 Special Feature
V. Fiscal Policy
Commodity Booms and Public Investment	
October 2015, Box 2.2
Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant	
October 2017, Chapter 4
The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions	
October 2017, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes	
April 2018, Box 1.5
Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries	
October 2019, Box 2.4
Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt	
April 2023, Chapter 3
Market Reforms to Promote Growth and Debt Sustainability	
April 2023, Box 3.1
Fiscal Imprudence and Inflation Expectations: The Role of Monetary Policy Frameworks	
October 2023, Box 2.1
Industrial Policies in Emerging Markets: Old and New	
April 2024, Box 4.1
The Role of Price-Suppressing Policies	
October 2024, Box 2.2
The Impact of Immigration on Government Finances	
April 2025, Box 3.3
SELECTED TOPICS
159
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Box 2.2
A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Box 3.5
Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?	
October 2017, Box 1.2 
The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
October 2018, Box 2.3 
Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
October 2018, Box 3.2
Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy?	
April 2020, Box 2.1
Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help?	
April 2020, Chapter 3
Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings	
April 2020, Box 3.1
Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks?	
April 2020, Box 3.2
Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:	
April 2020, Box 1.3 
Assessment and Policy Options
Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19	
April 2021, Chapter 4
Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness	
April 2021, Box 4.1
Monetary Expansions and Inflationary Risks	
October 2021, Box 1.3
Policy Responses and Expectations in Inflation Acceleration Episodes	
October 2021, Box 2.3
Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects	
April 2022, Box 1.2
Private Sector Debt and the Global Recovery	
April 2022, Chapter 2
Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich, and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2022, Box 2.2
House Prices: Coming Off the Boil	
April 2023, Box 1.1
Monetary Policy: Speed of Transmission, Heterogeneity, and Asymmetries	
April 2023, Box 1.2
The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy	
April 2023, Chapter 2
Spillovers to Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
April 2023, Box 2.3
Monetary and Fiscal Interactions	
April 2023, Box 3.2
Managing Expectations: Inflation and Monetary Policy	
October 2023, Chapter 2
Feeling the Pinch? Tracing the Effects of Monetary Policy through Housing Markets	
April 2024, Chapter 2
Weakening Interest Rate Pass-Through in Europe	
April 2024, Box 2.1
The Great Tightening: Insights from the Recent Inflation Episode	
October 2024, Chapter 2
The Role of Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies	
October 2024, Box 2.1
Emerging Market Resilience: Good Luck or Good Policies?	
October 2025, Chapter 2
IMF Arrangements and Emerging Market Resilience	
October 2025, Box 2.1
Milestones in Developing Monetary Policy Frameworks	
October 2025, Box 2.2
Macroeconomic Effects of Undermining Central Bank Independence	
October 2025, Box 2.3
VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment	
April 2016, Box 3.2
Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects	
April 2018, Chapter 2
Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus	
April 2018, Box 2.1 
Advanced Economies
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
160
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates	
April 2018, Box 2.4
Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil	
April 2018, Box 3.3
The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
October 2018, Box 2.1
The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:	
October 2018, Box 2.2 
The Case of Industrial Robots
Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies	
April 2019, Box 1.1
Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities	
April 2019, Box 1.3
Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in	
October 2019, Chapter 2 
Advanced Economies
Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities	
October 2019, Box 2.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration	
April 2020, Chapter 4
Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation	
April 2020, Box 4.1
Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.2
Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the	
April 2021, Chapter 3 
COVID-19 Shock
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples	
April 2022, Box 1.1
Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability	
April 2022, Box 2.1
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Wage Dynamics Post–COVID-19 and Wage Price Spiral Risks	
October 2022, Chapter 2
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States	
October 2022, Box 2.1
Distributional Implications of Medium-Term Growth Prospects	
April 2024, Box 3.2
Understanding the Social Acceptability of Structural Reforms	
October 2024, Chapter 3
Policies to Facilitate the Integration of Ukrainian Refugees into the European Labor Market:	
October 2024, Box 3.1 
Early Evidence
The Rise of the Silver Economy: Global Implications of Population Aging	
April 2025, Chapter 2
The Impact of AI on Older Workers	
April 2025, Box 2.3
VIII. Exchange Rate Issues
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?	
October 2015, Chapter 3
The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade	
October 2015, Box 3.1
Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains	
October 2015, Box 3.2
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2015, Box 1.2
Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits	
October 2015, Box 1.2
Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies	
October 2015, Box 1.3
SELECTED TOPICS
161
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2016, Box 1.1
Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Chapter 2
Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2016, Box 2.1
The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization	
April 2016, Box 3.3
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?	
October 2016, Chapter 2
The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with	
April 2017, Box 2.3 
China’s Final Demand
Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and	
April 2017, Box 2.4 
Developing Economies
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters	
October 2017, Box 1.4
Remittances and Consumption Smoothing	
October 2017, Box 1.5
A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators	
April 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Services Trade	
April 2018, Box 3.2
Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2018, Box 4.3
Global Trade Tensions	
October 2018, Scenario Box
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?	
April 2019, Chapter 3
Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries	
April 2019, Box 3.2
Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia	
April 2019, Box 3.4
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs	
April 2019, Chapter 4
Gross versus Value-Added Trade	
April 2019, Box 4.1
Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
April 2019, Box 4.2
Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?	
April 2019, Box 4.3
The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S.–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models	
April 2019, Box 4.4
A No-Deal Brexit	
April 2019, Scenario Box
Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production	
October 2019, 
	
	 Scenario Box 1.1
Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario	
October 2019, 
	
	 Scenario Box 1.2
The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018	
October 2019, Box 1.2
Global Trade and Value Chains during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Chapter 4
Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Box 4.1
The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data	
April 2022, Box 4.2
Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France	
April 2022, Box 4.3
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2023, Box 2.2
Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment	
April 2023, Chapter 4
Rising Trade Tensions	
April 2023, Box 4.1
Balance Sheet Exposure to Fragmentation Risk	
April 2023, Box 4.2
Geopolitical Tensions, Supply Chains, and Trade	
April 2023, Box 4.3
Fragmentation Is Already Affecting International Trade	
April 2024, Box 1.1
Trading Places: Real Spillovers from G20 Emerging Markets	
April 2024, Chapter 4
Capital Flows to G20 Emerging Markets and the Allocation Puzzle	
April 2024, Box 4.2
The Global Automotive Industry and the Shift to Electric Vehicles	
October 2024, Box 1.1
The Global Effects of Recent Trade Policy Actions: Insights from Multiple Models	
April 2025, Box 1.2
Enhancing Global Financial Integration to Support Growth in Low-Income Countries	
April 2025, Box 2.1
Trade Reallocation in Response to Tariffs: Will This Time Be Different?	
October 2025, Box 1.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
162
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
X. Regional Issues
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions	
April 2018, Box 2.3
Support or Distort: Evaluating National State Aid in Europe	
October 2025, Box 3.2
XI. Country-Specific Analyses
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade	
October 2014, Box 3.1
Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?	
October 2015, Box 3.3
The Japanese Experience with Deflation	
October 2016, Box 3.2
Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas	
April 2018, Box 2.2
Immigration and Wages in Germany	
April 2020, Box 4.2
The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean	
April 2020, Box 4.3
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States	
October 2022, Box 2.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
China’s Monetary Policy and the Housing Market	
April 2024, Box 2.2
Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on Misallocation	
October 2025, Box 3.1
XII. Climate Change Issues
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?	
October 2017, Chapter 3
The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones	
October 2017, Box 3.1
The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis	
October 2017, Box 3.2
Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies	
October 2017, Box 3.3
Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets	
October 2017, Box 3.4
Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution	
October 2017, Box 3.5
Mitigating Climate Change	
October 2017, Box 3.6
The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies	
April 2019, Box 3.1
What’s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions?	
October 2019, Box 1.SF.1
Mitigating Climate Change—Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies	
October 2020, Chapter 3
Glossary	
October 2020, Box 3.1
Zooming in on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization	
October 2020, Box 3.2
Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters	
April 2021, Box 1.2
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
Clean Tech and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1 
	
	 Special Feature
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Near-Term Macroeconomic Impact of Decarbonization Policies	
October 2022, Chapter 3
Near-Term Implications of Carbon Pricing: A Review of the Literature	
October 2022, Box 3.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
Decarbonizing the Power Sector While Managing Renewables’ Intermittence	
October 2022, Box 3.3
The Natural Rate of Interest and the Green Transition	
April 2023, Box 2.1
The Global Automotive Industry and the Shift to Electric Vehicles	
October 2024, Box 1.1
SELECTED TOPICS
163
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
XIII. Special Topics
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up	
October 2015, Box 2.3 
Human Development?
Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms	
April 2016, Box 3.1
Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method	
April 2016, Box 3.4
A Global Rush for Land	
October 2016, Box 1.SF.1
Conflict, Growth, and Migration	
April 2017, Box 1.1
Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity	
April 2017, Box 1.2
Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Cases of Brazil, Russia, India,	
April 2017, Box 2.1 
China, and South Africa
Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview	
April 2017, Box 3.1
 The Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation	
April 2017, Box 3.2
Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World	
April 2017, Box 3.3
Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income	
April 2017, Box 3.4
Smartphones and Global Trade	
April 2018, Box 1.1
Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?	
April 2018, Box 1.4
The Changing Service Content of Manufactures	
April 2018, Box 3.1
Patent Data and Concepts	
April 2018, Box 4.1
International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers	
April 2018, Box 4.2
Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation	
April 2018, Box 4.4
Increasing Market Power	
October 2018, Box 1.1
Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
October 2018, Box 1.5
Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
October 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects	
April 2019, Chapter 2
The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving	
April 2019, Box 2.1
Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power	
April 2019, Box 2.2
The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments, and Implications for the Global Outlook	
October 2019, Box 1.1
Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare	
October 2019, Box 2.1
The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures	
October 2019, Box 2.3
The Political Effects of Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.1
The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.2
The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate–Growth Differentials in	
April 2020, Box 2.2 
Advanced Economies
Social Unrest during COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.4
The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the	
October 2020, Box 2.2 
United States
Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure	
April 2021, Box 2.2
Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle	
April 2021, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Annex 1.SF.1
Food Insecurity and Prices during COVID-19	
October 2021, Box 2.1
mRNA Vaccines and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.1
Intellectual Property, Competition, and Innovation	
October 2021, Box 3.3
The Role of Price-Suppressing Policies	
October 2024, Box 2.2
Understanding the Social Acceptability of Structural Reforms	
October 2024, Chapter 3
Policies to Facilitate the Integration of Ukrainian Refugees into the European Labor Market:	
October 2024, Box 3.1 
Early Evidence
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
164
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
Intergenerational Considerations in Pension Reforms	
April 2025, Box 2.2
Journeys and Junctions: Spillovers from Migration and Refugee Policies	
April 2025, Chapter 3
Natural Disasters, Conflict, and Forced Displacement	
April 2025, Box 3.1
The Demographic Dividends from Migration	
April 2025, Box 3.2
Industrial Policy: Managing Trade-Offs to Promote Growth and Resilience	
October 2025, Chapter 3
A Comparison between Industrial and Structural Policies	
October 2025, Box 3.3
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
165
E
xecutive Directors broadly agreed with staff’s 
assessment of the global economic outlook, 
risks, and policy priorities. They welcomed 
the recent economic resilience despite repeated 
shocks, noting the importance of stronger economic 
fundamentals and policy frameworks in EMDEs. 
Directors acknowledged, however, that major policy 
shifts are reshaping the global economic landscape 
and broadly concurred that the recent resilience, also 
supported by temporary factors, could be fragile as 
lingering vulnerabilities, elevated policy uncertainty, 
and fragmentation continue to weigh on growth 
prospects. At the same time, a view was held that 
staff’s overall characterization of the global economic 
environment is overly pessimistic. Directors cautioned 
that protectionism and significant cuts to foreign aid 
disproportionately affect the outlook for the world’s 
poorest economies, undermining their convergence 
prospects.
Directors broadly concurred that risks to the 
outlook are tilted to the downside, including from 
prolonged policy uncertainty and any escalation 
in trade tensions, as well as from rising fiscal 
vulnerabilities, increased fragilities in financial markets, 
and their potentially adverse interactions. With high 
debt service obligations and rollover needs, a continued 
rise in government borrowing costs would further 
reduce fiscal space, challenging efforts to rebuild fiscal 
buffers and making bond market functioning more 
fragile. Directors also acknowledged that stretched 
risk asset valuations and higher interconnectedness 
between banks and nonbank financial institutions 
(NBFIs) has kept financial stability risks elevated. They 
also recognized the risks stemming from eroding good 
governance and the independence of key economic 
institutions. Labor supply shocks, regional conflicts, 
including Russia’s war in Ukraine, and commodity 
price volatility are additional risks to the outlook.
Directors broadly underscored the need to 
reinvigorate multilateral cooperation to meaningfully 
reduce trade policy uncertainty by re-anchoring trade 
in an open, rules-based and transparent system. They 
acknowledged the need to modernize trade rules and 
lower barriers, including through regional agreements 
that remain open to and do not discriminate against 
third parties. There was general recognition that 
trade diplomacy should work hand in hand with 
a coordinated approach to implement domestic 
macroeconomic adjustments and address distortions 
behind internal and external imbalances. Attention 
was also brought to the role of the global financial 
safety net in mitigating systemic risks and, in this 
regard, the importance of continued progress on Fund 
concessional resources and a strong, quota-based, and 
adequately resourced IMF at its center.
Directors highlighted the need for the Fund to 
provide tailored fiscal advice that takes country 
specific circumstances into account. They stressed 
the importance of rebuilding fiscal buffers and 
creating space for new spending demands while 
safeguarding debt sustainability. Directors called for 
fiscal consolidation with realistic and credible plans 
that are anchored in robust medium term fiscal 
frameworks and combine spending rationalization and 
revenue generation, while protecting the vulnerable. 
They emphasized the need to prioritize measures 
that raise efficiency of public spending and support 
sustainable and inclusive private sector led growth, 
while avoiding blanket spending cuts. Where new 
discretionary support is warranted, it should be 
transparent, targeted, and temporary. Directors 
noted the potential for reforms to pensions, health 
care, wage bills, and tax expenditures to create fiscal 
room for spending that promotes long run economic 
growth. In countries where debt is unsustainable, they 
emphasized the importance of cooperation through the 
The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the  
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 29, 2025.
IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK, 
SEPTEMBER 2025
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim
166
International Monetary Fund | October 2025
G20 Common Framework and the Global Sovereign 
Debt Roundtable to seek timely and orderly debt 
restructuring.
Directors emphasized the importance of central 
bank independence and their insulation from political 
pressures for the anchoring of inflation expectations 
and the pursuit of price stability in line with their 
respective mandates. Monetary policy should be data-
driven, calibrated to country-specific circumstances—
with careful assessment of the nature of shocks and 
the output gap—and clearly communicated. In 
economies experiencing supply shocks, a gradual 
easing of the policy stance should be considered 
provided that disinflation is clearly established. Where 
weaker demand dominates, cautious consideration 
can be given to a reduction in policy rates. A prudent 
approach to monetary policy easing can also help 
contain asset valuation pressures. For countries 
experiencing excessive exchange rate volatility and 
with shallow foreign exchange markets, the use of 
temporary foreign exchange interventions and capital 
flow measures may be appropriate, consistent with the 
advice of the Integrated Policy Framework, alongside 
further deepening local bond markets while managing 
risks from the bank-sovereign nexus. Directors also 
called on the authorities to continue to use their 
macroprudential tools, as appropriate, and generally 
supported the consistent and timely implementation 
of internationally-agreed regulatory frameworks, like 
Basel III, to mitigate macro-financial stability risks. 
It will also be important to address data gaps and 
strengthen regulation of NBFIs and digital assets, 
including stablecoins.
Directors acknowledged the importance of boosting 
productivity and re-igniting growth over the medium 
term. They called for comprehensive and carefully 
sequenced structural reform packages, taking into 
account country-specific circumstances including social 
and political economy considerations. Priority reforms 
include encouraging labor mobility and participation, 
increasing digitalization and AI readiness, and 
improving the business climate and competition to 
reallocate labor and capital to the most productive 
firms. Directors generally welcomed the Fund’s analysis 
on industrial policies, with many calling for further 
work in this area, including expanding its scope to 
include a discussion of spillover risks and related 
policy advice. Directors cautioned that the expanding 
use of industrial policies involves opportunity costs 
and tradeoffs, including fiscal costs, higher consumer 
prices, and resource misallocation. Where pursued, 
industrial policies should be transparent and focus on 
addressing market failures, targeting areas with the 
highest potential for positive spillovers and impact on 
supply-side capacity and job creation, supported by 
complementary structural reforms. Directors generally 
noted that strong governance is key for their successful 
implementation and called on governments to stay 
agile in monitoring their impact and scaling back or 
discontinuing ineffective measures. A few Directors 
also stressed the importance of leveraging historical 
experiences in the conduct of industrial policies.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK	
OCTOBER 2025
IN THIS ISSUE:
CHAPTER 1
Global Prospects and Policies
CHAPTER 2
Emerging Market Resilience: 
Good Luck or Good Policies? 
CHAPTER 3
Industrial Policy: Managing Trade-Offs 
to Promote Growth and Resilience
IBSN 
