World Economic Outlook 
October 2018
Challenges to Steady Growth
World Economic and Financial Surveys
I
N
T
E
R
N
A
T
I
O
N
A
L
 
M
O
N
E
T
A
R
Y
 
F
U
N
D
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
©2018 International Monetary Fund
 
Cover and Design: Luisa Menjivar and Jorge Salazar
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and 
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some 
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional 
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial 
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. | 
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
 
HC10.80	
ISBN 978-1-48437-679-9 (paper) 
	
978-1-48437-719-2 (Web PDF) 
	
978-1-48437-735-2 (ePub) 
	
978-1-48437-736-9 (Mobi)
The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a 
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited 
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the 
report on September 20, 2018. The views expressed in this publication are those of the 
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors 
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2018. World Economic Outlook: 
Challenges to Steady Growth. Washington, DC, October.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail: 
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services 
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
iii
Assumptions and Conventions	
ix
Further Information	
x
Data	
xi
Preface	
xii
Foreword	
xiii
Executive Summary	
xvi
Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies	
1
Recent Developments and Prospects	
1
Forces Shaping the Outlook	
9
The Forecast	
12
Policy Priorities	
23
Scenario Box 1. Global Trade Tensions	
33
Box 1.1. Increasing Market Power	
36
Box 1.2. Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
39
Box 1.3. Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
40
Box 1.4. Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
42
Box 1.5. Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
43
Box 1.6. Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
48
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent  
Trends in Energy Demand	
52
Box 1.SF.1. The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
60
References	
68
Online Annexes
Annex 1.SF.1. Commodity Special Feature	
Chapter 2. The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown	
71
Introduction	
71
Persistent Post–Global Financial Crisis Deviations in Output	
73
Policy Frameworks, Measures, and Postcrisis Output Performance	
78
Summary	
84
Box 2.1. The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
86
Box 2.2. The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:  
The Case of Industrial Robots	
90
Box 2.3. The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
93
References	
97
Online Annexes
Annex 2.1. Data Sources and Country Coverage
Annex 2.2. Additional Details on Quantifying Postcrisis Deviations in Activity from Precrisis Trends
Annex 2.3. Robot Diffusion and Its Employment Impact in the Aftermath of the Crisis
CONTENTS
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
iv	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Chapter 3. Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
101
Introduction	
101
Extent of Improvements in Inflation Outcomes	
103
Determinants of Inflation in Emerging Markets	
105
Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
108
Implications of Anchoring for Monetary Policy	
111
Summary and Policy Implications	
116
Box 3.1. Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies 	
118
Box 3.2. Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	 121
References	
123
Online Annexes
Annex 3.1. Data Sources and Country Coverage
Annex 3.2. Determinants of Inflation
Annex 3.3. Anchoring of Inflation Expectations
Annex 3.4. Anchoring of Inflation Expectations and Monetary Policy: Model-Based Guidance
Annex 3.5. The Event Study Methodology for the Taper Tantrum
Annex 3.6. Monetary Policy Reaction Function
Statistical Appendix	
127
Assumptions	
127
What’s New	
128
Data and Conventions	
128
Country Notes	
129
Classification of Countries	
130
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification	
130
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP,  
Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2017	
131
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup	
132
Table C. European Union	
132
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings	
133
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and  
Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries	
134
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods	
136
Table G. Key Data Documentation	
137
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies	
147
List of Tables	
151
Output (Tables A1–A4)	
152
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)	
159
Financial Policies (Table A8)	
164
Foreign Trade (Table A9)	
165
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)	
167
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)	
174
Flow of Funds (Table A14)	
178
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)	
181
World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics	
183
IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, October 2018	
193
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
CONTENTS﻿
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
v
Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections	
14
Table 1.5.1. Episodes of Declines in GDP per Capita Exceeding 20 Percent	
44
Table 1.5.2. Declines in GDP per Capita: Stylized Facts	
46
Table 1.5.3. Postcrisis Outcomes and Crisis Depth	
47
Table 1.SF.1. Total Demand Determinant for Baseline Specification	
55
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance,  
and Unemployment	
61
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account  
Balance, and Unemployment	
62
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account  
Balance, and Unemployment	
63
Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
64
Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP,  
Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
65
Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
66
Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output	
67
Table 2.1. Total Factor Productivity Deviations Account for Large Share of GDP per Worker Deviations	
77
Table 2.2. Impact of Precrisis Conditions on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from Precrisis Trend	
80
Table 2.3. Financial Sector Support and Discretionary Fiscal Stimulus in Group of Twenty Economies	
83
Online Tables
Annex Table 1.SF.1.1. Contribution to Electrification, 1971–2015	
Annex Table 1.SF.1.2. World Energy Usage, 2015 and 1971	
Annex Table 1.SF.1.3. Total Demand Determinants, by Varying Specifications	
Annex Table 1.SF.1.4. Primary Energy and Electricity Share Determinants	
Annex Table 2.1.1. Data Sources
Annex Table 2.1.2. Country Coverage
Annex Table 2.2.1. Banking Crises, 2007–08
Annex Table 2.2.2. Tests of Equality of Distributions of 2015–17 Deviations
Annex Table 2.2.3. Probability of Banking Crisis and the Strength of Restrictions on Banking Activities
Annex Table 2.2.4. Banking Crisis and Regulations: Probit Regression
Annex Table 2.2.5. Impact on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
Annex Table 2.2.6. Impact on 2011–13 Investment Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in 
Drivers
Annex Table 2.2.7. Impact on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers 
by Country Group
Annex Table 2.2.8. Impact on 2015–17 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
Annex Table 2.3.1. Sectors, Individual Industries, and Abbreviations Used in Chapter, ISIC Revision and IFR 
Sector Classifications
Annex Table 2.3.2. Crisis Exposure and Robot Density, Test in Median
Annex Table 2.3.3. Cross-Section Difference-in-Differences Estimation of Impact of Crisis on Robot Density
Annex Table 2.3.4. Ordinary Least Squares Estimation of Impact of Robot Adoption on Employment Using 
Output Loss
Annex Table 2.3.5. Ordinary Least Squares Estimation of Impact of Robot Adoption on Employment by 
Medium Skills and High Output Loss
Annex Table 2.3.6. Ordinary Least Squares Estimation of Impact of Robot Adoption on Employment by 
Labor Market Policies and Output Loss
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
vi	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 3.1.1. Data Sources
Annex Table 3.1.2. Country Coverage
Annex Table 3.2.1. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Estimation Results
Annex Table 3.2.2. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Specification Augmented for External Factors
Annex Table 3.2.3. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Alternative Forecast Horizon
Annex Table 3.2.4. Hybrid Phillips Curve: Extensions
Annex Table 3.3.1. Correlation of Relative Ranking across Anchoring Metrics, 2004–18
Annex Table 3.6.1. Estimation of Monetary Policy Rules
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing and General 
Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing and 
Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria: External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario: Selected 
Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1. Real GDP Growth, by Country Group	
xiv
Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators	
2
Figure 1.2. Commodity and Oil Prices	
3
Figure 1.3. Global Inflation	
4
Figure 1.4. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions	
6
Figure 1.5. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, February–September 2018	
6
Figure 1.6. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates and Spreads	
7
Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and Credit	
8
Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows	
8
Figure 1.9. Impact of Commodity Price Changes	
10
Figure 1.10. Global Investment and Trade	
10
Figure 1.11. Contributions to GDP Growth	
11
Figure 1.12. Per Capita Real GDP Growth	
12
Figure 1.13. Fiscal Indicators	
13
Figure 1.14. Global Current Account Balance	
17
Figure 1.15. Current Account Balances in Relation to Economic Fundamentals	
18
Figure 1.16. Net International Investment Position	
18
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
CONTENTS﻿
Figure 1.17. Growth for Creditors and Debtors	
19
Figure 1.18. Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions	
22
Figure 1.19. Geopolitical Risk Index	
23
Figure 1.20. Risks to the Global Outlook	
23
Figure 1.21. Projected Change in Public Debt	
25
Figure 1.22. Change in the Working-Age Population (15–64) Relative to 2015 Levels	
30
Scenario Figure 1. Real GDP in Trade Tensions Scenario	
35
Figure 1.1.1. Market Power over Time	
36
Figure 1.1.2. Markup Increase, by Subsector	
36
Figure 1.1.3. Advanced Economies: Distribution of Markups of All Firms	
37
Figure 1.1.4. Advanced Economies: Distribution of Markups of Firms, by Industry 	
37
Figure 1.5.1. Ongoing Episodes of Large Declines in GDP per Capita	
46
Figure 1.6.1. World Economic Outlook Data: Recessions, Actual and Forecast	
48
Figure 1.6.2. Consensus Economics Data: Recessions, Actual and Forecast	
49
Figure 1.6.3. Severe Slowdowns, Actual and Forecast	
50
Figure 1.6.4. Forecast Errors during Severe Slowdowns	
50
Figure 1.6.5. Forecast Performance	
51
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments	
52
Figure 1.SF.2. Primary Energy Consumption and Supply	
54
Figure 1.SF.3. Energy Efficiency 	
56
Figure 1.SF.4. Energy Demand and GDP per Capita	
57
Figure 1.SF.5. Biomass	
57
Figure 1.SF.6. Primary Energy Source Shares	
58
Figure 1.SF.7. Decomposition of Change in World Coal Intensity	
58
Figure 1.SF.1.1. Renewables Capacity	
60
Figure 2.1. Correlation of GDP Deviations between Periods	
73
Figure 2.2. Postcrisis Change in Inequality	
74
Figure 2.3. Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17	
74
Figure 2.4. Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend by Country Group, 2015–17	
75
Figure 2.5. Postcrisis Investment Deviations from Precrisis Trend: Mean Trajectory	
76
Figure 2.6. Postcrisis Capital Stock Deviations from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17	
76
Figure 2.7. Postcrisis Total Factor Productivity Deviations from Precrisis Trends, 2015–17	
77
Figure 2.8. Changes in Research and Development Expenditure, by Output Losses and  
Country Groups	
78
Figure 2.9. Average Change in Robot Density, by Output Losses and Country Groups, 2010–14	
78
Figure 2.10. Probability of Banking Crisis	
81
Figure 2.11. Postcrisis Deviations of Euro Area and Other Advanced Economies	
82
Figure 2.12. Impact on 2015–17 GDP Deviations from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers	 84
Figure 2.1.1. International Migration and the Global Financial Crisis	
86
Figure 2.1.2. Impact of Emigration Rate from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at  
Different Horizons	
87
Figure 2.1.3. Total Fertility Rate	
88
Figure 2.1.4. Impact of Crisis Exposure on Fertility Rate at Different Horizons	
88
Figure 2.1.5. Impact on Fertility from One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at  
Different Horizons	
89
Figure 2.2.1. Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment Growth	
90
Figure 2.2.2. Hollowing-Out Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment Growth	
91
Figure 2.2.3. Labor Market Policies and Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment Growth	
92
Figure 2.3.1. Containment and Resolution	
93
Figure 2.3.2. Timing of Recapitalization	
94
Figure 2.3.3. New Share Issuance by Banks	
94
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
vii
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
Figure 2.3.4. Nonperforming Loan Ratio	
95
Figure 2.3.5. Postcrisis Paths	
96
Figure 3.1. Headline Consumer Price Index Inflation	
102
Figure 3.2. Institutional and Policy Changes, Global Shocks, and Financial Conditions	
102
Figure 3.3. Regional Differences and Dispersion in Headline Consumer Price Index Inflation in  
Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
104
Figure 3.4. Other Measures of Price Inflation in Emerging Markets	
104
Figure 3.5. Inflation Dynamics	
105
Figure 3.6. Coefficient Estimates from the Baseline Phillips Curve Specification	
106
Figure 3.7. Contributions to Deviation of Core Inflation from Target	
106
Figure 3.8. Time Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, by Subperiod	
108
Figure 3.9. Evolution of the Degree of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations, 2000–17	
109
Figure 3.10. Cross-Country Heterogeneity in Degree of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations, 
	 2004–17	
110
Figure 3.11. Anchoring of Inflation Expectations and Policy Frameworks, 2004–17	
111
Figure 3.12. Gains from Anchoring Inflation Expectations	
113
Figure 3.13. Response to the Taper Tantrum	
114
Figure 3.14. Cumulative Exchange Rate Pass-Through	
114
Figure 3.15. Correlation between Detrended Policy Rate and Output Gap, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1	
115
Figure 3.16. Effects of Less-Anchored Inflation Expectations: Regression Results, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1	 116
Figure 3.1.1. Comparison of Macro Characteristics across Country Groups	
118
Figure 3.1.2. Inflation Dynamics	
119
Figure 3.1.3. Inflation, Food Shares, and Commodity Prices	
120
Figure 3.1.4. Central Bank Transparency	
120
Figure 3.2.1. Frequency of Monetary Policy Surprises, 2010–13 versus 2014–18	
121
Figure 3.2.2. Monetary Policy Predictability and Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
122
Figure 3.2.3. Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy Predictability	
122
Online Figures
Annex Figure 1.SF.1.1 Renewable Total Primary Energy Supply Growth, by Select Regions	
Annex Figure 2.2.1. Estimates of Precrisis Trends for the United States
Annex Figure 2.2.2. Structural Break
Annex Figure 2.2.3. Postcrisis Output per Worker Deviations from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17
Annex Figure 2.2.4. Distributions of GDP Deviations after Recessions
Annex Figure 2.2.5. Change in Postcrisis and Precrisis Growth Rates in Sectoral Capital Stock
Annex Figure 2.3.1. Sales of Robots for Professional Services
Annex Figure 2.3.2. Sales of Robots for Domestic/Personal Services
Annex Figure 2.3.3. Average Change in Robot Density (2010–14) and Initial Robot Stock in 2010
Annex Figure 2.3.4. Effect of Crisis Exposure on Robot Diffusion
Annex Figure 3.2.1. Contribution of Domestic and Global Factors to Inflation Dynamics
Annex Figure 3.3.1. Degree of Anchoring, Rolling Windows
Annex Figure 3.5.1. Effect of May 2013 “Taper Tantrum”: Alternative Classification Based on Pre-2013 Data
Annex Figure 3.5.2. Effect of May 2013 “Taper Tantrum”: Alternative Classification Based on Median 
Measures
Annex Figure 3.6.1. Net Capital Inflows to Emerging Markets, 2004–18
viii	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
ix
ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO). It has 
been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during July 17 to August 14, 2018, 
except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism II (ERM II), which are assumed 
to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established policies of national authorities will be 
maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical 
Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $69.38 a barrel in 2018 and $68.76 a barrel in 2019 and will remain 
unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that the six-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on US dollar 
deposits will average 2.5 percent in 2018 and 3.4 percent in 2019; that the three-month euro deposit rate will average –0.3 
percent in 2018 and –0.2 percent in 2019; and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will yield on average 0.0 percent 
in 2018 and 0.1 percent in 2019. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties 
surrounding them add to the margin of error that would in any event be involved in the projections. The estimates and 
projections are based on statistical information available through September 18, 2018.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
. . .	
to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
– 	
between years or months (for example, 2017–18 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered, 
including the beginning and ending years or months; and
/	
between years or months (for example, 2017/18) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
“Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
“Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 1 percentage point).
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Table F in the Statistical Appendix 
lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and government finance data for each country. 
For some countries, the figures for 2017 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Table G in the 
Statistical Appendix lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and 
balance of payments indicators for each country. 
What is new in this publication:
•	 Argentina’s consumer prices, which were previously excluded from the group composites because of data constraints, are 
now included starting from 2017 onward.
•	 Data for Aruba are included in the data aggregated for the emerging market and developing economies.
•	 Egypt’s forecast data, from which the nominal exchange rate assumptions are calculated, were previously excluded because 
the nominal exchange rate was a market sensitive issue; they are now made public.  
•	 Swaziland is now called Eswatini.
•	 Venezuela redenominated its currency on August 20, 2018, by replacing 100,000 bolívares Fuertes (VEF) with 1 bolívar 
Soberano (VES). Local currency data, including the historical data, for Venezuela are expressed in the new currency 
beginning with the October 2018 WEO database.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
•	 If no source is listed on tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.
•	 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
•	 Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is a state as 
understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities that are not states 
but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or region. Unless 
noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of the weighted group data.
   The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the part of 
the International Monetary Fund, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of 
such boundaries.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
x	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
FURTHER INFORMATION
Corrections and Revisions 
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the 
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are 
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and 
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online tables of contents.
Print and Digital Editions 
Print copies of this World Economic Outlook can be ordered at https://www.bookstore.imf.org/books/title/
world-economic-outlook-october-2018. 
The WEO is featured on the IMF website at http://www.imf.org/publications/WEO. This site includes a PDF 
of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein.
The IMF eLibrary hosts multiple digital editions of the World Economic Outlook, including ePub, enhanced 
PDF, Mobi, and HTML: http://elibrary.imf.org/OCT18WEO.
 
Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at http://www.
imf.org/external/terms.htm.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
xi
This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compila-
tion of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most 
frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histori-
cal data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context 
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each 
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural 
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF 
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a 
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International 
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their 
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a 
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are 
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF 
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and 
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum 
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Fax: (202) 623-6343
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum
DATA
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
xii	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s 
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international 
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product 
of a comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on 
information the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are 
carried out in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific 
Department, European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere 
Department—together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets 
Department; and the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of 
Maurice Obstfeld, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Gian Maria 
Milesi-Ferretti, Deputy Director, Research Department; and Oya Celasun, Division Chief, Research Department.
The primary contributors to this report were Rudolfs Bems, Christian Bogmans, Francesca Caselli, Wenjie Chen, 
Francesco Grigoli, Bertrand Gruss, Zsóka Kóczán, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian, Akito Matsumoto, Mico Mrkaic, Malhar 
Nabar, Natalija Novta, Andrea Pescatori, and Petia Topalova.
Other contributors include Michal Andrle, Gavin Asdorian, Luisa Calixto, Yan Carrière-Swallow, Federico Diez, 
Angela Espiritu, Rachel Yuting Fan, Gregg Forte, Meron Haile, Mandy Hemmati, Benjamin Hilgenstock, 
Ava Yeabin Hong, Benjamin Hunt, Deniz Igan, Christopher Johns, Lama Kiyasseh, Jungjin Lee, Daniel Leigh, 
Daniela Muhaj, Susanna Mursula, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, Rafael Portillo, Evgenia Pugacheva, 
Adrian Robles Villamil, Susie Xiaohui Sun, Suchanan Tambunlertchai, Nicholas Tong, Julia Xueliang Wang, 
Shan Wang, Jilun Xing, Juan Yépez, Yuan Zeng, Qiaoqiao Zhang, Candice Huiyuan Zhao, Caroline Chenqi Zhou, 
and Jillian Zirnhelt.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production 
and editorial support from Christine Ebrahimzadeh and Linda Kean and editorial assistance from James Unwin, 
Lucy Scott Morales, Sherrie Brown, and Vector Talent Resources.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, 
as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 20, 2018. However, 
both projections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive 
Directors or to their national authorities. 
PREFACE
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
A 
	 typical foreword to the World Economic  
	 Outlook (WEO) highlights how data  
	 since the previous projection alter our 
	 baseline growth assumptions. It pays 
detailed attention to the most recent developments 
and interprets the implications for policies going 
forward. This WEO foreword—my last—will instead 
situate the current conjuncture in a broader historical 
context, the better to draw out lessons for the future. 
The occasion justifies my unusual approach. This 
WEO is appearing shortly after the 10th anniversary of 
the Lehman Brothers collapse and, moreover, at a time 
of mounting uncertainties—not only over economic 
policies but also over the global framework of interna-
tional relations within which policies are made. 
The decade since the global financial crisis of 2008–
09 has indeed brought dramatic economic and political 
developments, a trend that seems unlikely to recede any 
time soon. How can policymakers guide their econo-
mies through the troubled waters ahead? How can 
they strengthen and modernize the post–World War II 
multilateral system, which supported an unparalleled 
70 years of peace and prosperity? To answer, we must 
consider not only the impact of the crisis itself but also 
the years just before, when some key patterns that have 
defined the post-crisis period first emerged. 
The Precrisis Decade
It was in the period before the crisis when some of 
our current economic vulnerabilities first came to be. 
The chart tracks real global growth since 1980, along 
with the contributions of advanced economies and of 
emerging market and developing economies. After the 
Asian crisis (1997–98) and the collapse of the dot-
com bubble (2000–01), the growth of emerging mar-
ket and developing economies accelerated significantly 
while advanced economies, even though recovering, 
grew at rates below prior levels. 
Two things stand out. First, advanced economies’ 
growth has generally trended downward since the 
mid-2000s. This long-term decline stems from aging 
workforces and slower productivity growth, which 
coincide with falling economic dynamism and rising 
market concentration. Notably, the longer-term future 
growth rates that the WEO projects for advanced 
economies are below current levels. 
Second, the start of the new millennium brought 
a growth surge in emerging market and develop-
ing economies that decisively placed them ahead of 
advanced economies’ growth. Rapid Chinese growth 
was responsible for some, but clearly not all, of this 
decoupling, because the pattern remains even after 
subtracting China’s algebraic growth contribution (as 
well as India’s, for that matter). The growth acceleration 
is a robust consequence of stronger policy frameworks 
in many emerging market and developing economies, 
including their embrace of more open trade. Because 
it also derives from the greater weight of these fast-
growing economies in the world economy, their distinct 
growth advantage over advanced economies looks likely 
to continue unless advanced economies can meet their 
structural economic challenges.
The Asian crisis and the dot-com collapse—and 
intervening events like the forced bailout of Long-Term 
Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998, which avoided 
a possible systemic financial meltdown—illustrate 
FOREWORD 
World
Advanced economies
Emerging/developing economies
–4
1980 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 1. Real GDP Growth, by Country Group
(Year over year)
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2018.
Note: Grey area denotes projections.
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
xiii
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
pointedly how balance-sheet weaknesses and asset-price 
bubbles can bring down financial institutions and entire 
economies. In his 1998 Henry L. Stimson Lecture at 
Yale University, Alexandre Lamfalussy wrote presciently 
of the US market turmoil that followed that year’s Rus-
sian default: “If such developments can take place in the 
model market of the world, what is the practical value of 
recommending that emerging markets copy this model?” 
Many emerging market and developing economies 
did draw and act on lessons from these crises, for 
example, by embracing inflation targeting, adopting 
more flexible exchange rate regimes, and implement-
ing macroprudential policies—lessons well worth 
remembering today. Advanced economies, however, 
were more complacent, often viewing financial crises 
as problems to which only emerging market and 
developing economies were susceptible—notwith-
standing the contradictory evidence from several near-
misses, including LTCM. The result was the global 
financial crisis, which ended the mid-decade global 
boom. As a group, emerging market and developing 
economies generally weathered that crisis well, given 
its severity, and they have continued to grow more 
quickly than during the 1980s and 1990s. 
The Postcrisis Decade
World growth took a rarely precedented tumble in 
2009, but all regions of the world experienced a bounce 
back in 2010–11, supported by vigorous countercycli-
cal responses throughout the Group of Twenty coun-
tries. Many advanced economies reduced policy interest 
rates to the zero lower bound and began to experiment 
with unconventional monetary policies.
After 2010–11, however, a succession of shocks—
the euro area crisis, reversals of fiscal stimulus in 
major economies, wobbles in Chinese growth, and 
falling commodity prices—all prevented continued 
strong and synchronized growth. Relatively favorable 
economic fundamentals in the United States made 
it likely that the Federal Reserve would be the first 
among major central banks to normalize monetary 
policy, and the dollar strengthened starting in the 
summer of 2014. Global markets were spooked a year 
later when China, feeling the resulting pressure on 
its heavily managed exchange rate, began to allow its 
currency to fall against the dollar. The tensions did 
not recede quickly. Within a month of the Federal 
Reserve’s first interest-rate hike in nearly 10 years at 
the end of 2015, global financial markets swooned 
and commodity prices fell further. The 2016 global 
growth rate of 3.3 percent was the lowest since 2009.
Economic optimism began to return midway 
through 2016, despite any effects from the surprise out-
come of the UK Brexit referendum in June. Late that 
year, manufacturing activity surged and growth picked 
up broadly around the world, leading to the most 
evenly balanced global upswing since 2010. Global 
trade, which had grown unusually slowly during 2012–
16, also rebounded as investment began to recover. As 
of the April 2018 WEO, we projected global growth 
to rise to 3.9 percent in both 2018 and 2019, and for 
the first time in a while, assessed short-term risks to our 
growth forecast to be evenly balanced between potential 
positive and negative surprises.
Now, in October 2018, the outlook is one of less 
balanced and more tentative expansion than we hoped 
for last April. Growth in the United States remains 
exceptionally robust for now, powered by a procyclical 
fiscal expansion that may, however, weigh on US and 
global growth later. But we have downgraded near-term 
growth prospects for the euro area, Korea, and the 
United Kingdom. Our reassessment is more dramatic 
for emerging markets as a group, where we see growth 
easing in Latin America (notably Argentina, Brazil, 
Mexico), the Middle East (notably Iran), and emerging 
Europe (notably Turkey). Our 2019 growth projection 
for China is also lower than in April, given the latest 
round of US tariffs on Chinese imports, as are our pro-
jections for India. Owing to these changes, our inter-
national growth projections for both this year and next 
are downgraded to 3.7 percent, 0.2 percentage point 
below our last assessments and the same rate achieved 
in 2017. At the global level, recent data show weaken-
ing in trade, manufacturing, and investment. Overall, 
world economic growth is still solid compared with 
earlier this decade, but it appears to have plateaued.
These more moderate growth numbers and the 
weaker incoming data that underpin them owe, in 
part, to a sharp rise in policy uncertainty over the past 
year—a development yet to be reflected in advanced 
economy financial markets but evident in news-based 
uncertainty measures. Uncertainty over trade policy is 
prominent in the wake of US actions (or threatened 
actions) on several fronts, the responses by its trading 
partners, and a general weakening of multilateral 
consultation on trade issues. The possible failure of 
Brexit negotiations poses another risk. Amid the trade 
uncertainties, financial conditions are tightening for 
emerging market and developing economies as they 
xiv	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
FOREWORD 
adjust to progressive interest rate hikes by the Federal 
Reserve and an impending end of asset purchases 
by the European Central Bank. Compared with 10 
years ago, many of these economies have higher levels 
of corporate and sovereign debt, leaving them more 
vulnerable. With geopolitical tensions also relevant 
in several regions, we judge that, even for the near 
future, the possibility of unpleasant surprises out-
weighs the likelihood of unforeseen good news.
Policy Challenges
Perhaps the biggest secular challenge for many 
advanced economies centers on the slow growth of 
workers’ incomes, perceptions of lower social mobility, 
and, in some countries, inadequate policy responses to 
structural economic change. Not only has the trend in 
long-term advanced economy growth been downward; 
in many countries, the more meager gains have gone 
primarily to the relatively well-off. In the United 
States, for example, median real household income 
was about the same in 2016 as in 1999. This pat-
tern clearly predates the global financial crisis and the 
euro area crisis. But the crises themselves, along with 
aspects of the policy response, further soured the pub-
lic mood. Such discontent in turn helped give rise to 
current tensions over trade policy as well as a broader 
skepticism toward centrist policies and leaders, who 
have traditionally supported global cooperation as the 
proper response to shared challenges.
Policymakers must take a long-term perspective to 
address this malaise. Inclusive fiscal policies, educational 
investments, and ensuring access to adequate health 
care can reduce inequality and are key priorities. So too 
are more secure social safety nets that can help work-
ers adjust to a range of structural shocks, whether from 
globalization, technological change, or (in some coun-
tries) climate change. Policies to promote labor force 
participation and the economic inclusion of women 
and youth are especially important. Structural reform 
priorities differ by country, but in general, addressing 
them will raise output and growth over the medium 
term. That said, due consideration must be given to 
those who are already disadvantaged but might lose 
out further. Support for research and development and 
basic and applied scientific research offers the promise 
of raising growth rates, as many studies have shown. 
These policy priorities are also relevant to emerging 
market and developing economies.
Most countries also need to build fiscal buffers to 
make room for policy responses to the next recession 
when it comes and to reduce the long-term tax costs of 
servicing high public debts. Several emerging mar-
ket and developing economies must undertake fiscal 
reforms to ensure the sustainability of public finances 
and improve market sentiment. Global and national 
actions have buttressed financial stability since the cri-
sis, but the work remains incomplete in several respects, 
including, for example, safeguarding the nonbank 
financial sector and resolution in insolvency, especially 
for systemically important international banks, where a 
cooperative global framework is urgently needed. Some 
financial oversight measures that grew out of the crisis 
could be simplified, but a wholesale rollback would risk 
future instability. Even piecemeal deregulation must be 
cautious and carefully considered, because a sequence 
of smaller actions could eventually weaken the system 
enough to leave it fragile. Indeed, precisely because 
monetary policy will need to remain accommodative 
where inflation is below target levels and will need 
to proceed cautiously elsewhere, effective macro- and 
microprudential levers must remain available.
The growing weight of emerging market and 
developing economies in the global economy means 
that advanced economies internalize fewer of the 
global gains from their own support of multilateral 
cooperation. They perceive the leakage of benefits 
to other countries to be relatively larger now than 
in the past, compared with their own benefits. This 
change may tempt some to retreat into an imagined 
self-​sufficiency. But economic interdependence is 
greater than ever—through trade, finance, knowledge 
spillovers, migration, and environmental impacts, to 
name a few channels—and that makes cooperation in 
areas of common concern more important than ever 
too, including for advanced economies. 
Multilateralism must evolve so that every country 
views it to be in its self-interest, even in a multipolar 
world. But that will require domestic political support for 
an internationally collaborative approach. Inclusive poli-
cies that ensure a broad sharing of the gains from eco-
nomic growth are not only desirable in their own right; 
they can also help convince citizens that international 
cooperation works for them. I am proud that during 
my tenure, the IMF has increasingly championed such 
policies while supporting multilateral solutions to global 
challenges. Without more inclusive policies, multilateral-
ism cannot survive. And without multilateralism, the 
world will be a poorer and more dangerous place.
Maurice Obstfeld
Economic Counsellor
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
xv
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
xvi	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
The steady expansion under way since mid-2016 
continues, with global growth for 2018–19 projected 
to remain at its 2017 level. At the same time, however, 
the expansion has become less balanced and may have 
peaked in some major economies. Downside risks to 
global growth have risen in the past six months and the 
potential for upside surprises has receded. 
Global growth is projected at 3.7 percent for 2018–
19—0.2 percentage point lower for both years than 
forecast in April. In the United States, momentum is still 
strong as fiscal stimulus continues to increase, but the 
forecast for 2019 has been revised down due to recently 
announced trade measures, including the tariffs imposed 
on $200 billion of US imports from China. Growth 
projections have been marked down for the euro area and 
the United Kingdom, following surprises that suppressed 
activity in early 2018. Among emerging market and 
developing economies, the growth prospects of many energy 
exporters have been lifted by higher oil prices, but growth 
was revised down for Argentina, Brazil, Iran, and Turkey, 
among others, reflecting country-specific factors, tighter 
financial conditions, geopolitical tensions, and higher oil 
import bills. China and a number of Asian economies are 
also projected to experience somewhat weaker growth in 
2019 in the aftermath of the recently announced trade 
measures. Beyond the next couple of years, as output gaps 
close and monetary policy settings continue to normal-
ize, growth in most advanced economies is expected to 
decline to potential rates—well below the averages reached 
before the global financial crisis of a decade ago. Slower 
expansion in working-age populations and projected 
lackluster productivity gains are the prime drivers of lower 
medium-term growth rates. US growth will decline as 
fiscal stimulus begins to unwind in 2020, at a time when 
the monetary tightening cycle is expected to be at its peak. 
Growth in China will remain strong but is projected to 
decline gradually, and prospects remain subpar in some 
emerging market and developing economies, especially for 
per capita growth, including in commodity exporters that 
continue to face substantial fiscal consolidation needs or 
are mired in war and conflict. 
Risks to global growth skew to the downside in a context 
of elevated policy uncertainty. Several of the downside 
risks highlighted in the April 2018 World Economic 
Outlook (WEO)—such as rising trade barriers and a 
reversal of capital flows to emerging market economies 
with weaker fundamentals and higher political risk—have 
become more pronounced or have partially materialized. 
While financial market conditions remain accommoda-
tive in advanced economies, they could tighten rapidly if, 
for example, trade tensions and policy uncertainty were 
to intensify. Monetary policy is another potential trigger. 
The US economy is above full employment, yet the path of 
interest rate increases that markets anticipate is less steep 
than that projected by the Federal Reserve. Unexpectedly 
high inflation readings in the United States could therefore 
lead investors to abruptly reassess risks. Tighter financial 
conditions in advanced economies could cause disruptive 
portfolio adjustments, sharp exchange rate movements, and 
further reductions in capital inflows to emerging markets, 
particularly those with greater vulnerabilities.
The recovery has helped lift employment and income, 
strengthened balance sheets, and provided an oppor-
tunity to rebuild buffers. Yet, with risks shifting to the 
downside, there is greater urgency for policies to enhance 
prospects for strong and inclusive growth. Avoiding 
protectionist reactions to structural change and finding 
cooperative solutions that promote continued growth in 
goods and services trade remain essential to preserve and 
extend the global expansion. At a time of above-poten-
tial growth in many economies, policy­makers should aim 
to enact reforms that raise medium-term incomes to the 
benefit of all. With shrinking excess capacity and mount-
ing downside risks, many countries need to rebuild fiscal 
buffers and strengthen their resilience to an environment 
in which financial conditions could tighten suddenly 
and sharply.
In advanced economies, economic activity lost 
some momentum in the first half of 2018 after peak-
ing in the second half of 2017. Outcomes fell short of 
projections in the euro area and the United Kingdom; 
growth in world trade and industrial production 
declined; and some high-frequency indicators mod-
erated. Core inflation remains very different across 
advanced economies—well below objectives in the 
euro area and Japan, but close to target in the United 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
Executive Summary
Kingdom and the United States. Across emerging 
market and developing economies, activity continued 
to improve gradually in energy exporters but softened 
in some importers. Activity slowed more markedly in 
Argentina, Brazil, and Turkey, where country-specific 
factors and a souring of investor sentiment were also at 
play. Inflation has generally increased in emerging mar-
ket and developing economies, in part reflecting the 
pass-through of currency depreciations. While financial 
conditions have tightened in many emerging market 
and developing economies, they remain supportive in 
advanced economies, despite continued federal funds 
rate increases in the United States. 
Global growth is forecast at 3.7 percent for 2018–
19, 0.2 percentage point below the April 2018 WEO 
projection, and is set to soften over the medium term. 
Global financial conditions are expected to tighten 
as monetary policy normalizes; the trade measures 
implemented since April will weigh on activity in 2019 
and beyond; US fiscal policy will subtract momentum 
starting in 2020; and China will slow, reflecting weaker 
credit growth and rising trade barriers. In advanced 
economies, marked slowdowns in working-age popula-
tion growth and lackluster productivity advances will 
hold back gains in medium-term potential output. 
Across emerging market and developing economies, 
medium-term prospects are mixed. Projections remain 
favorable for emerging Asia and emerging Europe, 
excluding Turkey, but are tepid for Latin America, the 
Middle East, and sub-Saharan Africa, where—despite 
the ongoing recovery—the medium-term outlook for 
commodity exporters remains generally subdued, with 
a need for further economic diversification and fiscal 
adjustment. Prospects for 2018–19 were marked down 
sharply for Iran, reflecting the impact of the reinstate-
ment of US sanctions. For Turkey, market turmoil, 
sharp currency depreciation, and elevated uncertainty 
will weigh on investment and consumer demand, 
likewise justifying a sharp negative revision in growth 
prospects. Growth for China and a number of Asian 
economies have also been revised down following the 
recently announced trade measures. Some 45 emerg-
ing market and developing economies—accounting for 
10 percent of world GDP in purchasing-power-parity 
terms—are projected to grow by less than advanced 
economies in per capita terms over 2018–23, and 
hence to fall further behind in living standards. 
The balance of risks to the global growth forecast 
is tilted to the downside, both in the short term and 
beyond. The potential for upside surprises has ebbed, 
given diminished growth momentum and tighter 
financial conditions in emerging market and developing 
economies. At the same time, several of the downside 
risks highlighted in the April 2018 WEO—such as 
rising trade barriers and a reversal of capital flows to 
emerging market economies with weaker external posi-
tions, such as Argentina and Turkey—have become 
more pronounced or have partially materialized. 
Escalating trade tensions and the potential shift away 
from a multilateral, rules-based trading system are key 
threats to the global outlook. Since the April 2018 
WEO, protectionist rhetoric has increasingly turned 
into action, with the United States imposing tariffs on a 
variety of imports, including on $200 billion of imports 
from China, and trading partners undertaking or 
promising retaliatory and other protective measures. An 
intensification of trade tensions, and the associated rise 
in policy uncertainty, could dent business and financial 
market sentiment, trigger financial market volatility, 
and slow investment and trade. Higher trade barriers 
would disrupt global supply chains and slow the spread 
of new technologies, ultimately lowering global produc-
tivity and welfare. More import restrictions would also 
make tradable consumer goods less affordable, harming 
low-income households disproportionately. 
Still-easy global financial conditions could tighten 
sharply, triggered by more aggressive monetary policy 
tightening in advanced economies or the materializa-
tion of other risks that shift market sentiment. Such 
developments would expose vulnerabilities that have 
accumulated over the years, dent confidence, and 
undermine investment (a key driver of the baseline 
growth forecast). In the medium term, risks stem from 
a potential continued buildup of financial vulnerabili-
ties, the implementation of unsustainable macroeco-
nomic policies amid a subdued growth outlook, rising 
inequality, and declining trust in mainstream economic 
policies. A range of other noneconomic risks are also 
relevant. If any of these risks materializes, the likeli-
hood of other adverse developments will rise. 
The environment of continued expansion offers a 
narrowing window of opportunity to advance policies 
and reforms—both multilaterally and at the country 
level—that extend the momentum and raise medium-
term growth for the benefit of all, while building buf-
fers for the next downturn and strengthening resilience 
to an environment where financial conditions could 
tighten suddenly and sharply.
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
xvii
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
Foster cooperation. Countries need to work together 
to tackle challenges that extend beyond their own 
borders. To preserve and broaden the gains from 
decades of rules-based global trade integration, coun-
tries should cooperate to reduce trade costs further 
and resolve disagreements without raising distortion-
ary barriers. Cooperative efforts are also essential for 
completing the financial regulatory reform agenda, 
strengthening international taxation, enhancing 
cybersecurity, tackling corruption, and mitigating and 
coping with climate change. 
Bring inflation to target, build buffers, curb excess 
imbalances. Monetary accommodation needs to 
continue where inflation is weak, but cautious, well-
communicated, data-dependent normalization should 
proceed where inflation is close to target. Fiscal policy 
should aim to rebuild buffers for the next downturn, 
and the composition of public spending and revenues 
should be designed to bolster potential output and 
inclusiveness. In countries at or close to full employ-
ment, with an excess current account deficit and an 
unsustainable fiscal position (notably the United 
States), public debt needs to be stabilized and even-
tually reduced, and procyclical stimulus, which is 
contributing to rising global imbalances and height-
ened risks to the US and global economies, should be 
withdrawn. Countries with both excess current account 
surpluses and fiscal space (for example, Germany) 
should increase public investment to boost potential 
growth and reduce external imbalances.
Strengthen the potential for higher and more inclusive 
growth. All countries should grasp the opportunity to 
adopt structural reforms and policies that raise pro-
ductivity and ensure broad-based gains—for instance, 
by encouraging technological innovation and diffu-
sion, increasing labor force participation (especially 
by women and youth), supporting those displaced 
by structural change, and investing in education and 
training to enhance job opportunities. 
Build resilience. Macro- and microprudential policies 
face the challenges of building financial buffers, curtail-
ing rising leverage, limiting excessive risk taking, and 
containing financial stability risks (including threats to 
cybersecurity). In the euro area, balance sheet repair 
needs to continue. Emerging market economies should 
aim to keep contingent liabilities and balance sheet 
mismatches in check. Building on recent efforts, China 
should continue to rein in credit growth and address 
financial risks, even if growth temporarily slows. Among 
the main findings of Chapter 2 is that countries with 
stronger fiscal positions before the global financial crisis, 
and those with more flexible exchange rate regimes, 
experienced smaller output losses. Underscoring the 
importance of macroprudential policies and effective 
supervision, countries with greater financial vulnerabili-
ties before the global financial crisis suffered larger output 
losses. The analysis in Chapter 3 highlights important 
ways in which emerging market and developing econo-
mies can reap the benefits from stronger institutions. In 
the current juncture where global financial conditions are 
normalizing, more credible monetary policy frameworks 
that effectively anchor inflation expectations can make 
the economy more resilient to adverse external shocks by 
improving the tradeoff between inflation and output.
Improve convergence prospects for low-income develop-
ing countries. Continued progress toward the 2030 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals is 
imperative to foster greater economic security and 
better living standards for a rising share of the world’s 
population. Given their generally high levels of public 
indebtedness, low-income developing countries need 
to make decisive progress to strengthen their fiscal 
positions while prioritizing well-targeted measures to 
reduce poverty. They must also boost the resilience of 
their financial systems. Investing in human capital, 
improving access to credit, and reducing infrastruc-
ture gaps can promote economic diversification and 
improve the capacity to cope with climate shocks. 
xviii	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
1
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Global growth for 2018–19 is projected to remain 
steady at its 2017 level, but its pace is less vigorous 
than projected in April and it has become less balanced. 
Downside risks to global growth have risen in the past six 
months and the potential for upside surprises has receded.
Global growth is projected at 3.7 percent for 
2018–19—0.2 percentage point lower for both years 
than forecast in April. The downward revision reflects 
surprises that suppressed activity in early 2018 in some 
major advanced economies, the negative effects of the 
trade measures implemented or approved between April 
and mid-September, as well as a weaker outlook for some 
key emerging market and developing economies arising 
from country-specific factors, tighter financial conditions, 
geopolitical tensions, and higher oil import bills. Beyond 
the next couple of years, as output gaps close and mon-
etary policy settings begin to normalize, growth in most 
advanced economies is expected to decline to potential 
rates well below the averages reached before the global 
financial crisis of a decade ago. Medium-term prospects 
remain generally strong in emerging Asia but subpar 
in some emerging market and developing economies, 
especially for per capita growth, including in commodity 
exporters that continue to face substantial fiscal con-
solidation needs or are mired in war and conflict.
The balance of risks to the global growth forecast has 
shifted to the downside in a context of elevated policy 
uncertainty. Several of the downside risks highlighted in 
the April 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO)—such 
as rising trade barriers and a reversal of capital flows to 
emerging market economies with weaker fundamentals 
and higher political risk—have become more pronounced 
or have partially materialized. Meanwhile, the potential 
for upside surprises has receded, given the tightening of 
financial conditions in some parts of the world, higher trade 
costs, slow implementation of reforms recommended in the 
past, and waning growth momentum. While financial 
market conditions remain accommodative in advanced 
economies, they could tighten rapidly if trade tensions and 
policy uncertainty intensify, or unexpectedly high inflation 
in the United States triggers a stronger-than-anticipated 
monetary policy response. Tighter financial conditions 
in advanced economies could cause disruptive portfo-
lio adjustments, sharp exchange rate movements, and 
further reductions in capital inflows to emerging mar-
kets, particularly those with greater vulnerabilities.
The recovery has helped lift employment and income, 
has strengthened balance sheets, and has provided an 
opportunity to rebuild buffers. However, with risks 
shifting to the downside, there is greater urgency for 
policies to enhance prospects for strong and inclusive 
growth. Avoiding protectionist reactions to structural 
change and finding cooperative solutions that promote 
continued growth in goods and services trade remain 
essential to preserving and extending the global expan-
sion. At a time of above-potential growth in many 
economies, policymakers should aim to enact reforms 
that raise medium-term incomes for the benefit of all. 
With shrinking excess capacity and mounting downside 
risks, many countries need to rebuild fiscal buffers and 
strengthen their resilience to an environment in which 
financial conditions could tighten suddenly and sharply.
Recent Developments and Prospects
Softer, More Uneven Momentum
In the first half of 2018, global growth shed some 
of the strong momentum registered in the second half 
of last year, and the expansion became less synchro-
nized across countries. Activity moderated more than 
expected in some large advanced economies from its 
strong pace last year, while the emerging market and 
developing economy group continued to expand at 
broadly the same pace as in 2017 (Figure 1.1). 
Among advanced economies, growth disappointed 
in the euro area and the United Kingdom. Slower 
export growth after a strong surge in the final quarter 
of 2017 contributed notably to the euro area slow-
down. Higher energy prices helped dampen demand 
in energy importers, while some countries were also 
affected by political uncertainty or industrial actions. 
In the United Kingdom, growth moderated more 
than anticipated, partly because of weather-related 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
1
CHAPTER
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
2
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
disruptions in the first quarter. Set against these 
developments, the US economy maintained robust 
growth, particularly in the second quarter, with 
private sector activity buoyed further by sizable fis-
cal stimulus.
Aggregate growth in the emerging market and 
developing economy group stabilized in the first half 
of 2018. Emerging Asia continued to register strong 
growth, supported by a domestic demand-led pickup 
in the Indian economy from a four-year-low pace of 
expansion in 2017, even as activity in China moder-
ated in the second quarter in response to regulatory 
tightening of the property sector and nonbank finan-
cial intermediation. Higher oil prices lifted growth 
among fuel-exporting economies in sub-Saharan Africa 
and the Middle East. The recovery in Latin America 
continued, though at a more subdued pace than antic-
ipated as tighter financial conditions and a drought 
weighed on growth in Argentina and a nationwide 
truckers’ strike disrupted production in Brazil.
Trade Tensions
Since January, a sequence of US tariff actions on 
solar panels, washing machines, steel, aluminum, and a 
range of Chinese products, plus retaliation by trading 
partners has complicated global trade relations.1 While 
the preliminary agreement between the United States 
and Mexico on some bilateral trade issues has been a 
step forward, the future of the trilateral North Amer-
ican Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) remains uncer-
tain as the United States and Canada work to resolve 
remaining issues. Moreover, the potential for escalating 
trade tensions looms.2
Although sentiment has generally remained strong 
despite the intensification of trade disputes, and 
headline high-frequency data point to continued 
momentum, some of the more trade-sensitive data 
1Following tariff increases in early 2018 on washing machines, 
solar cells, steel, and aluminum, the United States on June 15 
announced a 25 percent tariff on imports from China worth $50 bil-
lion; China announced retaliation on a similar scale. On September 
17, the United States announced a 10 percent tariff—rising to 
25 percent by year end—on an additional $200 billion in imports 
from China. In response, China, announced tariffs on a further 
$60 billion of US imports.
2The United States has also suggested that a further $267 bil-
lion of Chinese goods—covering nearly all remaining Chinese 
imports—may be hit with tariffs, and it has separately raised the 
possibility of tariffs on the automotive sector that would affect many 
other countries (see Scenario Box 1).
Industrial production
World trade volumes
Advanced economies1
Emerging market
economies2 
World
April 2018 WEO
October 2018 WEO
Advanced economies1
Emerging market
economies2 
World
2012 13
14
15
16
17
Aug.
18
2012 13
14
15
16
17 Aug.
18
4. Advanced Economies
5. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies
2. Manufacturing PMI
(Three-month moving
average; deviations
from 50)
96
112
2015
16
17
Jul.
18 
1. World Trade and Industrial Production
(Index, 2015 = 100)
Figure 1.1.  Global Activity Indicators
Global growth moderated in the ﬁrst half of 2018, with negative surprises to 
activity in several large advanced economies. After rapid growth in 2017, world 
trade volumes and industrial production have slowed, and some high-frequency 
indicators have softened.
Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics; 
Markit Economics; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: CC = consumer conﬁdence; PMI = purchasing managers’ index; 
WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Australia, Canada (PMI only), Czech Republic, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong 
SAR (CC only), Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand (PMI only), Norway (CC only), 
Singapore (PMI only), Sweden (CC only), Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China, 
United Kingdom, United States.
2Argentina (CC only), Brazil, China, Colombia (CC only), Hungary, India (PMI only), 
Indonesia, Latvia (CC only), Malaysia (PMI only), Mexico (PMI only), Philippines (CC 
only), Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand (CC only), Turkey, Ukraine (CC only).
GDP Growth
(Annualized semiannual percent change)
–4
14
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
100
104
108
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
3. Consumer Conﬁdence
(Index, 2010 = 100)
0
4
1
2
3
2011:
H1
13:
H1
15:
H1
17:
H1
13:
H1
15:
H1
17:
H1
3
9
4
5
6
7
8
2011:
H1
19:
H2
19:
H2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
3
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
have weakened since the start of the year. Surveys of 
purchasing managers in China, the euro area, Japan, 
and the United States point to softer growth in export 
orders. Sector-specific sentiment indicators for auto-
makers in Germany and Japan suggest more pessi-
mism about the outlook than at the start of the year. 
Industrial production subindices for the United States, 
Japan, and Germany indicate greater moderation in 
capital-goods-producing sectors than for the rest of 
manufacturing, which could signal weaker capital 
spending. German manufacturing orders fell by about 
4 percent on a monthly basis in June (contributing to 
a 6½ percent drop in the second quarter on a quar-
terly, annualized basis) followed by a close to 1 percent 
decline in July. Consistent with the evidence from the 
production side, international trade in goods appears 
to have slowed since early 2018 after very rapid growth 
late in 2017 (Figure 1.1). Growth in import volumes 
in some of the main advanced economies (United 
States, euro area, Japan) has declined. The trade 
slowdown could reflect a combination of factors, such 
as some payback from the very strong trade growth 
in late 2017 and weaker capital spending in a more 
uncertain global environment.
Commodity Index Rising on Higher Energy Prices
The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index 
rose 3.3 percent between February 2018 and August 
2018—that is, between the reference periods for the 
April 2018 and the current WEO—driven by higher 
energy prices (Figure 1.2). As discussed in the Com-
modities Special Feature, the energy subindex rose 
11.1 percent. Food prices were down 6.4 percent, and 
the metals subindex declined 11.7 percent.
Oil prices rose to more than $76 a barrel in June—
the highest level since November 2014—reflecting the 
collapse in Venezuela’s production, unexpected outages 
in Canada and Libya, and expectations of lower Ira-
nian exports following US sanctions. Prices dropped to 
about $71 a barrel by August following a decision by 
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Coun-
tries (OPEC) and the non-OPEC oil exporters (includ-
ing Russia) to increase oil production. The coal price 
index—an average of Australian and South African 
prices—increased 9.8 percent from February 2018 to 
August 2018, reflecting tight supply conditions. Strong 
demand for liquefied natural gas in China and India as 
well as higher oil prices kept the spot price for lique-
fied natural gas close to its highest level in three years. 
The decline in the IMF’s agricultural price index 
between the reference periods reflects, to a large extent, 
trade tensions and concerns about global growth. 
Moreover, weather-related supply shortfalls of cocoa, 
cotton, and wheat are smaller than previously antici-
pated. Among commodities affected by trade tensions, 
soybean prices fell in June as China announced retalia-
tory import tariffs on US soybeans.
The softening of metals prices between February 
and August 2018 was largely due to weaker demand 
from China. Metals markets also experienced high 
volatility, reflecting, in part, implemented tariff actions, 
US sanctions on aluminum giant Rusal, and higher 
trade policy uncertainty. The price of iron ore, the 
primary input in steel manufacture, dropped 12.4 per-
cent between the reference periods. Aluminum prices 
reached a seven-year high in May after the Rusal sanc-
tions, before declining more than 10 percent in June 
and July as tariff hikes were implemented.
Rising Headline Inflation, but Core Remains Subdued
Higher energy prices have lifted headline 
year-over-year inflation rates in advanced and emerging 
market and developing economies over the past six 
Average petroleum spot price
Food
Metals
All commodities
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2011
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates.
Figure 1.2.  Commodity and Oil Prices
(Deﬂated using US consumer price index; index, 2014 = 100)
The commodity price index has risen in the past six months, driven by higher 
energy prices. Food prices fell amid rising trade tensions, while the price of metals 
softened because of weaker demand from China.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
4
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
months. Core inflation—that is, excluding food and 
energy—remains below central banks’ targets in most 
advanced economies. Among emerging market and 
developing economies, excluding Venezuela’s hyper-
inflation, core inflation remains below the average 
of recent years but has inched up in recent months 
(Figure 1.3).
Among advanced economies, core annual consumer 
price inflation in the United States, where unemploy-
ment hovers around multidecade lows, has exceeded 
2 percent since March. The Federal Reserve’s preferred 
price index of personal consumption expenditure has 
also risen close to the target 2 percent. Core inflation 
in the United Kingdom averaged slightly more than 
2 percent in the first half of 2018, lower than last 
year, as the effects of the large sterling depreciation 
of 2016–17 on domestic prices have gradually faded. 
In the euro area and Japan, core inflation remains 
weak at about 1 percent in the euro area and 0.3 per-
cent in Japan.3
Real wage growth in most advanced economies 
remains muted, even as labor markets tighten and 
output gaps close (and, in some cases, as the gap turns 
positive with the economy operating above potential). 
In the United States and Japan, for example, where 
unemployment rates are the lowest since 2000 and 
1993, respectively, wages have risen only moderately, 
reflecting, in part, weak productivity growth and 
possibly greater labor market slack than reflected in 
headline unemployment numbers.
In the emerging market and developing economy 
group, core inflation remains contained at about 2 per-
cent in China, where domestic demand has slowed in 
response to financial regulatory tightening. In India, 
core inflation (excluding all food and energy items) 
has risen to about 6 percent as a result of a narrow-
ing output gap and pass-through effects from higher 
energy prices and exchange rate depreciation. Core 
inflation has declined in Brazil and Mexico (to about 
2½ percent and 3½ percent, respectively), reflecting 
moderations in activity and improved anchoring of 
expectations. In Russia, core inflation dropped this 
year (averaging less than 2 percent until May, and ris-
ing slightly in June), consistent with moderately tight 
monetary policy, declining inflation expectations, and 
low exchange rate pass-through.
3For Japan, the core consumer price index excludes fresh 
food and energy.
Consumer price inﬂation
Core consumer price inﬂation
Unemployment rate (inverted, right scale)
Wage rate (two-quarter moving average;
percent change from a year ago)
World
AEs
EMDEs
AEs2
EMDEs (right scale)
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
2013 14
15
16
17
Jul.
18
1
2
3
4
5
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2005 06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17 May.
18
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
2016
17
Aug.
18
3. Producer Price Inﬂation1
5. Unemployment Rate and Wage Growth in AEs3
 (Percent)
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
2013
14
15
16
17
Jul.
18
1. Advanced Economies
2. Emerging Market and
 Developing Economies
4. Consumer Price
 Inﬂation Expectations
 (Percent)
2
3
4
5
6
7
2013
14
15
16
17
Jul.
18
Figure 1.3.  Global Inﬂation
(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change, unless noted 
otherwise)
Higher fuel prices have lifted headline inﬂation over the past six months, and, in 
emerging market and developing economies, core inﬂation has also inched up. Wage 
growth, however, remains muted despite continued declines in unemployment rates.
Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; US Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies (AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST, 
FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HKG, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, NOR, PRT, 
SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, TWN, USA); EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies (BGR, BRA, CHL, CHN, COL, HUN, IDN, IND, MEX, MYS, PER, PHL, POL, 
ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, ZAF). Country list uses International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1AEs exclude HKG, ISR, and TWN. EMDEs include UKR; exclude IDN, IND, PER, and 
PHL.
2AEs include AUS; exclude LUX.
3Blue line includes AUS and NZL; excludes BEL. Red line includes AUS and MLT; 
excludes HKG, SGP, and TWN.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
5
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Financial Conditions Marginally Tighter, 
Localized Pressures
As discussed in the October 2018 Global Financial 
Stability Report (GFSR), global financial conditions 
have marginally tightened over the past six months. 
Although they remain accommodative and generally 
supportive of growth, significant differences have 
emerged between advanced and emerging market 
economies. In advanced economies, after spiking in 
the early months of the year, market volatility has 
subsided and risk appetite remains relatively strong. 
The widening growth differential between the United 
States and other advanced economies, together with 
associated divergences in monetary policy stances 
and long-term yields, have contributed to US dollar 
appreciation since April. Against this backdrop, local-
ized pressure points have emerged in countries with 
weaker macroeconomic fundamentals and greater 
political uncertainty. The financial market impact of 
trade tensions has so far been contained to specific 
sectors, such as automobiles and aluminum, and 
some trade-sensitive currencies.
As expected by markets, the Federal Reserve 
raised the target range of the federal funds rate to 
1.75–2 percent in June. With economic expansion in 
the United States gaining momentum, and a sizable 
fiscal stimulus anticipated to amplify already-buoyant 
private sector activity, the Federal Reserve signaled 
two additional rate hikes in 2018 and three in 2019. 
Also, in June, the European Central Bank announced 
an extension of its asset purchase program through 
the end of the year, while indicating it would reduce 
monthly purchases from €30 billion to €15 billion in 
October. The central bank also committed to main-
taining rates at current levels at least through the 
summer of 2019. In July the Bank of Japan modified 
its yield curve control policy to allow a wider devi-
ation band for the benchmark 10-year yield around 
an unchanged target of about zero percent. The Bank 
of Japan also introduced forward guidance on main-
taining ultralow policy rates for an extended period of 
time. Among other advanced economies, the Bank of 
Canada raised its policy rate by 25 basis points in July, 
as did the Bank of England in August (marking only 
its second rate hike in a decade).
Long-term bond yields have diverged among 
advanced economies since February–March (Fig-
ure 1.4). As of mid-September, the 10-year US 
Treasury yield has risen to about 3.0 percent, while 
yields on German 10-year bunds have dropped 25 
basis points to 0.45 percent and yields on UK gilts 
have remained at about 1.5 percent. Italian sovereign 
spreads have widened considerably since late May, 
initially owing to difficulties in the formation of a 
government and, more recently, because of uncertainty 
about the forthcoming budget. As of mid-September, 
they stood at about 250 basis points. In contrast, other 
euro area sovereign spreads have remained compressed. 
Corporate spreads have increased slightly since April, 
particularly among non-investment-grade credits 
(Figure 1.4, panel 4). With advanced economies’ 
corporate profits remaining generally healthy, equity 
indices in the United States are slightly higher. Else-
where, they are at broadly the same level (Figure 1.4, 
panel 5). As noted in the October 2018 GFSR, US 
equity prices now appear modestly higher than their 
model-based values, based on alternative measures of 
S&P 500 earnings expectations as well as proxies for 
both the discount factor and the equity risk premium. 
Price-to-earnings ratios are little changed relative to 
April (Figure 1.4, panel 6).
As of mid-September, the US dollar has strength-
ened by about 6½ percent in real effective terms since 
February (the reference period for the April 2018 
WEO), consistent with the widening interest rate and 
expected growth differentials (Figure 1.5, panel 1). The 
euro, the yen, and the pound sterling have weakened 
vis-à-vis the US dollar but remain broadly unchanged 
in real effective terms, reflecting the depreciation of 
emerging market currencies discussed below. 
Among emerging market economies, Argentina 
and Turkey have come under severe market pressure 
in recent weeks. In Argentina, tighter global finan-
cial conditions, together with a domestic corruption 
scandal and persistent uncertainty over the success of 
the stabilization plan underlying the program with the 
IMF, have contributed to financial market volatility. 
Despite a 2,000-basis-point hike in the short-term 
policy rate and several increases of reserve require-
ments, the Argentinean peso depreciated by over 
40 percent in real effective terms between February 
and mid-September, equity valuations fell further, 
and sovereign spreads rose to above 700 basis points. 
In Turkey, concerns about underlying fundamentals 
and political tensions with the United States trig-
gered a sharp depreciation of the currency (27 per-
cent between February and mid-September in real 
effective terms), declining asset prices, and widening 
spreads. In response, the authorities released some 
foreign exchange liquidity by lowering reserve require-
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
6
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
ments and limited the capacity of banks to engage in 
cross-currency swap and forward transactions. The 
effective rate was increased first by providing liquidity 
to banks at the higher overnight lending rate rather 
than the weekly repo rate, and, in early September, by 
a 625 basis point hike in the benchmark policy rate.
Several other central banks (India, Indonesia, 
Mexico, Philippines) have also raised policy rates in 
recent months as headline inflation has risen and, 
in some cases, currencies have come under pressure 
(Figure 1.6). In China, the central bank maintained 
its policy rate while lowering banks’ required reserve 
United States
Euro area
United Kingdom
Sep. 15, 2017
Mar. 21, 2018
Sep. 17, 2018
Japan
United States
United Kingdom
Germany
Italy
S&P 500
MSCI Emerging Market
Euro Stoxx
TOPIX
United States
Japan
Germany
Italy
US high yield
Euro high yield
US high grade
Euro high grade
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
10
15
20
25
30
35
2013
14
15
16
17
Sep.
18
6. Price-to-Earnings Ratios2
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
2013 14
15
16
17
Aug.
18
5. Equity Markets
 (Index, 2007 = 100)
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2013
14
15
16
17
Sep.
18
3. Ten-Year Government Bond
 Yields2
 (Percent)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2017
18
19
20
Sep.
21
1. US Policy Rate
 Expectations1
2013 14
15
16
17
Sep.
18
4. Credit Spreads2
 (Basis points)
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2018
19
20
Sep.
21
2. Policy Rate Expectations1
 (Percent; dashed lines are
 from the April 2018 WEO)
Figure 1.4.  Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial 
Market Conditions
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
Despite monetary policy tightening in the United States, ﬁnancial conditions 
remain generally supportive of growth in advanced economies. Since earlier this 
year, long-term government bond yields have diverged: a steeper path of expected 
policy rates has modestly lifted US 10-year government bond yields, while yields 
on German and UK long-term bonds have fallen.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor’s; 
TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States, the 
sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro 
interbank offered forward rate for the euro area; updated September 17, 2018.
2Data are through September 17, 2018.
Latest relative to August 2018
August 2018 relative to February 2018
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EA = euro area. Data labels use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes. Latest data available are for September 14, 
2018.
The US dollar has appreciated in real effective terms by about 6.5 percent since 
February on the back of widening interest rate and growth differentials. Emerging 
market currencies have generally weakened, with very large depreciations in 
Turkey and Argentina on growing concerns about macroeconomic imbalances and 
a notable weakening of the South African rand—after its strong rally in previous 
months—and of the Brazilian real.
Figure 1.5.  Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, 
February–September 2018
(Percent)
1. Advanced Economies
2. Emerging Market Economies
–6
8
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
USA
EA
JPN GBR SWE CHE KOR TWN SGP CAN NOR AUS NZL
ZAF
CHN
IND
IDN
MYS
PHL
THA
HUN
POL
RUS
TUR
ARG
BRA
CHL
COL
MEX
PER
PAK
–50
10
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
7
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
ratio in two separate moves (targeted to certain banks 
in April, followed by a more general cut in July) to 
support lending. Long-term yields have generally 
increased and sovereign spreads have widened, reflect-
ing a reduction in bond flows to emerging markets in 
recent months. However, markets appear to be dis-
criminating across countries, as spreads have widened 
to a much larger extent for countries with greater 
external financing needs (Figure 1.6, panel 4). Equity 
indices in emerging market and developing econo-
mies have generally declined, reflecting rising trade 
tensions and tighter external financial conditions 
(Figure 1.7). In some cases (for example, China), 
domestic regulatory tightening has contributed to a 
retreat in equity prices. 
Currency movements for other emerging market and 
developing economies have mostly reflected develop-
ments in underlying fundamentals and perceptions of 
future policy direction (Figure 1.5, panel 2). Between 
February and mid-September, the Brazilian real declined 
14 percent as domestic activity slowed and external 
financial conditions became tighter, while the Chinese 
renminbi depreciated by 3.5 percent as macro poli-
cies shifted to a more accommodative stance in recent 
months, and as trade tensions with the United States 
rose. The South African rand depreciated by some 14 
percent on weaker-than-expected activity in the first half 
of the year and slow reform progress, unwinding some 
of the earlier gains associated with the change in the 
leadership. In contrast, the Mexican peso has appreciated 
by over 3½ percent since February after concerns about 
postelection shifts in policy direction began to fade, 
counteracting some of the negative sentiment stemming 
from US tariff actions and uncertainty surrounding 
NAFTA’s future prior to the August agreement.
Tracking indicators and early data releases suggest 
that, after a buoyant start to the year, capital flows 
to emerging markets weakened considerably in the 
second quarter and beyond (Figure 1.8). In particu-
lar, evidence from investment fund flows and other 
high-frequency data sources suggests that nonresident 
portfolio flows, which were strong during 2017 and 
early 2018, turned negative in May–June of 2018, 
consistent with foreign exchange market pressures on 
several emerging market economies. While portfolio 
flows appeared to have stabilized during July, along-
side currency valuations, outflows have resumed in 
August amid weakening investor sentiment following 
the depreciation of the Turkish lira and the Argen-
tinean peso. 
Emerging Europe
China
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
4. Current Account Balance and Change in EMBI Spreads
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
2013
14
15
16
17
Sep.
18 
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2013
14
15
16
17
Sep.
18
1. Policy Rate1
 (Percent)
2. Ten-Year Government Bond Yields1
 (Percent)
3. EMBI Sovereign Spreads1
 (Basis points)
–100
0
100
200
300
–12
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
Change in EMBI spread
(basis points, Apr. 16–Sep. 14)
Current account 2017 (percent of GDP)
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
2012
13
14
15
16
17
Sep.
18
Among emerging markets, policy rates have generally increased since the spring 
(the sharp increase for emerging Europe reﬂects the policy rate hikes in Turkey). 
Long-term government bond yields have also generally increased, and sovereign 
spreads have widened over the past six months. Spreads have widened 
signiﬁcantly more in countries with greater external ﬁnancing needs.
Figure 1.6.  Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates and 
Spreads
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial 
Statistics; Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, and Thailand (except EMBI spread); emerging Europe comprises 
Poland, Romania, Russia, and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, 
Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. 
Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1Data are through September 14, 2018.
TUN
HUN
MAR
PER
CHL
ROU
COL
ZAF
PHL
ARG
MYS
POL
EGY
TUR
MEX
BRA
IDN
RUS
IND
CHN
y = –14.25x + 22.12
R 2 = 0.45
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
8
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Emerging Asia
excluding China
Latin America
BRA
CHN
IND
MEX
COL
IDN
MYS
RUS
TUR
BRA
COL
IDN
IND
RUS
TUR
MEX (right scale)
CHN
MYS
Emerging Europe    
China
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2012 13
14
15
16
17 Jun.
18
90
110
130
150
170
190
210
230
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2006 08
10
12
14
16 18:
Q2
Credit-to-GDP Ratio1
(Percent)
Real Credit Growth1
(Year-over-year percent change)
–10
0
10
20
30
40
2012 13
14
15
16
17 Jun.
18
3.
15
25
35
45
55
65
75
85
2006 08
10
12
14
16
18:
Q2
4.
5.
2.
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
2012
13
14
15
16
17
Aug.
18
1. Equity Markets
(Index, 2007 = 100)
Figure 1.7.  Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and 
Credit 
Equity indices have declined amid rising trade tensions and somewhat tighter 
external ﬁnancial conditions.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial 
Statistics (IFS); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
1Credit is other depository corporations’ claims on the private sector (from IFS), 
except in the case of Brazil, for which private sector credit is from the Monetary 
Policy and Financial System Credit Operations published by Banco Central do 
Brasil, and China, for which credit is total social ﬁnancing after adjusting for local 
government debt swaps.
Bond
EM-VXY
Equity
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
China
Saudi Arabia
Total
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
China
Saudi Arabia
Total
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
Latin America
Saudi Arabia
China
Total
–6
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
2007
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
18:
Q1
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
2010
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Aug.
18
Figure 1.8.  Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
1. Net Flows in Emerging Market Funds
 (Billions of US dollars)
2. Capital Inﬂows
 (Percent of GDP)
Taper
tantrum
Greek
crisis
Irish
crisis
1st ECB
LTROs
–6
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
2007
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
18:
Q1
3. Capital Outﬂows Excluding Change in Reserves
 (Percent of GDP)
–6
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
2007
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
18:
Q1
4. Change in Reserves
 (Percent of GDP)
China equity
market sell-off
US presidential
election
Capital ﬂows to emerging markets appear to have weakened considerably in the 
second quarter of 2018, with nonresident portfolio ﬂows turning negative in 
May–June 2018.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; EPFR Global; Haver Analytics; IMF, International 
Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Capital inﬂows are net purchases of domestic assets by nonresidents. 
Capital outﬂows are net purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents. 
Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, and Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia, 
and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. 
ECB = European Central Bank; EM-VXY = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Volatility 
Index; LTROs = long-term reﬁnancing operations.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
9
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Forces Shaping the Outlook
Diverging Cyclical Positions
While the global expansion is projected to continue 
in 2018 and 2019, it is becoming less synchronized. 
Compared with 2017, which saw the most widely 
shared pickup in country annual growth rates since 
2010, a smaller share of countries, particularly among 
advanced economies, is expected to experience an 
acceleration of activity for 2018 and beyond.4 In 
part, this reflects diverging cyclical positions, with 
expansions peaking in some countries while others 
continue to emerge from deep recession. Recent fuel 
price increases also have varying impacts on short-term 
prospects for fuel exporters and importers.
Following a stretch of above-trend growth in 
advanced economies during 2015–17, output gaps 
have closed or are set to close in most cases. As remain-
ing slack diminishes and high capacity utilization 
begins to constrain supply, the growth rate of output 
is projected to start declining toward its potential, 
particularly among some euro area countries and in 
Japan. The US economy is an important exception to 
the pattern. It is expected to continue to grow above 
potential until 2020, helped by sizable fiscal stimu-
lus. The pace of expansion is expected to dip below 
the economy’s potential growth rate thereafter as the 
stimulus reverses and reinforces the effects of ongoing 
monetary tightening.
The Impact of Commodity Price Increases
Most nonfood commodities have registered price 
increases since mid-2017. Most notable has been 
the increase in oil prices—about $30 a barrel, or 
70 percent, since June 2017. Some of this increase is 
expected to dissipate over the medium term because 
of higher US shale production and OPEC+ supply. 
Nonetheless, as shown in the Commodities Spe-
cial Feature, oil futures curves are notably higher 
than a year ago.
The improved outlook for oil prices contributes 
to revisions to growth prospects for fuel exporters 
and importers—with a more notable impact on the 
4In 2017, 58 percent of countries, accounting for 75 percent of 
world GDP in purchasing-power-parity terms, experienced a pickup 
in year-over-year growth rates. In 2018, 52 percent of economies, 
accounting for 47 percent of world GDP, are projected to register 
a pickup in annual growth rates. For 2019, the corresponding 
numbers are 54 percent of economies, accounting for 32 percent 
of global GDP.
exporters, given the implied magnitude of the changes 
in disposable income (Figure 1.9). A comparison of 
forecast revisions between the April 2018 WEO and 
the current report shows an upward revision of about 
0.1 and 0.3 percentage point for 2018 and 2019, 
respectively, for a group of fuel exporters, excluding 
countries whose prospects are heavily conditioned 
by domestic strife, geopolitical tensions, or outright 
macroeconomic collapse. In contrast, growth prospects 
for the same period have been revised downward by 
about 0.1–0.3 percentage point for the rest of the 
world, a group dominated by fuel importers (Fig-
ure 1.9, panel 3). 
Investment, Trade, and the Global Expansion
A core element of the 2017 upsurge in global 
growth and trade was the pickup in investment in 
advanced economies and an end to investment con-
tractions in some large, stressed commodity exporters. 
Overall, both global imports and investment growth, 
at about 5 percent, were the highest since the 2010–11 
rebound from the global financial crisis. This pace of 
expansion in investment is projected to ease in 2018 
and 2019 compared with 2017, with a more notable 
decline in trade growth (Figure 1.10). 
Despite this easing, investment growth in emerg-
ing market and developing economies is projected to 
remain robust over the next five years at about 5½ 
percent, accounting for well over one-third of their 
GDP growth rate during that period (Figure 1.11). 
Medium-term prospects for investment growth are 
much weaker in advanced economies, with capital 
spending projected to slow considerably as growth 
declines toward its lower potential rate and the fiscal 
stimulus in the United States begins to unwind. 
At the same time, rising trade tensions and policy 
uncertainty—discussed in more detail below—raise 
concerns about global economic prospects. These 
factors could lead firms to postpone or forgo capital 
spending and hence slow down growth in investment 
and demand. This slowdown would also weaken trade 
growth, as capital and intermediate goods account for 
an important share of global trade. As mentioned earlier, 
high-frequency data point to a slowdown in global trade 
and industrial production, somewhat weaker manufactur-
ing purchasing managers’ indices, and especially weaker 
export orders, but the extent to which these factors 
have affected capital spending and trade are still unclear. 
Consistent with signs of slower production of capital 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
10
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
2015–16 (cumulative)
2017
2018–19 (average; Feb. 2018 commodity prices)
2018–19 (average; Aug. 2018 commodity prices)
2015–16 (cumulative)
2017
2018–19 (average; Feb. 2018 commodity prices)
2018–19 (average; Aug. 2018 commodity prices)
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) country codes.
1Gains (losses) for 2018–19 are simple averages of annual incremental gains 
(losses) for 2018 and 2019. The windfall is an estimate of the change in disposable 
income arising from commodity price changes. The windfall gain in year t for a 
country exporting x US dollars of commodity A and importing m US dollars of 
commodity B in year t –1 is deﬁned as (Δpt
Axt – 1 – Δpt
Bmt – 1) / Yt – 1, in which 
Δpt
A and Δpt
B are the percentage changes in the prices of A and B between year 
t –1 and year t, and Y is GDP in year t – 1 in US dollars. See also Gruss (2014).
2The yellow horizontal line inside each box represents the median; the upper and 
lower edges of each box show the top and bottom quartiles; the red markers 
denote the top and bottom deciles; and the gray square indicates the 
purchasing-power-parity-weighted mean. Stressed fuel exporters include Iran, 
Iraq, Libya, South Sudan, Venezuela, and Yemen.
Higher oil prices have led to a sizable increase in the projected terms-of-trade 
windfall gains and losses in 2018–19. This is reﬂected in growth forecast 
revisions relative to the April 2018 World Economic Outlook: Nonstressed fuel 
exporters are expected to grow faster in 2018–19 than previously projected, while 
growth prospects for oil importers were revised downward.
Figure 1.9. Impact of Commodity Price Changes
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
SAU
DZA
KAZ
NGA
RUS
COL
MYS
CAN
AUS
MEX
ARG
BRA
IDN
1. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses for Commodity
Exporters1
(Percent of GDP)
USA
EGY
TUR
FRA
POL
DEU
ITA
CHN
ESP
JPN
IND
PAK
THA
KOR
2. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses for Commodity
Importers1
(Percent of GDP)
2018
2019
2018
2019
3. Growth Forecast Revisions from April 2018 to October 20182
(Percentage points)
Nonstressed fuel exporters
Fuel importers
Commodity exporters
Commodity importers
Real investment
Real GDP at market prices
Real imports
5. Real Imports, Emerging
Market and Developing
Economies
4. Real Investment,
Emerging Market and
Developing Economies
2. Real Investment,
Advanced Economies
1. World
3. Real Imports,
Advanced Economies  
Figure 1.10.  Global Investment and Trade
(Percent change)
The pace of expansion of global investment is projected to ease in 2018 and 2019 
compared with 2017, with a more notable decline in trade growth.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: World and advanced economies exclude Ireland. Commodity exporters 
include fuel and nonfuel primary products exporters listed in Table D of the 
Statistical Appendix, as well as Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, New Zealand, 
Norway, and Peru.
–15
15
–10
–5
0
5
10
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
2005 07
09
11
13
15
17
19
2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19
2005 07
09
11
13
15
17
19
2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
11
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
goods, the forecast for fixed investment growth in 2018 
was revised downward in advanced economies by about 
0.4 percentage point relative to the April 2018 WEO, 
particularly in advanced Asia and the United Kingdom. 
This downward revision was accompanied by downward 
revisions to export growth (by over 1 percentage point) 
and especially import growth (by 1.4 percentage point). 
The forecast for investment and trade growth in 2019 
is also weaker. For emerging market and developing 
economies, trade growth was revised down modestly for 
2018 and more substantially for 2019. The forecast for 
investment growth for 2018–19 is weaker than in April, 
despite higher capital spending in India, on account of 
contracting investment in economies under stress, such as 
Argentina and Turkey, which is also reflected in a down-
ward revision for import growth, particularly for 2019.
Structural Headwinds
The cyclical upsurge in global growth that began in 
mid-2016—and is now extended by procyclical fiscal 
stimulus in the United States and associated favorable 
spillovers to trading partners—has helped overcome pow-
erful structural headwinds acting on potential growth. 
After the cyclical boost in demand and the US stimulus 
run their course, and as growth in China continues to 
slow in line with the necessary rebalancing of the econ-
omy, global growth is set to moderate, weighed down by 
structural drags. The increase in trade costs would also 
depress medium-term prospects by hindering efficient 
resource allocation, investment, and productivity.
•• Among advanced economies, the subdued outlook 
for potential growth reflects, to a large extent, slower 
labor force growth due to population aging (as 
discussed in Chapter 2 of the April 2018 WEO). 
While labor productivity growth is expected to 
improve in the medium term, the slight acceleration 
will only partially offset the slower increases in labor 
input. Box 1.1 discusses the rise in corporate market 
power in advanced economies, a trend that could be 
a further drag on business dynamism, investment, 
and productivity. Some policy measures that are sup-
porting short-term activity in some economies (such 
as larger US fiscal deficits) are not sustainable—and 
hence come at the cost of lower future growth 
because they will need to be reversed.
•• Among emerging market and developing economies, 
prospects for many economies to close income gaps 
relative to advanced economies appear weaker than 
in the past (Figure 1.12). Some 45 emerging market 
and developing economies—accounting for 10 
percent of world GDP in purchasing-power-parity 
terms—are projected to grow by less than advanced 
economies in per capita terms over 2018–23, and 
hence to fall further behind in living standards. 
Commodity prices, despite their recent increase, 
are projected to remain below the levels seen before 
2011–13. Commodity exporters face a difficult 
adjustment to structurally lower revenues than in 
the past, requiring diversification of their economies 
away from commodity dependence and mobilization 
of noncommodity sources of revenue to finance 
pressing development needs. The adjustment costs 
associated with this transition will weigh on the 
medium-term growth outlook for this group of 
economies. 
Inventories
Net foreign balance
Public consumption
Private consumption
Fixed investment
GDP
Source: IMF staff calculations.
In the medium term, investment growth is projected to remain robust in emerging 
market and developing economies, accounting for well over one-third of their GDP 
growth. In advanced economies, investment growth is expected to weaken 
signiﬁcantly over the next ﬁve years.
Figure 1.11.  Contributions to GDP Growth
(Percent)
1. Advanced Economies
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–1
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
–1
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
12
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
The Forecast
Policy Assumptions
The WEO baseline forecast assumes an expansionary 
fiscal policy stance for advanced economies in 2018, 
owing largely to US fiscal stimulus, turning neutral 
in 2019 (Figure 1.13).5 From 2020 onward, fiscal 
5The revision to the expected fiscal policy stance for advanced 
economies in 2019 relative to the April 2018 WEO reflects smaller-​
than-previously anticipated declines in the structural primary 
balances of the United States and France, which outweigh the 
policy is expected to be contractionary in advanced 
economies as the US fiscal stimulus begins to unwind. 
The fiscal stance is assumed to be broadly neutral in 
emerging market and developing economies through 
the forecast horizon.
Monetary policy stances are projected to diverge 
among advanced economies. The US federal funds tar-
get is expected to increase to about 2.5 percent by the 
end of 2018 and about 3.5 percent by the end of 2019 
(the forecast assumes a total of eight rate hikes during 
2018–19). The policy target rate is expected to decline 
to 2.9 percent in 2022. Policy rates are projected to 
remain negative in the euro area until mid-2019 and 
close to zero in Japan through the end of 2019. They 
are expected to rise gradually thereafter but to remain 
very low through the forecast horizon in both cases. 
For emerging market economies, monetary policy 
stances are assumed to vary, based on the economies’ 
cyclical positions.
The baseline forecast incorporates the impact of 
tariffs that had been announced by the United States 
as of mid-September, namely a 10 percent tariff 
on all aluminum imports, a 25 percent tariff on all 
steel imports, a 25 percent tariff on $50 billion of 
imports from China imposed in July and August, and 
a 10 percent tariff on an additional $200 billion of 
imports from China imposed in late September, rising 
to 25 percent by year end, as well as the retaliatory 
measures taken by trading partners.6 The forecast 
assumes that part of the negative effect of these trade 
measures will be offset by policy stimulus from China 
(and possibly other economies as well). The forecast 
does not incorporate the impact of further tariffs on 
Chinese and other imports threatened by the United 
States, but not yet implemented, due to uncertainty 
about their exact magnitude, timing, and potential 
retaliatory response. Scenario Box 1 discusses the 
potential economic consequences of further escalation 
in trade tensions and rising trade barriers.
Assumptions about Financial Conditions and 
Commodity Prices
The baseline forecast assumes that global financial 
conditions will tighten gradually as the expansion 
more expansionary-than-previously projected stance of Germany, 
Greece, and Italy.
6In particular, the Chinese authorities have announced tariffs 
ranging from 5–10 percent on $60 billion of imports from the 
United States in response to the US tariffs imposed in September.
1995–2005
2006–17
2018–23
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States; 
EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; LAC = Latin America and the 
Caribbean; MENAP = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; PPP = 
purchasing power parity; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa. Bars denote PPP 
GDP-weighted averages, red markers indicate the medians, and black markers 
denote the top and bottom deciles of per capita GDP growth in the country groups. 
The fuel and nonfuel exporter subgroups are deﬁned in Table D of the Statistical 
Appendix and cover EMDEs only.
Prospects for emerging market and developing economies to narrow gaps in living 
standards relative to advanced economies are uneven.
Figure 1.12.  Per Capita Real GDP Growth
(Percent)
1. By Country Group
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region
–2
8
0
2
4
6
LAC
MENAP
EMDE Asia
excluding
China
EMDE
Europe
SSA
CIS
–6
10
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
AEs
EMDEs
China
Fuel exporters
Nonfuel
exporters
excluding China
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
13
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
continues in 2018–19, but remain generally support-
ive of growth. A well-communicated, data-dependent 
normalization of monetary policy in the United States 
and the United Kingdom is expected to continue, 
leading to a steady increase in long-term interest rates. 
Financial market volatility is assumed to remain low. 
The increase in advanced economy long-term sovereign 
bond yields is expected to generate some rebalancing 
of global portfolios. Nonetheless, barring some cases 
in which macroeconomic and financial imbalances 
have increased in recent years, sovereign bond spreads 
for most emerging market economies are assumed to 
remain contained.
The IMF’s Primary Commodity Price Index is 
projected to increase about 18 percent in 2018 from 
its 2017 average (a cumulative increase from 2016 of 
about 36 percent) and then to fall marginally in 2019. 
Oil prices are expected to average $69.38 a barrel 
in 2018 (higher than the April 2018 WEO projection 
of $62.30 and the 2017 price of $52.80 a barrel). 
Global oil supply is expected to gradually increase over 
the forecast horizon, lowering oil prices to $68.76 a 
barrel in 2019, and further to about $60 a barrel in 
2023. Metal prices are expected to increase by about 
5.3 percent in 2018, before declining by 3.6 percent 
in 2019 as the effects of recent tariff actions take hold 
and trade policy uncertainty weighs on metals demand.
Global Growth Outlook
Global growth is projected at 3.7 percent in 2018 
and 2019, 0.2 percentage point below the April 
2018 WEO, even though well above its level during 
2012–16. Differences in the outlook across countries 
and regions are notable (Table 1.1, Annex Tables 
1.1.1–1.1.7, and Boxes 1.2 and 1.3 provide details 
of country projections). Global growth is expected to 
remain steady at 3.7 percent in 2020, as the decline in 
advanced economy growth with the unwinding of the 
US fiscal stimulus and the fading of the favorable spill-
overs from US demand to trading partners is offset by 
a pickup in emerging market and developing economy 
growth. Thereafter, global growth is projected to slow 
to 3.6 percent by 2022–23, largely reflecting a modera-
tion in advanced economy growth toward the potential 
of that group. 
Growth in advanced economies will remain well 
above trend at 2.4 percent in 2018, before softening 
to 2.1 percent in 2019. The forecast for both years is 
0.1 percentage point weaker than in the April 2018 
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
April 2018 WEO
World
Advanced
economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
Latin America and
the Caribbean
Other emerging market and
developing economies
World
Advanced economies2
Major advanced
economies2,3
Emerging and
developing Asia
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
April 2018 WEO
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Advanced
economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
2001
03
05
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
1950
60
70
80
90
2000
10
20 23
3. Fiscal Balance
4. Gross Public Debt
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
United States
Japan1
France, Germany,
United Kingdom
Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Portugal,
Spain
2. Change in the Structural Primary Fiscal Balance
(Percentage points)
Figure 1.13.  Fiscal Indicators
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
The ﬁscal policy stance in advanced economies is assumed to be expansionary in 
2018, before turning neutral in 2019. In emerging market and developing 
economies, the ﬁscal policy stance is assumed to be broadly neutral.
1. Change in the Structural Primary Fiscal Balance
(Percentage points) 
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Japan’s latest ﬁgures reﬂect comprehensive methodological revisions adopted in 
December 2016.
2Data through 2000 exclude the United States.
3Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
14
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
2017
Projections
Difference from July 
2018 WEO Update1
Difference from April 
2018 WEO1
2018
2019
2018
2019
2018
2019
World Output
3.7
3.7
3.7
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
Advanced Economies
2.3
2.4
2.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
United States 
2.2
2.9
2.5
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
Euro Area
2.4
2.0
1.9
–0.2
0.0
–0.4
–0.1
Germany
2.5
1.9
1.9
–0.3
–0.2
–0.6
–0.1
France
2.3
1.6
1.6
–0.2
–0.1
–0.5
–0.4
Italy
1.5
1.2
1.0
0.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.1
Spain
3.0
2.7
2.2
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Japan
1.7
1.1
0.9
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
United Kingdom
1.7
1.4
1.5
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
Canada
3.0
2.1
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies2
2.8
2.8
2.5
0.0
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
4.7
4.7
–0.2
–0.4
–0.2
–0.4
Commonwealth of Independent States
2.1
2.3
2.4
0.0
0.2
0.1
0.3
Russia
1.5
1.7
1.8
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.3
Excluding Russia
3.6
3.9
3.6
0.3
–0.1
0.4
0.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.5
6.5
6.3
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.3
China
6.9
6.6
6.2
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
India3
6.7
7.3
7.4
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.4
ASEAN-54
5.3
5.3
5.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
6.0
3.8
2.0
–0.5
–1.6
–0.5
–1.7
Latin America and the Caribbean 
1.3
1.2
2.2
–0.4
–0.4
–0.8
–0.6
Brazil
1.0
1.4
2.4
–0.4
–0.1
–0.9
–0.1
Mexico
2.0
2.2
2.5
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.5
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
2.2
2.4
2.7
–1.1
–1.2
–1.0
–1.0
Saudi Arabia
–0.9
2.2
2.4
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
Sub-Saharan Africa 
2.7
3.1
3.8
–0.3
0.0
–0.3
0.1
Nigeria
0.8
1.9
2.3
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
0.4
South Africa
1.3
0.8
1.4
–0.7
–0.3
–0.7
–0.3
Memorandum
European Union
2.7
2.2
2.0
–0.2
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.7
4.7
5.2
–0.3
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
Middle East and North Africa 
1.8
2.0
2.5
–1.2
–1.3
–1.2
–1.1
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
3.2
3.2
3.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
5.2
4.2
4.0
–0.6
–0.5
–0.9
–0.7
Imports
Advanced Economies
4.2
3.7
4.0
–0.8
–0.4
–1.4
–0.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.0
6.0
4.8
0.0
–0.9
0.0
–0.8
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.4
3.4
3.1
–0.8
–0.6
–1.1
–0.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.9
4.7
4.8
–0.6
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
23.3
31.4
–0.9
–1.6
0.9
13.4
5.6
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export 
weights)
6.8
2.7
–0.7
–3.3
–1.2
–2.9
–1.2
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
1.7
2.0
1.9
–0.2
–0.3
0.0
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
4.3
5.0
5.2
0.3
0.7
0.2
0.7
London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) 
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
1.5
2.5
3.4
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.0
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during July 17–August 14, 2018. Economies are listed on the basis of 
economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook. 
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2018 World Economic Outlook Update, and April 2018 World Economic Outlook forecasts. The differ-
ences are also adjusted to include Argentina’s consumer prices since the July 2018 Update.
2Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a 
base year. 
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
15
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table 1.1 (continued)
Year over Year
Q4 over Q47
Projections
Projections
2016
2017
2018
2019
2016
2017
2018
2019
World Output
3.3
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.2
4.0
3.5
3.8
Advanced Economies
1.7
2.3
2.4
2.1
2.0
2.5
2.3
1.9
United States 
1.6
2.2
2.9
2.5
1.9
2.5
3.1
2.3
Euro Area
1.9
2.4
2.0
1.9
2.0
2.7
1.7
1.9
Germany
2.2
2.5
1.9
1.9
1.9
2.8
1.9
1.6
France
1.1
2.3
1.6
1.6
1.2
2.8
1.3
1.7
Italy
0.9
1.5
1.2
1.0
1.0
1.6
0.8
1.3
Spain
3.2
3.0
2.7
2.2
2.9
3.0
2.5
2.1
Japan
1.0
1.7
1.1
0.9
1.5
2.0
1.0
–0.3
United Kingdom
1.8
1.7
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.3
1.5
1.4
Canada
1.4
3.0
2.1
2.0
2.0
3.0
2.1
1.9
Other Advanced Economies2
2.3
2.8
2.8
2.5
2.6
2.9
2.8
2.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.4
5.2
4.6
5.3
Commonwealth of Independent States
0.4
2.1
2.3
2.4
1.0
1.7
2.2
2.3
Russia
–0.2
1.5
1.7
1.8
0.8
1.2
2.1
1.9
Excluding Russia
2.0
3.6
3.9
3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.3
6.3
6.7
6.2
6.5
China
6.7
6.9
6.6
6.2
6.8
6.8
6.4
6.2
India3
7.1
6.7
7.3
7.4
6.1
7.7
6.5
7.9
ASEAN-54
4.9
5.3
5.3
5.2
4.8
5.4
5.1
5.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.3
6.0
3.8
2.0
3.8
6.1
0.9
4.0
Latin America and the Caribbean 
–0.6
1.3
1.2
2.2
–0.8
1.7
0.5
2.8
Brazil
–3.5
1.0
1.4
2.4
–2.4
2.2
1.7
2.5
Mexico
2.9
2.0
2.2
2.5
3.3
1.6
2.2
3.0
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
5.1
2.2
2.4
2.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
1.7
–0.9
2.2
2.4
2.1
–1.4
3.5
2.1
Sub-Saharan Africa 
1.4
2.7
3.1
3.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
–1.6
0.8
1.9
2.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
0.6
1.3
0.8
1.4
1.0
1.9
0.5
0.9
Memorandum
European Union
2.0
2.7
2.2
2.0
2.1
2.8
1.9
2.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.6
4.7
4.7
5.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East and North Africa 
5.2
1.8
2.0
2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
2.5
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.7
3.4
3.0
3.0
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
2.2
5.2
4.2
4.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.4
4.2
3.7
4.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.8
7.0
6.0
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Exports
Advanced Economies
1.8
4.4
3.4
3.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
3.0
6.9
4.7
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil5
–15.7
23.3
31.4
–0.9
16.2
19.6
19.6
–3.6
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export  
weights)
–1.5
6.8
2.7
–0.7
10.3
1.9
1.3
1.9
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.9
1.2
1.7
2.1
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6
4.2
4.3
5.0
5.2
4.2
3.7
4.6
4.1
London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) 
On US Dollar Deposits (six month)
1.1
1.5
2.5
3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
On Euro Deposits (three month)
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
5Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $52.81 in 
2017; the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $69.38 in 2018 and $68.76 in 2019.
6Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” 
section of the Statistical Appendix.
7For World Output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market 
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.   
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
16
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
WEO. In 2018, weaker-than-expected outturns in the 
first half of the year have led to downward revisions for 
the euro area and the United Kingdom. In 2019, recent 
trade measures are expected to weigh on economic 
activity, especially in the United States, where the 2019 
growth forecast was revised down by 0.2 percentage 
point. Growth is expected to decline to 1.8 percent in 
2020 as the US fiscal stimulus begins to unwind and 
euro area growth moderates toward its medium-term 
potential. Growth is projected to fall to 1.4 percent 
later on as working-age population growth continues to 
slow and productivity growth remains moderate.
With emerging Asia continuing to expand at a 
strong pace—despite a 0.3 percentage point downward 
revision to the 2019 growth forecast mostly driven by 
recently announced trade measures—and activity in 
commodity exporters firming, growth in the emerging 
market and developing economy group is set to remain 
steady at 4.7 percent in 2018–19. Over the medium 
term, growth is projected to rise to slightly less than 
5 percent. Beyond 2019, the aggregate growth rate for 
the group reflects offsetting developments as growth 
moderates to a sustainable pace in China, while it 
improves in India (owing to structural reforms and 
a still-favorable demographic dividend), commodity 
exporters (though to rates below the average of recent 
decades), and some economies experiencing macroeco-
nomic stress in 2018–19. In comparison with the April 
2018 WEO, the growth forecast for emerging market 
and developing economies was marked down for 2018 
and 2019 by 0.2 percentage point and 0.4 percentage 
point, respectively, and for 2020–23 by about 0.2 per-
centage point. For 2018–19, the main sources of the 
downward revision are the negative expected impact of 
the trade measures implemented since the April 2018 
WEO on activity in China and other economies in 
emerging Asia, much weaker activity in Iran following 
the reimposition of US sanctions, a sharp projected 
slowdown in Turkey following the ongoing market tur-
moil, and a more subdued outlook for large economies 
in Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico). Over 
2020–23, the revisions primarily reflect a downward 
reassessment of the still-strong growth prospects for 
India and a lower growth forecast for Pakistan and Tur-
key, in addition to continued weaker growth in Iran.
Inflation Outlook
Largely reflecting recent increases in commodity 
prices, inflation is expected to rise this year across 
both advanced and emerging market and developing 
economies. In advanced economies, it is projected 
to pick up to 2 percent in 2018, from 1.7 percent 
in 2017. Inflation in emerging market and developing 
economies excluding Venezuela is expected to increase 
to 5.0 percent this year from 4.3 percent in 2017 
(Box 1.4 provides details of the inflation outlook for 
individual countries).
Among advanced economies, core inflation will rise 
over the forecast horizon, with differentiation across 
countries mostly based on cyclical positions. In the 
United States, for example, core personal consump-
tion expenditure price inflation, the Federal Reserve’s 
preferred measure, is expected to rise to 2.1 percent 
in 2018 and 2.3 percent in 2019 (from 1.6 percent 
in 2017), as the sizable, procyclical fiscal stimulus lifts 
output above potential. Core inflation is assumed to 
gradually decline to 2 percent thereafter, with a mon-
etary policy response that ensures expectations remain 
well anchored. In the euro area, core harmonized index 
of consumer prices inflation is projected to increase 
slowly to 2 percent by 2022, reflecting the influence of 
backward-looking elements in the inflation processes.
Within the group of emerging market and develop-
ing economies, core inflation rates are expected to be 
more dispersed than among advanced economies. To a 
large extent, the dispersion reflects variation in cyclical 
positions, anchoring of inflation expectations, and 
inflation targets.
External Sector Outlook
Current Account Positions
After remaining broadly stable in 2017, current 
account deficits and surpluses in 2018 are, on the whole, 
forecast to widen slightly from 2017 (Figure 1.14). 
The most notable drivers of predicted current account 
changes for 2018 are the increase in oil prices, which 
is expected to result in an improvement in the current 
account balance of oil exporters of about 3 percent of 
their GDP, and strong growth in the United States, 
which is projected to lead to a modest widening of the 
US current account deficit for this year. Given that most 
fuel exporters were already running surpluses in 2017, 
both factors will lead to some widening of global current 
account imbalances.
Forecasts for 2019 and beyond indicate a gradual 
decline in the current account balances of oil export-
ers (because average oil prices are projected to decline 
compared with their current levels), as well as an initial 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
17
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
further widening of the US current account deficit, 
driven by expansionary fiscal policy. Over the medium 
term, current account balances should narrow again, 
with a stabilization in the US current account deficit as 
the expansionary effects of fiscal policy wane, coupled 
with some narrowing of surpluses in China and, to a 
lesser extent, in Europe. The recently imposed trade 
measures by the United States and retaliatory actions 
by trading partners are expected to have a limited 
impact on external imbalances (see 2018 External Sec-
tor Report for a discussion of the relation between trade 
costs and external imbalances).
As highlighted in the IMF’s 2018 External Sector 
Report, many countries’ current account imbalances 
in 2017 were too large in relation to country-specific 
norms consistent with underlying fundamentals and 
desirable policies. It is therefore interesting to doc-
ument how current account balances are projected 
to evolve in coming years. As shown in panel 1 of 
Figure 1.15, current account balances in 2018 are 
projected to move in a direction consistent with some 
reduction in those excess imbalances (despite a larger 
deficit in the United States and a larger surplus in Ger-
many). Medium-term projections suggest, on average, 
further movement of current account balances in the 
same direction, but also feature a widening of the US 
current account deficit and persistent large surpluses 
in many advanced European and Asian economies 
(Figure 1.15, panel 2).7 At the same time, given that 
changes in macroeconomic fundamentals relative to 
2017 affect not only current account balances but 
also their equilibrium values, the path of future excess 
imbalances cannot be precisely inferred from this 
exercise.8 
International Investment Positions
Changes in international investment positions reflect 
both net financial flows and valuation changes arising 
from fluctuations in exchange rates and asset prices. 
Given that WEO projections assume broadly stable 
real effective exchange rates and limited variation 
in asset prices, changes in international investment 
positions are driven by projections for net external bor-
7The change in the current account balance over 2018 would 
offset, on average, about one-fifth of the 2017 current account gap, 
while the change between 2017 and 2023 would offset about half of 
the 2017 gap.
8For instance, an improvement in the terms of trade is typically 
associated with a larger equilibrium current account balance and a 
more appreciated equilibrium exchange rate.
rowing and lending (in line with the current account 
balance), with their ratios to domestic and world GDP 
affected by projected growth rates for individual coun-
tries and for the world economy as a whole.9,10
9WEO forecasts include projections of 10-year government bond 
yields, which would affect bond prices going forward, but the impact 
of those changes in bond prices on the valuation of external assets 
and liabilities is typically not included in international investment 
position forecasts.
10Exchange rate changes can affect the evolution of international 
investment positions. For instance, according to estimates by the 
United States Bureau of Economic Analysis, the 7 percent deprecia-
tion of the US dollar in nominal effective terms between the end of 
2016 and the end of 2017 improved the US net international invest-
ment position by about 6 percent of GDP by increasing the domes-
tic currency value of foreign currency assets held by US residents.
United States
Other adv.
Em. Asia
Discrepancy
Eur. debtors
Lat. Am.
CEE
Afr. and ME
Japan
China
Eur. creditors
Adv. Asia
Oil exporters
Figure 1.14.  Global Current Account Balance
(Percent of world GDP)
After a slight widening in 2018, current account balances are expected to narrow 
marginally over the medium term as the surpluses of oil exporters decline and the 
US current account deﬁcit stabilizes with the fading of the expansionary effects of 
ﬁscal policy.
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan 
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South 
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, 
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, 
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, 
Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, 
Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, 
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab 
Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, 
France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom).
–4
4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
2002
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
20
22 23
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
18
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
As panel 1 of Figure 1.16 shows, over the next five 
years, creditor and debtor positions as a share of world 
GDP are projected to widen slightly. On the creditor 
side, this is explained primarily by the growing creditor 
positions of a group of European advanced economies, 
a result of large projected current account surpluses. 
On the debtor side, this reflects some increase in 
the debtor position of the United States and other 
advanced economies (a group including Canada, 
France, and the United Kingdom, among others), 
partially offset by a further sizable improvement in the 
position of euro area debtor countries.
Similar trends are highlighted in panel 2 of Fig-
ure 1.16, which shows projected changes in net interna-
tional investment positions as a percentage of domestic 
GDP across countries and regions between 2017 and 
2023, the last year of the WEO projection horizon. The 
net creditor position of advanced European economies 
is projected to exceed 85 percent of GDP and of Japan 
to exceed 75 percent of GDP, while the net debtor 
position of the United States is projected to approach 
50 percent of GDP, some 9 percentage points above the 
2017 estimate. In contrast, the net international invest-
ment position of a group of euro area debtor countries, 
ESP
NLD
ITA
DEU
FRA
BEL
SGP
HKG
CHE
SWE
KOR
SAU
CAN
AUS
TUR
THA
ZAF
POL
RUS
MEX
MYS
IDN
IND
BRA
ARG
USA
GBR
JPN
CHN
ESP
NLD
ITA
DEU
FRA
BEL
SGP
HKG
SWE
KOR
SAU
AUS
TUR
THA
ZAF
POL
RUS
MEX
MYS
IND
BRA
ARG
USA
GBR
CHN
Figure 1.15.  Current Account Balances in Relation to
Economic Fundamentals
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Change in current-account-to-
GDP ratio, 2017–18
1. 2017 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current
 Account Balances, 2017–18
Current account gap, 2017
2. 2017 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current
 Account Balances, 2017–23
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Change in current-account-to-
GDP ratio, 2017–23
Current account gap, 2017
Current account balances in 2018 are projected to move in a direction consistent 
with some reduction in excess imbalances. Medium-term projections suggest 
further modest movement of current account balances in the same direction. 
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country 
codes.
United States
Other adv.
Em. Asia
Eur. debtors
Lat. Am.
CEE
Afr. and ME
Japan
China
Eur. creditors
Adv. Asia
Oil exporters
Figure 1.16.  Net International Investment Position
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Oil exporters
Adv. Asia
Japan
Eur. creditors
Afr. and ME
Lat. Am.
Other
adv.
United States
China
CEE
Eur. debtors
Projected change in IIP, 2017–23
Net IIP, 2017
2. Net IIP, 2017, and Projected Changes, 2017–23
(Percent of GDP)
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
1. Global International Investment Position
(Percent of world GDP)
Em. Asia
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan 
Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic 
of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South 
Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, 
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, 
Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, 
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, 
Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); IIP = international investment position; 
Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, 
Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, 
Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Other 
adv. = Other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New 
Zealand, United Kingdom).
Creditor and debtor net international investment positions are projected to widen 
slightly over the medium term.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
19
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
including Italy and Spain, is expected to improve by 
more than 20 percentage points of their collective GDP, 
and by 2023, net foreign liabilities would be about half 
their level a decade earlier.
Domestic and External Contributions 
to GDP Growth
Another way to look at the prospects for global 
rebalancing is to examine the domestic and external 
contributions to GDP growth in creditor and debtor 
countries. Growth in domestic demand was faster in 
creditor countries than in debtor countries in 2017, as 
in previous years, primarily reflecting high growth in 
China (Figure 1.17). At the same time, the net external 
contribution to growth was again positive for credi-
tors, driven this time by positive contributions from 
China, creditor Europe, and Japan. For 2018, the net 
external contribution to growth is slightly negative for 
creditors, with a positive contribution from creditor 
Europe, Japan, and other advanced Asian economies 
broadly offset by negative contributions from China 
and oil exporters. Among debtor countries, the net 
external contribution to growth is forecast to be posi-
tive for Latin American debtor countries and to remain 
negative for the United States because of expansionary 
fiscal policy.
Implications of Imbalances
Sustained excess external imbalances in the world’s 
key economies and policy actions that threaten to 
widen such imbalances pose risks to global stability. 
The fiscal easing under way in the United States is 
leading to a tightening of monetary conditions, a 
stronger US dollar, and a larger US current account 
deficit. These trends risk aggravating trade tensions and 
may result in a faster tightening of global financing 
conditions, with negative implications for emerging 
market economies, especially those with weak external 
positions. Over the medium term, widening debtor 
positions in key economies could constrain global 
growth and possibly result in sharp and disruptive 
currency and asset price adjustments.
As discussed in the section titled “Policy Priorities,” 
the US economy, which is already operating beyond 
full employment, should implement a medium-term 
plan to reverse the rising ratio of public debt, accom-
panied by fiscal measures to gradually boost domestic 
capacity. This would help ensure more sustainable 
growth dynamics as well as contain external imbal-
ances. Stronger reliance on demand growth in some 
Net external contribution to growth
Domestic demand contribution to growth
Total
Figure 1.17.  Growth for Creditors and Debtors
(Percent)
–2
0
2
4
6
8
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
1. Growth for Creditors 
2. Growth for Debtors 
Eur.
creditors
China
Japan
Adv. Asia Oil exporters
United
States
Eur.
debtors
Other adv.
Latin
America
Em. Asia
CEE
All creditors
All
debtors
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan 
Province of China); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia, 
Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, Turkey, Ukraine); 
Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, 
Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, 
Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland); 
Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, 
Slovenia); Latin America = Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, 
Uruguay; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, 
Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, 
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab 
Emirates, Venezuela. 
In 2017 and 2018, domestic demand growth was faster in creditor countries than 
in debtor countries.
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
2017
2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
20
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
creditor countries, especially those with policy space 
to support it, such as Germany, would help facilitate 
domestic and global rebalancing while sustaining world 
growth over the medium term.
Risks
The balance of risks to the short-term global growth 
forecast has now shifted to the downside. The potential 
for upside surprises has receded, given the tightening of 
financial conditions in some parts of the world, the rise 
in trade costs, slow implementation of reforms recom-
mended in the past, and waning growth momentum, 
reflected in worse-than-anticipated outturns in several 
large economies, weakening growth of industrial produc-
tion, and a softening of some high-frequency indicators. 
At the same time, several of the downside risks high-
lighted in the April 2018 WEO have become more pro-
nounced or have partially materialized—such as rising 
trade barriers and a reversal of capital flows to emerging 
market economies with weaker fundamentals and higher 
political risk. With protectionist rhetoric increasingly 
turned into action with the United States imposing 
tariffs on a wide range of imports and retaliatory actions 
by trading partners, escalation of trade tensions to an 
intensity that carries systemic risk is a distinct possibility 
without policy cooperation. And global financial con-
ditions, while still generally easy, could tighten sharply, 
triggered by faster-than-anticipated monetary policy 
tightening in advanced economies or the emergence 
of other risks that would cause market sentiment to 
deteriorate suddenly. With public and corporate debt 
near record levels in many countries, such developments 
would expose vulnerabilities that have built up over the 
years, dent confidence, and undermine investment—a 
key driver of the baseline growth forecast.
In the medium term, risks to the growth outlook 
remain skewed to the downside as they were in April. 
These risks stem from a continued buildup of financial 
vulnerabilities, the implementation of unsustainable 
macroeconomic policies in the face of a subdued 
growth outlook, rising inequality, and declining trust 
in mainstream policies. A range of other noneconomic 
factors continue to cloud the outlook. If any of these 
risks materializes, the likelihood of other destabiliz-
ing developments could increase, amplifying negative 
growth consequences. The limited policy space to 
counteract downturns in advanced and emerging mar-
ket economies further exacerbates concerns about these 
undesirable possibilities.
Trade Tensions and Policy Uncertainty
Escalating trade tensions and the potential shift 
away from a multilateral, rules-based trading system 
are key threats to the global outlook. Discontent with 
trade practices and the rules-based trading system 
has led to a range of trade actions since January, as 
noted in the section titled “Recent Developments.” A 
cooperative approach to reduce trade costs and resolve 
disagreements without raising tariff and nontariff bar-
riers has so far proved elusive, with the United States 
imposing tariffs on a variety of imports and trading 
partners undertaking retaliatory measures. As discussed 
in the 2018 External Sector Report, widening exter-
nal imbalances in some large economies, such as the 
United States—where the fiscal expansion will likely 
increase the country’s current account deficit—could 
further fuel protectionist sentiments. The prolifer-
ation of trade actions and threats, and the ongoing 
renegotiations of major free trade agreements, such as 
NAFTA and the economic arrangements between the 
United Kingdom and the rest of the European Union, 
have created pervasive uncertainty about future trade 
costs.11 An intensification of trade tensions and the 
associated further rise in policy uncertainty could dent 
business and financial market sentiment, trigger finan-
cial market volatility, and slow investment and trade. 
An increase in trade barriers would disrupt global 
supply chains, which have become an integral part of 
production processes in the past decades, and slow the 
spread of new technologies, ultimately lowering global 
productivity and welfare. It would also make tradable 
consumer goods less affordable, harming low-income 
households disproportionately. In addition to their 
negative effects on domestic and global growth, protec-
tionist policies would likely have very limited effect on 
external imbalances, as discussed in the 2018 External 
Sector Report.
Scenario Box 1 discusses the potential economic 
consequences of further escalation in trade tensions 
and rising trade barriers. Illustrative simulations 
suggest that a combination of higher import tariffs by 
the United States (along the lines threatened by the 
US administration so far) and retaliatory measures 
11As discussed in the 2016 United Kingdom IMF Article IV 
Selected Issues paper and the 2018 Euro Area IMF Article IV 
Selected Issues paper, the rise in trade barriers between the United 
Kingdom and the European Union would imply sizable losses for the 
UK economy and, to a lesser extent, for its trading partners, with 
negative impacts concentrated in countries with the largest trade 
links with the United Kingdom.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
21
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
by its trading partners could inflict significant costs 
on the global economy, especially through its impact 
on confidence and financial conditions. According to 
model simulations, global GDP would fall by more 
than 0.8 percent in 2020 and remain roughly 0.4 per-
cent lower in the long term compared with a baseline 
without trade tensions. The disruption caused by an 
escalation of trade restrictions could be particularly 
large in the United States and China, with GDP losses 
of more than 0.9 percent in the United States and 
over 1.6 percent in China in 2019, and in the NAFTA 
trading partners, where GDP is simulated to be more 
than 1.6 percent lower in 2020 than in the absence of 
tariff measures.
As discussed in the July 2018 Group of Twenty 
Surveillance Note and the October 2016 WEO, such 
illustrative scenarios likely understate the negative 
repercussions of rising trade tensions on the global 
economy. Inward-looking trade policies could come 
together with tighter restrictions on the cross-border 
flows of factors of production. Curbs to migration 
would prevent aging economies from taking advantage 
of demographic trends in other parts of the world to 
ease labor supply pressures (Chapter 2 of the April 
2018 WEO). The disruption to international economic 
links would also make it harder for countries to tackle 
cooperatively, and in a coordinated manner, the other 
multilateral challenges they face, now or in the future.
Beyond trade, recent and forthcoming elections 
have raised the prospect of realigned policy agendas. 
Political and policy uncertainty could deter private 
investment and weaken economic activity in several 
countries by raising the possibility of slower reform or 
of significant change to policy objectives. For exam-
ple, the recent difficulties with forming a government 
in Italy and the possibility of reversal of reforms or 
the implementation of policies that would harm debt 
sustainability triggered a sharp widening in spreads. In 
Turkey, growing concerns about the credibility of the 
policy agenda, underlying fundamentals, and political 
tensions with the US were the main factors behind the 
sharp depreciation of the Turkish lira, the decline in 
asset prices, and widening spreads in August. In China, 
the recent shift to a more accommodative macro policy 
stance, while fine-tuning the pace of deleveraging, has 
brought renewed attention to the difficult trade-off 
between growth and stability that policymakers face. 
These developments are consistent with an overall 
increase in global economic policy uncertainty since 
the start of this year (Figure 1.18). IMF staff analysis 
suggests that 2019 and 2020 growth forecast revisions 
compared with the April 2018 WEO are slightly more 
negative for countries that trade extensively with the 
United States—which could serve as a proxy for the 
global repercussions of the uncertain direction of US 
trade policy (Figure 1.18, panel 2). 
Financial Tensions
After years of an extremely supportive financial 
environment, the global economy remains vulner-
able to a sudden tightening of financial conditions. 
As discussed in the April and October 2018 GFSRs, 
measures of equity valuations appear stretched in some 
markets, investors have moved into riskier asset classes 
in search of yield, and the share of firms with low 
investment-grade ratings in advanced economy bond 
indices has increased significantly. Across many econ-
omies, government and corporate debt is substantially 
higher than before the global financial crisis (April 
2018 Fiscal Monitor). In some emerging markets, there 
are concerns about rising contingent liabilities and 
increasing balance sheet mismatches. A surprise tight-
ening of global financial conditions could expose these 
vulnerabilities and derail the expansion.
As discussed in previous WEOs, various factors 
could trigger a sudden change in global financial 
conditions. Signs of firmer-than-expected inflation in 
the United States (for example, as capacity constraints 
become more binding) could lead to a shift in market 
expectations of US interest rate hikes, which are cur-
rently well below those assumed in the WEO baseline 
forecast. A negative shock could trigger a sudden 
deterioration of risk appetite, which in turn could 
lead to disruptive portfolio adjustments, accelerate 
and broaden the reversal of capital flows from emerg-
ing markets, and lead to further US dollar appreci-
ation, straining economies with high leverage, fixed 
exchange rates, or balance sheet mismatches. Rising 
trade tensions and political and policy uncertainty 
could also make market participants abruptly reassess 
fundamentals and risks. The recent turmoil in Turkey, 
exacerbated by political tensions with the United States 
against the backdrop of deteriorating fundamentals, 
including a belated monetary policy response to 
increasing inflation, exemplifies the increased salience 
of this risk for other vulnerable emerging markets. In 
an environment of gradually tightening global interest 
rates and rising uncertainty, the likelihood of conta-
gion from such episodes to other economies has also 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
22
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
risen. The increase in Italian sovereign yields since May 
is another case in point. A significant further decline in 
sovereign bond prices, with possible contagion effects, 
would impose valuation losses on investors, worsen 
public debt dynamics, and weaken bank balance 
sheets, reigniting concerns about sovereign-bank feed-
back loops in the euro area.
Financial tensions could also arise from regulatory 
actions. In China, where the authorities are taking 
welcome steps to slow credit growth, uncoordinated 
financial and local government regulatory action could 
have unintended consequences that trigger disorderly 
repricing of financial assets, increase rollover risks, and 
lead to stronger-than-forecast negative effects on activity. 
More broadly, an indiscriminate rollback of postcrisis 
regulatory reform and oversight—both domestically and 
internationally—could encourage excessive risk taking, 
leading to a further buildup of financial vulnerabilities.
Cybersecurity breaches and cyberattacks on critical 
financial infrastructure represent an additional source 
of risk because they could undermine cross-border pay-
ment systems and disrupt the flow of goods and services. 
Continued rapid growth of crypto assets could create 
new vulnerabilities in the international financial system.
Other Factors 
A range of other factors continues to influence the 
medium-term outlook in various regions. Geopolitical 
risks (Figure 1.19) and domestic strife are weighing on 
the outlook in several economies, especially in the Mid-
dle East and sub-Saharan Africa. Box 1.5 documents 
the depth of macroeconomic distress in several countries 
(such as Libya, Venezuela, and Yemen) and compares it 
to other cases of large GDP collapses in recent history. 
While the baseline forecast assumes a gradual easing 
of existing strains, an intensification of conflicts in 
the Middle East and Africa not only would have large 
negative domestic repercussions (Box 1.1 of the April 
2017 WEO), but could trigger a rise in migrant flows 
into Europe, potentially deepening political divisions. 
In several systemically important economies, declin-
ing trust in national and regional institutions may 
increase the appeal of politically popular but unsustain-
able policy measures, which could harm confidence, 
threaten medium-term sustainability, and, in the case 
of Europe, undermine regional cohesion. Furthermore, 
many countries remain vulnerable to the economic and 
humanitarian costs of extreme weather events and other 
natural disasters, with potentially significant cross-border 
ramifications through migration flows.
Fan Chart Analysis
A fan chart analysis—based on equity and commod-
ity market data as well as the dispersion of inflation 
and term spread projections of private forecasters—
shows a downward shift in the balance of risks relative 
to the October 2017 WEO, as shown in Figure 1.20. 
The shift is broad based—with all indicators showing 
a decline in the current year extending into 2019. The 
worsening of the risk profile mostly reflects anticipated 
exacerbation of global trade tensions, which will weigh 
on investment and growth. These measures already 
Global economic policy uncertainty (PPP weight)
US trade policy uncertainty (right scale)
2019 growth forecast revision
2020 growth forecast revision
Figure 1.18.  Policy Uncertainty and Trade Tensions
y = –0.010x + 0.028 
R 2 = 0.011
y = –0.007x + 0.028
R 2 = 0.018
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Jan.
2016
Apr.
16
Jul.
16
Oct.
16
Jan.
17
Apr.
17
Jul.
17
Oct.
17
Jan.
18
Apr.
18
Aug.
18
–0.20
–0.10
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
Exports to the United States (share of GDP)
Growth revision from April 2018 to October 2018 (percentage points)
2. Growth Forecast Revisions and Exports to the United States
1. Economic Policy Uncertainty1
(Index)
Sources: Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016); United Nations COMTRADE database; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: PPP = purchasing power parity. Baker-Bloom-Davis index of Global 
Economic Policy Uncertainty (GEPU) is a GDP-weighted average of national EPU 
indices for 20 countries: Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, France, Germany, 
Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain, 
Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
1Mean of global economic policy uncertainty index from 1997 to 2015 = 100; 
mean of US trade policy uncertainty index from 1985 to 2010 = 100.
Global economic policy uncertainty has increased sharply since the beginning of 
the year. Growth forecast revisions for 2019 and 2020 are slightly more negative 
for countries with larger trade exposure to the United States.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
23
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
appear, at least in part, to be priced into US equities, 
whose risk profile has worsened. A greater likelihood 
of higher energy prices adds to downside risks. Box 1.6 
discusses the challenges of predicting recessions. 
As discussed in the October 2018 GFSR, 
growth-at-risk analysis suggests a slight increase in 
short-term downside risks to global financial stability 
compared with the April 2018 GFSR, and contin-
ued risks to medium-term growth that are well above 
historical norms.
Policy Priorities
With risks shifting to the downside, domestic and 
multilateral policies have a vital role to play in sustain-
ing the global expansion and enhancing prospects for 
strong and inclusive growth. Global growth remains 
above trend but, with momentum appearing to peak, 
strengthening resilience and tackling long-standing 
challenges become more urgent.
Policies—Advanced Economies
In advanced economies, the macroeconomic pol-
icy stance should be tailored to the maturing cyclical 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2010
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Aug.
18
Source: Caldara and Iacoviello (2018).
Note: ISIS = Islamic State.
Arab Spring:
Syrian and
Libyan wars
Syrian
civil war
escalation 
Russian
actions
in Crimea
ISIS
escalation
Paris
attacks 
Geopolitical risks continue to trend upward.
Figure 1.19.  Geopolitical Risk Index
(Index)
50 percent conﬁdence interval
70 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval from October 2017 WEO
Balance of risks for
Current year
Next year
GDP (right scale)
VIX (left scale)
Term spread
(right scale)       
Oil (left scale)
Figure 1.20.  Risks to the Global Outlook
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2015
16
17
18
19
0
25
50
75
100
125
0.0
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.6
2006 08
10
12
14
16
Jul.
18
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Term spread
S&P 500
Inﬂation risk
Oil market risks
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
2006 08
10
12
14
16
Jul.
18
2. Balance of Risks Associated with Selected Risk Factors2
(Coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying
variables)
1. Prospects for World GDP Growth1
(Percent change)
Dispersion of Forecasts and Implied Volatility3
3.
4.
WEO baseline
The risks around the central global growth forecast for 2018 and 2019 have tilted
to the downside.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE); 
Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
1The fan chart shows the uncertainty around the October 2018 World Economic 
Outlook (WEO) central forecast with 50, 70, and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. 
As shown, the 70 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 percent interval, and 
the 90 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 and 70 percent intervals. See 
Appendix 1.2 of the April 2009 WEO for details. The 90 percent intervals for the 
current-year and one-year-ahead forecasts from the October 2017 WEO are shown.
2The bars depict the coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying 
variables. The values for inﬂation risks and oil market risks enter with the opposite 
sign since they represent downside risks to growth.
3GDP measures the purchasing-power-parity-weighted average dispersion of GDP 
growth forecasts for the Group of Seven economies (Canada, France, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States), Brazil, China, India, and Mexico. VIX 
is the CBOE Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 Implied Volatility Index. Term spread 
measures the average dispersion of term spreads implicit in interest rate forecasts 
for Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Oil is the CBOE 
crude oil volatility index. Forecasts are from Consensus Economics surveys. 
Dashed lines represent the average values from 2000 to the present.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
24
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
position. While rising oil prices are largely responsible 
for higher headline inflation, core inflation has also 
been firming in the context of narrowing or closing 
output gaps. Where inflation is close to or above target, 
data-dependent and well-communicated monetary 
normalization is appropriate. In cases where inflation is 
still significantly below target, continued accommodative 
monetary policy remains appropriate. As much as possi-
ble, countries should use this period of sustained growth 
to rebuild fiscal buffers. Structural reforms aimed at 
increasing labor productivity, labor force participation, 
and flexibility of the labor market would be welcome. 
Investments in physical and digital infrastructure, as well 
as reduced barriers to entry in services markets, could 
boost growth potential in the medium term.
Monetary Policy: Data Dependent, Well 
Communicated, Country Specific
In the United States, the monetary policy stance 
should be gradually tightened as inflation pressures 
emerge amid solid growth and historically low unem-
ployment. The large and procyclical fiscal stimulus 
places an additional burden on the Federal Reserve 
to raise policy rates to keep inflation expectations 
anchored around the target and prevent the economy 
from overheating. In this context, the Federal Reserve’s 
continued adherence to data-dependent policymaking 
and clear communication will be vital to ensuring a 
smooth adjustment—both domestically and abroad.
In the United Kingdom, where the output gap is 
closed and unemployment is low, a modest tighten-
ing of monetary policy may be warranted, although 
at a time of heightened uncertainty, monetary policy 
should remain flexible in response to changing condi-
tions associated with the Brexit negotiations.
In the euro area and Japan, accommodative mone-
tary policies remain appropriate. In the euro area, pos-
itive output gaps and tightening labor markets should 
eventually lift inflation, but the increase is projected to 
happen slowly over the forecast horizon, given a strong 
backward-looking element in the inflation process. 
The European Central Bank’s expectation that policy 
rates will remain low through the summer of 2019, 
and beyond, if necessary, together with the net asset 
purchases until the end of the year (and the sizable 
stock of acquired assets and the associated reinvest-
ments), are therefore vital. In Japan, where inflation 
is not expected to reach the target over the next five 
years, a sustained accommodative monetary stance is 
also a necessity. The Bank of Japan recently reinforced 
its commitment to reflate the economy by introducing 
forward guidance on policy interest rates and increas-
ing flexibility of market operations to make the accom-
modative monetary stance more sustainable.
Fiscal Policy: Rebuild Buffers, Enhance Inclusiveness, 
and Boost Medium-Term Potential
Above-trend growth in many advanced economies 
offers a chance to build fiscal buffers and prepare for 
the next downturn. Figure 1.21 highlights that, while 
public debt is projected to decline in many of the 
largest advanced economies over the next five years, 
projected changes in public debt are uncorrelated with 
initial debt levels.12 Procyclical fiscal stimulus should 
be avoided and rolled back (for example, in the United 
States), while further steps should be taken by coun-
tries with fiscal space and excess external surpluses to 
boost domestic growth potential and address global 
imbalances (for example, in Germany). In cases where 
fiscal consolidation is appropriate, the pace of fiscal 
tightening should depend on economic conditions 
and avoid exerting sharp drags on demand, and efforts 
should be made to reorient the composition of spend-
ing and revenues to enhance inclusiveness and protect 
vulnerable people. Fiscal spending should prioritize 
areas that can support growth, such as investing in 
physical and digital infrastructure, boosting labor force 
participation where aging threatens future labor supply, 
and enhancing workforce skills.
In the United States, the tax overhaul and higher 
spending will widen the fiscal deficit, which was 
already set to deteriorate over the long term because 
of aging-related spending. Against the backdrop of 
record low unemployment rates, the deficit expansion is 
providing a short-term boost to activity in the United 
States and many of its trading partners, but at the cost 
of elevated risks to the US and global economies. The 
larger deficit not only will leave fewer budget resources 
to invest in supply-side reforms, but will add to an 
already-unsustainable public debt and contribute to a 
rise in global imbalances. With the US economy already 
operating above potential, expansionary fiscal policy 
could lead to an inflation surprise, which may trigger 
a faster-than-currently anticipated rise in US interest 
rates, a tightening of global financial conditions, and 
further US dollar appreciation, with potentially negative 
12The October 2018 Fiscal Monitor discusses the evolution of 
public sector balance sheets, which provide a more comprehensive 
view of the state of public finances.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
25
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
spillovers for the global economy. The preferred policy 
course would be to increase the revenue-to-GDP ratio 
through greater reliance on indirect taxes.
In the United Kingdom, the fiscal targets—which 
envisage the cyclically adjusted public sector deficit 
falling below 2 percent of GDP and public debt begin-
ning to decline by 2020–21—provide an anchor for 
medium-term objectives while allowing for flexibility 
in the short term. The pace of fiscal consolidation can 
be eased if risks materialize and growth slows sharply.
In Japan, the debt trajectory needs to be anchored 
by a credible medium-term fiscal consolidation plan, 
which should be based on gradual increases in the 
consumption tax rate beyond the 2 percentage-point 
increase envisaged for October 2019. However, in 
the short term, premature fiscal tightening should be 
avoided to support growth momentum and reflation.
In the euro area, countries with currently limited fis-
cal space (for example, France, Italy, Spain) should use 
this period of above-potential growth and accommo-
dative monetary policy to rebuild fiscal buffers, which 
would help alleviate bank-sovereign strains. France’s 
plan to restrain spending is a welcome step. Countries 
with fiscal space, such as Germany, should fund mea-
sures that would raise potential output and facilitate 
external rebalancing, for example, by increasing public 
investment in physical and human capital.
Structural Policies: Boost Potential Growth
Low productivity and an aging workforce weigh 
heavily on the medium-term growth prospects of 
advanced economies. Reforms of product and labor 
markets could boost medium-term productivity, labor 
supply, and growth potential and are especially import-
ant when fiscal and monetary policy are constrained. 
Reforms that strengthen education and health care 
would help tackle poverty and inequality and prepare 
workers for challenges arising from rapid progress in 
labor-saving technologies and globalization.
In the euro area, structural reforms have attracted 
much discussion in individual countries, but progress 
has been mixed. France has made welcome strides in 
improving labor market flexibility, and, more recently, 
in legislating measures to better align workforce skills 
with business needs to boost employment. Contin-
ued progress with planned reforms that aim to ease 
corporate administrative burdens would also benefit 
long-term growth. In Germany, policies to increase 
labor supply and investment, as well as to support 
entrepreneurship and advance digital transformation, 
October 2018 WEO
October 2017 WEO
October 2018 WEO
October 2017 WEO
Figure 1.21.  Projected Change in Public Debt
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
JPN
ITA
USA
FRA
CAN
GBR
DEU
AUS
KOR
3. G20 AEs: Projected Public Debt Change, 2017–22
(Percentage points)
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
0
50
100
150
200
250
KOR
AUS
DEU
GBR
CAN
FRA
USA
ITA
JPN
Projected change (percentage points)
Public debt, 2017 (percent of GDP)
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
BRA
IND
ARG
MEX
ZAF
CHN
IDN
TUR
SAU
RUS
4. G20 EMDEs: Projected Public Debt Change, 2017–22
(Percentage points)
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Projected change (percentage points)
Public debt, 2017 (percent of GDP)
2. G20 EMDEs: Projected Change in Public Debt (2017–23) and
2017 Public Debt
1. G20 AEs: Projected Change in Public Debt (2017–23) and
2017 Public Debt
Public debt in most major advanced economies is projected to decline over 
2017–23, while it is projected to increase in some of the largest emerging market 
and developing economies. But there is no clear relationship between the 
projected change in debt ratios and the level of debt prevailing in 2017.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing 
economies; G20 = Group of Twenty; WEO = World Economic Outlook. 
RUS
SAU
TUR
IDN
CHN
ZAF
MEX
ARG
IND
BRA
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
26
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
would all be beneficial, and should be supported with 
available fiscal space—particularly in contexts such as 
the current year in which the budget is in surplus. In 
Italy, past pension and labor market reforms should 
be preserved, and further measures should be pursued, 
such as decentralizing wage bargaining to align wages 
with labor productivity at the firm level. In Spain, 
the structural reform agenda, which aims to raise the 
effectiveness of active labor market policies and reduce 
labor market segmentation, needs new impetus.
In Japan, the foremost priority should be labor mar-
ket reform that could help lift productivity and wage 
inflation. For example, the government’s Work Style 
Reform appropriately focuses on reducing labor market 
duality via the “equal pay for equal work” pillar. Boost-
ing labor force participation rates among women and 
older workers, and allowing more use of foreign labor, 
would help support an aging population, but might 
add to deflationary pressures in the short term and 
should be tackled after the Work Style Reform.
In the United States, labor supply could be incentiv-
ized among lower-income households by increasing the 
generosity of the Earned Income Tax Credit and raising 
the federal minimum wage. Education reforms could 
focus on expanding apprenticeships and vocational 
programs to offer attractive noncollege career paths, 
designing new federal financing options for tertiary 
education, reducing funding differences across districts, 
and offering more support to low-income areas.
In the United Kingdom, where goods and labor mar-
kets are already flexible, reforms should focus on easing 
planning restrictions to boost housing supply, improv-
ing the quality of transport infrastructure, and raising 
human capital among the lower skilled (such as by 
raising the basic skills of high school graduates). Active 
labor market policies should facilitate the relocation of 
workers in industries that are likely to be more affected 
by higher trade barriers after Brexit.
Financial Sector Policies: Complete Balance Sheet 
Cleanup, Increase Resilience to Shocks
The potential for greater financial market volatil-
ity requires fortifying financial systems and avoiding 
a rollback of the postcrisis regulatory reforms. As 
discussed in the October 2018 GFSR, macroprudential 
tools need to be developed and deployed, and macro-
prudential policy buffers need to be rebuilt, including 
by raising capital buffers, to provide insurance against 
a future tightening of financial conditions. In the euro 
area, completing the banking union remains a prior-
ity. Continued progress with balance sheet cleanup is 
essential to strengthen credit intermediation in several 
economies. There is also a general need to improve 
euro area banks’ cost efficiency and profitability 
through proactive supervision, greater use of digiti-
zation, and revamped business models. In Japan, the 
drag on bank profitability from low interest rates and 
demographic headwinds could be remedied by increas-
ing fee-based income and diversifying revenue sources, 
together with consolidation. In the United States, 
rising leverage, a weakening of underwriting standards 
for corporate credit, the growth of passively managed 
investment products, and cyber risks bear close moni-
toring. Changes to financial oversight should continue 
to ensure that the current risk-based approach to reg-
ulation, supervision, and resolution is preserved (and 
strengthened in the case of nonbanks).
Policies—Emerging Market Economies
With advanced economy interest rates expected 
to increase from current still-accommodative lev-
els and with trade tensions rising, emerging market 
and developing economies need to be prepared for 
an environment of higher volatility. Many need to 
enhance resilience through an appropriate mix of fiscal, 
monetary, exchange rate, and prudential policies to 
lessen their vulnerability to tightening global financial 
conditions, sharp currency movements, and reversals in 
capital flows. Given subdued medium-term prospects 
for per capita incomes in many countries and mount-
ing downside risks to growth, reforms need to be 
enacted to bolster growth potential and ensure that all 
segments of society have access to opportunities.
Managing Trade-Offs and Enhancing Resilience
Although global financial conditions remain gener-
ally supportive from a historical perspective, continued 
monetary policy normalization in the United States and 
a stronger US dollar, coinciding with country-specific 
factors, have put pressure on the exchange rates and 
funding costs of some emerging market economies (for 
example, Brazil, India, Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa, 
and especially Argentina and Turkey), and have led to 
further reductions in capital inflows. Policy reactions 
have been varied. In addition to allowing the exchange 
rate to adjust, albeit to varying degrees, countries 
resorted to interest rate hikes (such as in Argentina, Indo-
nesia, Mexico, Turkey), the activation of official financing 
(for example, in Argentina), and intervention in the 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
27
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
foreign exchange market (Argentina and Brazil). The 
challenges that Turkey faces will require a comprehensive 
policy package comprising monetary, fiscal, quasi-fiscal, 
and financial sector policies.
Monetary policy in emerging market economies 
will need to manage the trade-off between supporting 
activity should external financial conditions tighten 
further, and keeping inflation expectations anchored. As 
Chapter 3 demonstrates, firmer anchoring of inflation 
expectations—fostered, for example, by credible fiscal 
and monetary policy frameworks—reduces inflation 
persistence and limits the pass-through of currency 
depreciations to domestic prices, allowing greater leeway 
for monetary policy to support output.
Turning to individual countries, monetary policy 
should be tightened to reanchor expectations where 
inflation continues to be high (as recently done in 
Argentina), where it is increasing further in the wake 
of a sharp currency depreciation (Turkey), or where 
it is expected to pick up (India). Monetary policy 
should instead remain accommodative in Brazil, where 
unemployment remains high and inflation is gradually 
increasing toward the inflation target. In Mexico, con-
ditional on expectations remaining anchored, monetary 
policy may become accommodative to support activity 
once inflation is firmly on a downward path. Given 
the inflation outlook, monetary policy could also be 
adjusted from its moderately tight stance toward a 
neutral stance in Russia. Recent tightening in Indone-
sia was broadly appropriate to tackle risks to inflation 
from exchange rate depreciation and rising inflation 
expectations. Given external uncertainty, monetary 
policy may stay on hold in the immediate future, while 
the impact of recent actions is assessed. In South Africa, 
possible exchange rate pressures amid US monetary 
policy tightening, rising risk aversion, and higher oil 
prices pose upside risks to inflation.
Exchange rate flexibility can help economies absorb 
external shocks, although the effects of exchange rate 
depreciations on private and public sector balance 
sheets and on domestic inflation expectations require 
close monitoring. Under floating exchange rate 
regimes, foreign exchange interventions should be lim-
ited to addressing disorderly market conditions while 
protecting reserve buffers (for example, in Argentina, 
Brazil, India, Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa, Turkey). 
As highlighted in Chapter 2, countries with flexible 
exchange rate regimes and those with lower financial 
vulnerabilities experienced less damage to output in the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis.
Long-standing advice on the importance of rein-
ing in excess credit growth where needed, supporting 
healthy bank balance sheets, containing maturity and 
currency mismatches, and maintaining orderly market 
conditions has become even more relevant in the face of 
renewed market volatility. In China, it will be import-
ant, despite growth headwinds from slower credit 
growth and trade barriers, to maintain the focus on 
deleveraging and continue regulatory and supervisory 
tightening, greater recognition of bad assets, and more 
market-based credit allocation to improve resilience and 
boost medium-term growth prospects. In India, reform 
priorities include reviving bank credit and enhancing 
the efficiency of credit provision by accelerating the 
cleanup of bank and corporate balance sheets and 
improving the governance of public sector banks.
Considerable progress was made in Russia in recent 
years to shore up financial stability, including by clos-
ing weak banks, introducing reforms to the resolution 
framework, enacting measures to reduce dollarization, 
and increasing the risk weights of unsecured consumer 
and mortgage loans. However, efficiency, competition, 
and governance in the banking system should still be 
improved. In Turkey, where significant stress is emerg-
ing in bank and corporate balance sheets, further prog-
ress should be made in strengthening bank supervision 
and enhancing the crisis management framework.
In Brazil, the financial sector has proved resilient, 
despite the severity of the 2015–16 recession, yet bank 
credit is lagging, especially for nonfinancial firms. Key 
reforms have strengthened supervision and regulation 
but remaining vulnerabilities, including related-party 
exposures and transactions, large exposures, country 
and transfer risk, and restructured loans, still need to 
be addressed and the safety net strengthened. Mexico 
remains exposed to bouts of financial volatility in 
global markets, given its open capital account and deep 
financial integration with the rest of the world. The 
exchange rate should remain the main shock absorber, 
and foreign exchange intervention should only be used 
to guard against disorderly market conditions. The 
Flexible Credit Line provides additional insurance in 
case of tail events.
South Africa has a range of buffers, including a float-
ing exchange rate, deep financial markets, contained 
foreign currency exposures, and long debt maturities. 
However, significant vulnerabilities arise from large 
gross external financing needs. Deepening reforms to 
improve governance and the business environment 
would help reduce such vulnerabilities.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
28
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
In Saudi Arabia, further financial development 
and inclusion should be pursued while maintain-
ing financial stability. Increased finance for small 
and medium-sized enterprises; more developed debt 
markets; and improved financial access, especially for 
women; will support growth and equality. Reforms 
should focus on removing structural impediments 
that may dissuade financial institutions from entering 
these markets. In Egypt, while healthy foreign reserves 
and a flexible exchange rate leave the economy well 
positioned to manage any acceleration in outflows, 
maintenance of sound macroeconomic frameworks and 
consistent policy implementation, which have led to a 
successful macroeconomic stabilization, is important.
Rebuilding Fiscal Buffers
Public debt has increased in emerging markets over 
the past decade, and is projected to increase further in 
many of the largest economies over the next five years 
(Figure 1.21). This highlights the need to preserve 
and rebuild buffers. The composition of spending and 
revenues should be growth friendly and protect the 
most vulnerable. As shown in Chapter 2, strong fiscal 
positions before the global financial crisis helped lessen 
damage to GDP in its aftermath.
A gradual fiscal consolidation is needed in China 
to preserve policy space and ensure broader macro-
economic sustainability. The composition of fiscal 
policy should support the needed rebalancing from 
investment to private consumption, and reverting to 
infrastructure stimulus to boost slowing growth should 
be avoided. In India, a high interest burden and risks 
from rising yields also require continued focus on 
debt reduction to establish policy credibility and build 
buffers. These efforts should be supported by further 
reductions in subsidies and enhanced compliance with 
the Goods and Services Tax. Fiscal policy is appropri-
ately geared toward rebuilding fiscal buffers in Indo-
nesia, but untargeted subsidies should continue to be 
reduced, and a medium-term strategy should be put in 
place to increase the tax ratio, which is low by interna-
tional standards.
Fiscal consolidation is a key priority in Brazil as 
well. Pension reform is essential for securing fiscal 
sustainability and ensuring fairness, given that pen-
sion expenditures are high and rising and pensions are 
unduly generous for some segments of the population. 
While recent measures to increase transparency are wel-
come, the fiscal framework needs to be strengthened, 
including by increasing budget flexibility. It will also be 
necessary to continue restraining the government wage 
bill, harmonizing the federal and state tax regimes, 
and improving subnational government finances, while 
protecting effective social programs. A more ambitious 
medium-term fiscal target in Mexico would help ensure 
continued market confidence, rebuild fiscal space, 
and prepare the country to better deal with long-term 
demographics-related spending pressures. Significant 
upfront fiscal adjustment is needed in Argentina to 
lessen the federal financing burden and put public debt 
on a firm downward trajectory.
Further fiscal consolidation is needed over the 
medium term in Russia, and should continue in line 
with the fiscal rule, to rebuild fiscal buffers in the 
short term; the recent relaxation of the fiscal rule 
could weaken the hard-won credibility of the authori-
ties’ macroeconomic framework. To finance increased 
spending on health, education, and infrastructure, 
other spending could be reduced, alongside raising the 
main value-added tax rate, strengthening tax compli-
ance, and broadening the tax base. Parametric pension 
reform could provide some fiscal space as well. Fiscal 
and quasi-fiscal consolidation is also needed as part of 
Turkey’s policy package. Specific measures are needed 
to secure Turkey’s stated medium-term program targets, 
and, on the quasi-fiscal side, public-private partnership 
activity needs to be managed carefully, and state loan 
guarantees should be gradually reduced and limited to 
cases of clear market failures. In South Africa, a gradual 
and growth-friendly fiscal consolidation will be needed 
to strengthen public finances, focusing on wage savings 
and complemented by measures to boost efficiency 
of other current spending, including through better 
targeting of education subsidies and the rationalization 
of transfers to public entities.
Structural Reforms to Boost Growth
Structural reforms remain essential to raising growth 
potential and spreading its benefits more widely, includ-
ing through streamlining regulations and enhancing 
competitiveness, investing in infrastructure and human 
capital, and increasing labor market efficiencies.
Despite a growing emphasis in China on the quality 
rather than the speed of growth, tensions persist 
between stated development goals and intentions 
to reduce leverage and allow market forces to play a 
larger role in the economy. An overarching priority 
is to continue with reforms, even if the economy 
slows down, and to avoid a return to credit- and 
investment-driven stimulus. Key elements of the 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
29
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
reform agenda should include strengthening financial 
regulation and tightening macroprudential settings to 
rein in the rapid increase in household debt; deep-
ening fiscal structural reforms to foster rebalancing 
(making the personal income tax more progressive and 
increasing spending on health, education, and social 
transfers); tackling income inequality by removing 
barriers to labor mobility and strengthening fiscal 
transfers across regions; more decisively reforming 
state-owned enterprises; and fostering further market 
liberalization, particularly in services. Addressing the 
distortions that affect trade and cross-border flows is 
also needed.
In India, important reforms have been implemented 
in recent years, including the Goods and Services 
Tax, the inflation-targeting framework, the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, and steps to liberalize foreign 
investment and make it easier to do business. Looking 
ahead, renewed impetus to reform labor and land mar-
kets, along with further improvements to the business 
climate, are also crucial. In Indonesia, the priorities 
are to enhance infrastructure, streamline regulations 
to boost competition and competitiveness, improve 
education quality, and ease labor market regulation to 
support employment.
In Brazil, recent advances in trade facilitation and 
reforms of the labor and subsidized credit markets are 
welcome, but more reforms are needed to boost produc-
tivity, including by improving financial intermediation, 
investing in infrastructure, and effectively implementing 
anti–money laundering and anticorruption measures. In 
Argentina, reforms will need to ensure that the benefits 
from stronger, sustained growth extend to all parts of 
society by strengthening the social safety net, including 
through a redesign of assistance programs.
Priority areas in Russia include improving property 
rights and governance, enhancing the institutional 
infrastructure, reforming labor markets, and investing 
in innovation and infrastructure. Structural reforms in 
Turkey should focus on increasing labor market flexibil-
ity to help lower unemployment and the output costs 
of disinflation, and strengthening the business climate 
to help improve the composition of external inflows 
and enhance resilience.
Recent reforms in South Africa, such as measures 
adopted to tackle corruption, to strengthen procure-
ment, and in the intention to eliminate wasteful 
expenditure, are welcome. However, further reforms 
are needed to increase policy certainty, improve the 
efficiency of state-owned enterprises, enhance flexibility 
in the labor market, improve basic education, and align 
training with business needs.
Policies—Low-Income Developing Countries
Despite an uptick in growth in 2017–18, many 
low-income countries continue to face substantial risks, 
including from a tightening of global financial condi-
tions, heightened trade tensions, and domestic policy 
slippages. Many continue to grapple with noneco-
nomic challenges, such as rising temperatures, natural 
disasters, and internal conflict. Low-income countries 
therefore need to take advantage of the growth recov-
ery to enact reforms that help build resilience, raise 
potential growth and its inclusiveness, and move closer 
toward achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Rebuilding Fiscal Buffers and Enhancing 
Financial Resilience
Despite recent narrowing of fiscal deficits as a 
result of stronger fuel revenues and some fiscal con-
solidation efforts, public debt burdens have risen 
in many low-income countries in the past sev-
eral years. For oil exporters in sub-Saharan Africa, 
foreign-currency-denominated public debt has increased 
by as much as 80 percent from 2010–13 to 2017, 
while for non-resource-intensive countries the increase 
is about 18 percent over the same period (April 2018 
Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa). Many 
low-income countries are increasingly shifting away 
from traditional multilateral and bilateral sources of debt 
toward bond issuances and non–Paris Club bilateral 
creditors, resulting in higher debt-service costs.
Strengthening of fiscal positions is necessary to 
reduce debt vulnerabilities. Fuel exporters should guard 
against the temptation to let higher oil prices delay 
reforms. Despite their recent recovery, oil prices are 
projected to remain below the 2013 peak. Boosting 
non-oil revenues and continuing fiscal consolidation 
plans remain key goals for oil exporters. The focus 
should be on growth-friendly fiscal adjustment, with a 
shift in spending toward productive and social outlays 
accompanied by frontloaded domestic revenue mobili-
zation, through, for example, broadening the tax base 
and strengthening revenue administration. Moreover, 
enhancing financial resilience through proactive bank-
ing supervision, ensuring adequate provisioning for 
losses by banks, and improving resolution frameworks 
to keep expensive public bailouts at bay can help foster 
a financial system supportive of growth.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
30
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Building More Robust and Diverse Economies
Under current policies in many low-income coun-
tries, per capita income growth is projected to remain 
sluggish and below past averages. Many low-income 
countries are also facing pressure to accommodate 
a rapid increase in the working-age population. It 
is estimated that by 2035, the number of people in 
low-income countries reaching working age (15–64) 
will exceed that of the rest of the world combined 
(Figure 1.22). Creating enough jobs to absorb the new 
entrants will be vital for welfare and social and political 
stability. In this regard, economic diversification into 
labor-intensive activities outside agriculture, and 
away from excessive dependence on commodities for 
resource-intensive exporters, is critical. While the man-
ufacturing sector has traditionally served as a source of 
well-paying jobs for low- to middle-skilled workers in 
developing economies, market services sectors such as 
retail, transport, telecommunications, and financial and 
business services can be viable alternatives (Chapter 3 
of the April 2018 WEO). Facilitating private sector 
development—including by strengthening investor 
rights and the rule of law, reducing the cost of doing 
business, and enhancing infrastructure and openness to 
trade—would help strengthen investment and growth. 
Improving education standards will be essential to 
ensure that the growing pool of workers has the neces-
sary skills. 
Achieving robust growth will also require enhancing 
the macroeconomic resilience of low-income countries, 
including against climate change. Stronger buffers and 
sound macroeconomic policy frameworks, alongside 
policies and institutions that make it easier for labor and 
capital to move across economic sectors and geographic 
regions, are essential to that end. To reduce adverse 
consequences from climate change, countries could 
also invest in specific adaptation strategies that reduce 
exposure and vulnerability to weather shocks, such as 
climate-smart infrastructure, the adoption of appropri-
ate technologies and regulations, and putting in place 
well-targeted social safety nets that can promptly deliver 
support (Chapter 3 of the October 2017 WEO).
Fostering Inclusive Growth
Although inequality has declined since 2000 
across sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Latin America, 
low-income countries continue to experience signifi-
cant inequality (October 2017 Fiscal Monitor). Policies 
to address inequality include ensuring macroeconomic 
stability to improve the sustainability of growth; 
investing in physical infrastructure, especially in poor 
regions; and creating an enabling environment for 
competition and trade, for instance through product 
market reforms that treat all market entrants equally. 
Other policies entail enabling access to financial 
services for low-income households and small and 
medium-sized enterprises, for example by leveraging 
recent developments in fintech. Finally, investments in 
accessible and good-quality education, including early 
childhood development, and broad-based health care 
are essential.
Multilateral Policies
Avoiding protectionist reactions to structural change 
and finding cooperative solutions that promote contin-
ued growth in goods and services trade will be essential 
to preserve and extend the global expansion. Global 
cooperation remains vital to dealing with challenges 
that transcend countries’ borders and resolving dis-
agreements that threaten the gains from international 
economic integration. To preserve and broaden these 
gains, countries need to work together in several areas.
•• Trade: Trade openness under a rules-based, mul-
tilateral trading system has helped diffuse innova-
Advanced economies
Low-income developing countries
Rest of the world
China
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
2015
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Figure 1.22.  Change in the Working-Age Population (15–64)
Relative to 2015 Levels
(Millions)
Sources: UN (2017); and IMF staff calculations.
By 2035 the number of people in low-income countries reaching working age 
(15–64) will exceed that of the rest of the world combined. 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
31
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
tion, lift productivity, and expand the variety of 
goods and services available globally. Policymakers 
should aim to reduce trade costs further and resolve 
disagreements without raising tariff and nontariff 
barriers while facilitating the adjustment of those 
displaced by trade and technology. Such efforts 
could significantly raise global welfare, as docu-
mented in Chapter 2 of the October 2016 WEO. 
To best support a strong, stable global economy, 
World Trade Organization (WTO) rules and com-
mitments should be strengthened to address areas of 
growing relevance, such as services and e-commerce. 
Quickly resolving the impasse over the WTO’s 
Appellate Body will help ensure that existing rules 
are applied and enforced. While agreements at the 
global level are especially important, well-designed 
and ambitious regional arrangements—such as 
the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement 
for Trans-Pacific Partnership—can also help. The 
signing of the African Continental Free Trade Area, 
and of the new Economic Partnership Agreement 
between the euro area and Japan, and recent steps to 
reinvigorate negotiations of the EU–China Compre-
hensive Agreement on Investment are encouraging.
•• Global financial stability: Cooperative global efforts 
on regulatory reform have been crucial in enhancing 
the safety of the financial system in the decade since 
the global financial crisis, as discussed in Chapter 2 
of the October 2018 GFSR, and pressures to roll 
back portions of the reform should be resisted. 
Key areas for more action include completing the 
implementation of the reform agenda—such as fully 
implementing the leverage ratio and net stable fund-
ing ratio, devising effective resolution frameworks, 
and enhancing supervisory intensity for globally 
important financial institutions (especially across 
borders); bolstering tools and policymaking capa-
bilities of macroprudential entities; and mitigating 
systemic risk from nonbank financial institutions via 
continued vigilance on the regulatory perimeter and 
filling data gaps. Continued close cooperation is also 
needed to confront emerging risks, such as those 
arising from the growing systemic importance of 
central counterparties and the potential for cyber-
security breaches, as well as to combat cross-border 
money laundering and the financing of terrorism. As 
global banks withdraw from high-risk lending, cor-
respondent banking relationships—through which 
global banks provide deposit‑taking and remittance 
services to smaller banks in low-income countries—
are under pressure. These relationships play a crucial 
role because they ensure that these countries have 
access to vital international payments. To preserve 
them, domestic regulators will need to, among other 
things, address gaps in anti–money laundering and 
combating the financing of terrorism where needed. 
The rapid development of financial technology 
offers opportunities, including for enhanced finan-
cial inclusion, but risks should also be carefully 
monitored. In addition, an adequately financed 
global safety net remains critical so that countries 
have quick and predictable access to international 
financing in times of need.
•• Migration: Immigration can relieve the strain of 
aging and contribute to productivity. However, 
although migrant skills typically complement those 
of the native population, immigration can provoke 
a political backlash. For source countries, emigra-
tion can weigh on long-term growth, including 
through lost human capital, though remittances and 
diaspora networks have mitigating effects. Coop-
eration between source and destination countries 
should facilitate prompt integration of migrants 
and support remittance flows. Recurrent surges in 
international migration, prompted by conflicts or 
climate-related events, cannot be avoided without 
cooperative action to improve international security, 
support low-income countries’ efforts in achieving 
the Sustainable Development Goals, and resist and 
adapt to climate change.
•• Excess imbalances: As discussed in the section titled 
“External Sector Outlook” and the 2018 External 
Sector Report, both deficit and surplus economies 
must implement measures that help rebalance the 
composition of global demand and prevent a further 
buildup of excess global imbalances.
•• Taxation: Various features of the current international 
tax system are conducive to tax avoidance. The many 
possibilities that multinational enterprises have for 
shifting profits to jurisdictions with low tax rates 
reduce tax revenues and put downward pressure 
on corporate income tax rates. The complex treaty 
network can be exploited through “treaty shopping,” 
which allows corporations to avoid or reduce any 
withholding taxes on dividends or interest. Further 
multilateral cooperation on taxation is therefore 
needed to continue efforts aimed at fighting profit 
shifting, such as through the Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development–Group of 
Twenty Base Erosion and Profit Shifting initiative. In 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
32
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
the longer term, conceptual and practical problems, 
which are intensifying as a result of globalization, may 
require more fundamental reforms.
•• Other issues: A range of noneconomic factors 
imperils the sustainability and inclusiveness of global 
growth. Cross-border cooperation remains vital 
for mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and for 
containing the associated adverse consequences of 
rising global temperatures and devastating climate 
events. These developments disproportionately hurt 
low-income countries that have contributed the least 
to emissions and have low capacity to cope with 
their effects (see Chapter 3 of the October 2017 
WEO). By adding to migrant flows, climate-related 
events compound an already-complex situation of 
refugees fleeing conflict areas, often to countries 
already under severe strain. Finally, a truly global 
effort is also needed to curb corruption, which is 
undermining faith in government and institutions in 
many countries.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
33
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
The Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal Model 
(GIMF) is used to simulate the economic impact of 
the tariffs that have recently been imposed between 
the United States and several of its trading partners as 
well as some trade measures that have been announced 
or considered, but not yet imposed. The simulations 
capture several channels through which the rise in 
trade tensions can affect global economic activity. In 
addition to the direct impact of higher trade costs, the 
analysis includes estimates of how the trade tensions 
could affect confidence and thus firms’ investment 
plans as well as how financial markets could react and 
the resulting implications for firms’ cost of capital. The 
scenario, which builds on the one presented in the July 
2018 Group of Twenty (G20) Surveillance Note, has 
been constructed with five distinct layers.
•• The first layer corresponds to measures that have 
already been implemented and thus are included in 
the World Economic Outlook baseline projections. It 
estimates the impact of the United States impos-
ing a 10 percent tariff on all aluminum imports, a 
25 percent tariff on all steel imports, a 25 percent 
tariff on $50 billion of imports from China, and a 
10 percent tariff on an additional $200 billion of 
imports from China that subsequently increases to 
25 percent. All US trading partners are assumed to 
respond and levy tariffs on an equivalent amount 
of US exports, except in the case of the 10 percent 
tariff on $200 billion in Chinese imports. In this 
case, China is assumed to respond with an average 
tariff of 7 percent on $60 billion of US imports 
that rises to 17 percent when the US tariff increases 
to 25 percent. The steel and aluminum tariffs 
imposed by the United States are assumed to fall 
exclusively on intermediate goods, while the tariff 
responses by China and other US trading partners 
fall on a mix of final and intermediate goods. These 
tariffs are assumed to be permanent and take effect 
in the second half of 2018, except for the 10 per-
cent tariff on $200 billion of Chinese imports and 
the associated retaliation, which is assumed to take 
place in the fourth quarter of 2018. The increase 
in the tariff from 10 to 25 percent on the $200 bil-
lion of imports from China and China’s associated 
retaliation are assumed to occur in 2019.
•• The second layer estimates the impact of the 
United States imposing a 25 percent tariff on a 
further $267 billion of imports from China and 
China responding by raising both the base that 
tariffs apply to and the tariff rates such that all 
goods imports from the United States also face a 
25 percent tariff (roughly $130 billion in imports 
from the United States). These tariffs fall on a mix 
of intermediate and final goods, are assumed to be 
permanent, and take effect in 2019.
•• The third layer estimates the impact of the United 
States following through on the proposal to impose 
a 25 percent tariff on all imported cars and car 
parts (worth about $350 billion). Again, affected 
US trading partners are assumed to respond with 
similar tariffs on US exports of cars and car parts 
as well as other goods such that they are imposing 
tariffs on an equivalent amount of US exports. 
These tariffs are assumed to be permanent and take 
effect in 2019.
•• The fourth layer estimates the potential impact that 
rising trade tensions could have on confidence and 
thus firms’ investment plans. To calibrate how large 
this effect might be, it uses the Baker-Bloom-Davis 
overall Economic Policy Uncertainty measure and 
its estimated impact on investment in the United 
States.1 A one standard deviation increase in the 
uncertainty measure (which is roughly one-sixth of 
the change that occurred during the global financial 
crisis) leads to an estimated 1 percent drop in the 
level of investment in the United States in one year. 
Half of this decline in US investment is assumed to 
occur in 2018, with the remainder coming in 2019. 
The impact of the decline in investment in other 
countries is then scaled by their trade openness 
relative to the United States—hence, countries more 
dependent on trade see a larger fall in investment 
than does the United States.
•• The final layer estimates the impact of a potential 
tightening of financial conditions for corporates. 
The magnitude of this tightening is based on 
estimates by several financial market participants of 
the impact on US corporate earnings of a worst-case 
United States-versus-China trade war.2 Based on 
historical relationships, this estimated 15 percent 
decline in earnings is then mapped into an increase 
in US corporate spreads. This rise in US spreads 
1For details on the Economic Policy Uncertainty measure, see 
http://​www​.policyuncertainty​.com.
2The worst-case scenario is the United States imposing tariffs 
of 25 percent on all Chinese imports and China responding in a 
reciprocal fashion.
Scenario Box 1. Global Trade Tensions
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
34
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
is then mapped into corporate spreads in other 
countries, based on their credit rating relative to US 
corporates. This increase in spreads is assumed to 
occur in 2019, with half of the increase remaining 
in corporate spreads in 2020.
With regard to the room for a policy response to the 
macroeconomic implications of these trade measures, 
all layers assume that the euro area and Japan are 
unable to ease (conventional) monetary policy further 
in response to macroeconomic developments owing 
to the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. 
Should additional unconventional monetary policy 
measures be implemented, the decline in GDP in 
Japan and the euro area would be about half as large 
in the short and medium terms than estimated here. 
In all other countries/regions, conventional monetary 
policy responds according to a Taylor-type reaction 
function. In addition, to better capture the poten-
tially disruptive impact of tariffs on extended global 
value chains, the scenario assumes that, in the short 
term, firms have limited ability to substitute between 
imported intermediate inputs, whether from different 
countries or domestic sources. Over the long term, the 
substitutability between intermediate inputs is notably 
higher, on par with the substitutability between 
final goods.
Before turning to the results, it is important to 
note that these model simulations are illustrative of 
the disruptions that an escalation in trade restrictions 
could impose on the global economy, but are of 
course subject to limitations. Global macroeconomic 
models, such as GIMF, provide important insights 
into the cross-border transmission of shocks and the 
dynamic behavior of macroeconomic variables in 
response to policy changes, but cannot capture some 
of the sectoral distortions that the proposed trade 
restrictions are likely to generate. Given the struc-
ture of the model, the impact of higher tariffs on a 
specific sector of the economy—cars, for example—is 
derived by assuming a (much more modest) gen-
eral increase in tariffs: for instance, if cars represent 
20 percent of US imports, the impact of a 20 percent 
tariff on cars would be calculated as the impact of 
a 4 percent tariff on all US imports (and similarly 
for steel and aluminum). As a result, the sectoral 
distortions imposed by tariffs are not fully captured 
in the simulations. In addition, there is a high degree 
of uncertainty about the magnitude and persistence 
of both the confidence effects on investment and the 
tightening of corporate spreads. These effects could 
turn out to be milder or more severe than assumed 
here and, in part, this motivates providing them as 
separate layers. Regarding the layer that contains the 
tightening of corporate spreads, one aspect that is not 
included in the analysis is the potential for safe-haven 
flows to mitigate the impact of the financial tighten-
ing in such countries as the United States, Ger-
many, and Japan.
Turning to the simulated macroeconomic effects 
illustrated in Scenario Figure 1, the first point to 
note is that the impact of the tariffs that have been 
imposed to date (blue line) is small, but material, with 
the United States and China bearing the brunt of the 
costs. These costs would roughly double if the United 
States imposes a 25 percent tariff on an additional 
$267 billion of imports from China and if China 
responds with 25 percent tariffs on all US exports 
(red line). Some countries, however, do benefit in the 
short term, as households and firms in China and the 
United States substitute away from the higher-priced 
imports, now subject to tariffs, to imports from other 
countries. Over time, as Chinese and US households 
and firms are able to source domestically more of the 
goods that were previously imported, the benefits to 
other countries disappear. If the United States were 
to follow through with the imposition of tariffs on 
imported cars and car parts, and trading partners 
respond as assumed, the negative impact on the US 
economy is estimated to increase sharply (yellow line). 
This is due to the large volume of imports to which 
the tariffs apply and the fact that almost half are car 
parts (intermediate inputs that, it is assumed, are 
difficult, in the short term, to substitute away from). 
For similar reasons, other countries tightly linked to 
the US car market, such as its partners in the North 
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and Japan, 
would also see notable declines in output. As in the 
previous layer, some regions temporarily benefit (in 
this case China and the euro area), but once house-
holds and firms in the most affected countries have 
sufficient time to make the desired substitutions, the 
impact is negative everywhere. It is worth noting that 
these short-term benefits could be overstated. This 
arises because, as noted above, this car tariff layer 
is implemented as a much smaller but broad-based 
change in tariffs, which could result in overestimating 
Scenario Box 1 ﻿ (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
35
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
the short-term substitutability between imports from 
China and the euro area and those now higher-priced 
tariffed goods.
Not surprisingly, if firms curtail investment, given 
their concerns about the impact of a deteriorating 
global trading environment, output suffers every-
where, with the impact more pronounced where 
there are constraints on conventional monetary policy 
(green line). Also, if financial markets respond to the 
deterioration in the global trading environment by 
tightening financial conditions for firms, the output 
declines would be even sharper, with emerging markets 
potentially suffering even more (gray line).
In the long term, once all adjustment has occurred 
(colored bars), output in the United States is almost 
1 percent below a baseline with no tariffs, and output 
in China is just over ½ percent below baseline. The 
bulk of the negative impact outside of the United 
States and China is driven by the tariffs on cars and 
car parts. US NAFTA partners suffer the most, with 
output almost 1½ percent below baseline. In Japan, 
the long-term decline in GDP is just under 0.2 per-
cent, and it is less than 0.1 percent in the euro area. 
Global GDP is down by roughly 0.4 percent in the 
long term, with advanced G20 economies bearing a 
slightly higher burden.
Tariffs in baseline
Add China (25 percent on $267 billion) with retaliation
Add cars, trucks, and parts with retaliation
Add conﬁdence effect
Add market reaction
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
2017
20
23
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
2017
20
23
1. United States
Long
term
Long
term
Long 
term
Long
term
Long
term
Long
term
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
2017
20
23
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
2017
20
23
Long
term 
Long
term 
2. China
3. Japan
4. Euro Area
0.4
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
2017
20
23
2017
20
23
5. US NAFTA
Trading Partners
6. World
2017
20
23
2017
20
23
7. G20 Advanced
Economies
8. G20 Emerging
Economies
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.4
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
Scenario Figure 1.  Real GDP in Trade
Tensions Scenario
(Percent deviation from control)
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: G20 = Group of Twenty; NAFTA = North American Free
Trade Agreement.
Scenario Box 1 ﻿ (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
36
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Concern over and the public policy debate about 
corporate market power are both growing. Concerns 
arise for at least two reasons. First, rising corporate 
market power may help account for several puzzling, 
and often worrisome, macroeconomic trends in 
advanced economies over the past two decades—low 
investment despite rising corporate profits, declin-
ing business dynamism, slow productivity growth, 
and falling labor income shares (Autor and others 
2017; De Loecker and Eeckhout 2017; Gutiérrez and 
Philippon 2017). Second, the rise of tech giants has 
raised fresh questions about whether this trend might 
continue and, if so, whether some rethinking of policy 
is needed to maintain fair and strong competition in 
the digital age. However, corporate market power is 
hard to measure, and common indicators, such as the 
The authors of this box are Federico Díez, Daniel Leigh, and 
Suchanan Tambunlertchai.
Herfindahl index or market concentration ratios, can 
be misleading. Beyond the United States and select 
advanced economies, evidence of how corporate mar-
ket power has evolved is also scarce.
This box presents new evidence, based on data from 
a large number of publicly traded firms, on trends 
in corporate market power across 74 advanced and 
emerging market and developing economies.1 Market 
power, measured as firms’ markups—the ratio of the 
price at which firms sell their output to the marginal 
cost of production—has generally increased, especially 
in advanced economies (Figure 1.1.1).
1The evidence presented in the box draws on Díez, Leigh, 
and Tambunlertchai (2018), who calculate firm-level markups 
using the approach of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and De 
Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), and investigate the relationship 
between markups, investment, innovation, and the labor share of 
income at the firm level.
Latin America
Emerging and developing Asia
Interquartile range
United Kingdom
Advanced Europe
Interquartile range
United States
Canada
Japan
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1989
95
2000
05
10
16
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Figure 1.1.1.  Market Power over Time
(Estimated markups)
Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Average markups of listed ﬁrms weighted by sales.
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1980
85
90
95
2000
05
10
16
1. Advanced Economies
Basic materials
Consumer goods
Consumer services
Financials
Health care
Industrials
Oil and gas
Technology
Telecommunications
Utilities
Figure 1.1.2.  Markup Increase, by Subsector
Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Dashed line indicates 45-degree line along which 
markups are equal over time.
Markup in 1980
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Markup in 2016
Box 1.1. Increasing Market Power
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
37
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Figure 1.1.1 unveils two clear facts. First, mark-
ups among advanced economies have significantly 
increased since the 1980s, by 43 percent on average, 
and this trend has accelerated during the current 
decade. Second, emerging market and developing 
economies show less evidence of a rise in markups.2
The pattern of rising markups in advanced econ-
omies is found across all broad economic sectors. 
Figure 1.1.2 presents, for each narrowly defined eco-
nomic subsector, the markup in 2016 compared with 
that in 1980, where the color refers to the correspond-
ing 10 broad FTSE Russell Industry Classification 
Benchmark economic sectors. In the figure, a colored 
marker located above the 45-degree line indicates an 
increase in markups. Markups increased across almost 
all narrow sectors, but there is significant heterogene-
ity in the magnitudes of the increases. Markups more 
than doubled in the biotechnology, retail real estate 
investment trusts (retail REITs), consumer finance, 
2This increase, documented by Díez, Leigh, and Tambunlert-
chai (2018), is also consistent with the findings by De Loecker 
and Eeckhout (2018). Furthermore, the increase in markups is 
accompanied by an increase in profits, strengthening the notion 
of increased corporate market power.
and software subsectors. In contrast, subsectors, such 
as auto parts, computer hardware, and electrical 
components and equipment, saw markups decline. So, 
while markups have generally increased since 1980, 
much cross-sector heterogeneity is observed.
2016
1980
Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: X-axis truncated at 5 for graphical clarity.
0
5
Figure 1.1.3.  Advanced Economies: 
Distribution of Markups of All Firms
(Kernel density)
0.0
2.5
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1
2
3
4
2016
1980
Figure 1.1.4.  Advanced Economies:
Distribution of Markups of Firms, by Industry
(Kernel density)
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6. Consumer
Services
1. Oil and Gas
2. Basic Materials
5. Health Care
4. Consumer Goods
10. Technology
8. Utilities
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
3. Industrials
9. Financials
Sources: Thomson Reuters Worldscope; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results for 10 “industries” of the FTSE Russell 
Industrial Classiﬁcation Benchmark from Thomson Reuters 
Worldscope. X-axis truncated at 5 for graphical clarity.
7. Telecommunica-
tions
Box 1.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
38
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
More in-depth analysis shows that the increase in 
market power in advanced economies is mostly driven 
by a fraction of “superstar” firms that have managed 
to extract especially large markups, while the market 
power of other firms has increased little since 1980. 
This fact implies that the rise in markups has been 
accompanied by an increasingly skewed distribution, 
not only at the aggregate level, but also within broad 
economic sectors (Figures 1.1.3 and 1.1.4). 
This increase in corporate market power has import-
ant macroeconomic effects. Most strikingly, starting 
from low levels, higher markups are initially associated 
with increasing investment and innovation, but this 
relationship becomes negative when market power 
becomes too strong. The inverted U-shape relationship 
between competition on one hand and investment and 
innovation on the other is consistent with findings by 
Aghion and others (2005) and suggests that, at low 
levels of market power, firms invest to escape compe-
tition, whereas, at high levels of market power, firms 
have weaker incentives to invest because of the lack of 
competitive pressure. Furthermore, higher corporate 
market power also seems to be associated with lower 
labor shares: the fraction of firms’ revenue going to 
workers decreases, while the share of revenue going to 
profits increases.
The ultimate policy implications will depend on 
the drivers of this increase in global market power, 
which are still being debated. The potential causes 
include, among others, the rise of intangible assets (for 
example, patents), network effects in the digital econ-
omy (see April 2018 Fiscal Monitor), and outdated or 
weaker enforcement of antitrust laws. More research is 
needed to disentangle the various factors at play.
Box 1.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
39
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Advanced economies are projected to expand by 
2.4 percent in 2018 (a marginally faster pace than in 
2017) and 2.1 percent in 2019. Growth in advanced 
economies is expected to decline to 1.7 percent in 
2020 as the US tax cuts are partially reversed, and to 
1.5 percent in the medium term as working-age popu-
lation growth continues to slow.
•• Growth in the United States is expected to peak 
at 2.9 percent in 2018, supported by the procy-
clical fiscal stimulus after eight consecutive years 
of expansion and still-loose financial conditions 
(despite expected monetary tightening). Growth is 
expected to soften to 2.5 percent in 2019 (a down-
ward revision of 0.2 percentage point relative to the 
April 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO) due to 
the recently introduced trade measures) and to drop 
to 1.8 percent in 2020 as the fiscal stimulus begins 
to unwind. Strong domestic demand is projected 
to push the economy above full employment and 
increase imports and the current account deficit. 
Medium-term growth is forecast to temporarily 
decline below potential at 1.4 percent as the posi-
tive output gap is gradually closed.
•• Growth is projected to remain strong in the euro 
area, but has been revised down by 0.4 percent-
age point to 2.0 percent for 2018, reflecting 
weaker-than-expected performance in the first half 
of the year. Growth is forecast to gradually slow 
further to 1.9 percent in 2019, 0.1 percentage point 
lower than the April forecast. Healthy consumer 
spending and job creation amid supportive mon-
etary policy are expected to continue to provide 
strong aggregate demand, though at a moderat-
ing pace. Short-term profiles of country-specific 
growth rates vary. In France, growth is expected to 
moderate to 1.6 percent in 2018 and 2019, 0.5 
(0.4) percentage point weaker than in the April 
2018 WEO for 2018 (2019), reflecting softer 
external demand as well as lower outturns and 
high-frequency indicators in 2018. In Germany, 
growth was revised down to 1.9 percent in 2018 
and 2019 (by 0.6 percentage point and 0.1 per-
centage point, respectively) because of a slowdown 
in exports and industrial production. Italy’s growth 
forecast is also lower than in the April 2018 WEO, 
estimated at 1.2 percent for 2018 and 1 percent 
The author of this box is Natalija Novta.
in 2019, because of the underlying deterioration 
in external and domestic demand and uncertainty 
about the new government’s policy agenda. In 
Spain, growth is expected to be 2.7 percent in 2018 
and 2.2 percent in 2019, which is a 0.1 percentage 
point decline relative to the April forecast for 2018, 
and no change for 2019. Medium-term growth 
in the euro area, projected at about 1.4 percent, is 
expected to be constrained by slow productivity 
growth and unfavorable demographics.
•• In the United Kingdom, growth is projected to slow 
to 1.4 percent in 2018 and 1.5 percent in 2019 
(from 1.7 percent in 2017). This forecast represents 
a downward revision of 0.2 percentage point for 
2018 relative to the April 2018 WEO, driven by 
weak growth in the first quarter of the year, partly 
due to weather-related factors. The medium-term 
growth forecast remains at 1.6 percent, weighed 
down by the anticipated higher barriers to trade 
following Brexit. (Assumptions regarding the Brexit 
outcome remain broadly unchanged relative to 
the April 2018 and October 2017 WEOs. Tariffs 
on trade with the European Union are expected 
to remain at zero, and nontariff costs will likely 
increase moderately.)
•• Japan’s growth is projected to moderate to 1.1 per-
cent in 2018 (from a strong, above‑trend outturn of 
1.7 percent in 2017), before softening to 0.9 per-
cent in 2019. The downward revision of 0.1 per-
centage point for 2018 relative to the April 2018 
WEO is largely due to the contraction observed in 
the first quarter of 2018, and given the uptick in 
growth and domestic demand in the second quarter 
of 2018, this is likely to represent a temporary dip 
rather than the beginning of a turn in the cycle. 
Japan’s medium-term prospects are impeded by 
unfavorable demographics and a trend decline in 
the labor force.
•• Among other advanced economies, growth is 
projected to moderate in Canada to 2.1 percent 
in 2018 and 2.0 percent in 2019, and to exceed 
3 percent in Australia in 2018, before declining to 
2.8 percent in 2019. In Korea, growth is projected 
at 2.8 percent in 2018 and 2.6 percent in 2019. 
The downward revisions to the 2019 growth 
forecast for Australia and Korea relative to the April 
2018 WEO partially reflect the negative effect of 
the recently introduced trade measures.
Box 1.2. Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
40
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Growth in emerging market and developing econ-
omies is expected to remain steady at 4.7 percent in 
2018–19, and to rise modestly over the medium term.
•• In China, growth is projected to moderate from 
6.9 percent in 2017 to 6.6 percent in 2018 and 
6.2 percent in 2019, reflecting slowing external 
demand growth and necessary financial regulatory 
tightening. The 0.2 percentage point downgrade 
to the 2019 growth forecast is attributable to the 
negative effect of recent tariff actions, assumed to be 
partially offset by policy stimulus. Over the medium 
term, growth is expected to gradually slow to 5.6 per-
cent as the economy continues to make the transition 
to a more sustainable growth path with continued 
financial de-risking and environmental controls.
•• Growth is projected to remain strong elsewhere 
in emerging and developing Asia. India’s growth 
is expected to increase to 7.3 percent in 2018 and 
7.4 percent in 2019 (slightly lower than in the 
April 2018 World Economic Outlook [WEO] for 
2019, given the recent increase in oil prices and 
the tightening of global financial conditions), up 
from 6.7 percent in 2017. This acceleration reflects 
a rebound from transitory shocks (the currency 
exchange initiative and implementation of the 
national Goods and Services Tax), with strength-
ening investment and robust private consumption. 
India’s medium-term growth prospects remain 
strong at 7¾ percent, benefiting from ongoing 
structural reform, but have been marked down 
by just under ½ percentage point relative to the 
April 2018 WEO. In the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, 
Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam), growth 
is expected to be 5.3 percent in 2018, before 
softening to 5.2 percent in 2019. The 0.2 percent-
age point downward revision to the 2019 growth 
forecast reflects largely the economic costs of recent 
trade measures.
•• Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean is 
projected to decrease from 1.3 percent in 2017 to 
1.2 percent in 2018 and to rise to 2.2 percent in 
2019, a more subdued recovery than envisaged in 
the April 2018 WEO.
o
o Mexico’s growth is projected to increase from 
2.0 percent in 2017 to 2.2 percent in 2018 
and 2.5 percent in 2019, supported by higher 
US growth. The growth forecast is, however, 
The authors of this box are Wenjie Chen and Zsóka Kóczán.
lower than expected in the April 2018 WEO, 
reflecting the impact on investment and 
domestic demand of prolonged uncertainty 
related to trade.
o
o Brazil’s economy is expected to grow at 1.4 per-
cent and 2.4 percent in 2018 and 2019, respec-
tively, up from 1 percent growth in 2017, driven 
by a recovery of private demand as the output 
gap gradually closes. The growth forecast for 
2018 is lower than in the April 2018 WEO by 
0.9 percentage point on account of disruptions 
caused by the nationwide truck drivers’ strike and 
tighter external financial conditions, which are a 
source of risk to the outlook. Growth is expected 
at 2.2 percent in the medium term.
o
o After growing by 2.9 percent in 2017, Argentina 
is expected to contract by 2.6 percent in 2018, 
a large downward revision relative to the April 
2018 WEO forecast, reflecting recent financial 
market disruptions, high real interest rates, and 
the faster fiscal consolidation under the excep-
tional access Stand-By Arrangement approved in 
June. The economy is expected to contract by a 
further 1.6 percent in 2019. Growth of 3.2 per-
cent is expected over the medium term under the 
steady implementation of reforms and return-
ing confidence.
o
o Venezuela’s economy continues to decline for the 
fifth consecutive year, following a 14 percent 
drop in 2017. Real GDP is projected to shrink 
by 18 percent in 2018 and a further 5 percent in 
2019, driven by plummeting oil production, and 
political and social instability.
•• The outlook for the Commonwealth of Independent 
States is more favorable than in the April 2018 
WEO, with growth for the region expected at 
2.3 percent in 2018 and 2.4 percent in 2019 (up 
from 2.1 percent in 2017), moderating to 2.1 per-
cent in the medium term. Growth in Russia is 
projected at 1.7 percent in 2018, up from 1.5 per-
cent in 2017, supported by higher oil prices and 
recovering domestic demand. Medium-term growth 
is expected to remain muted at about 1.2 percent, 
absent structural reforms. Growth projections for 
Kazakhstan have been revised upward to 3.7 percent 
in 2018 and 3.1 percent in 2019, reflecting higher 
non-oil growth and increased oil production.
•• Growth in emerging and developing Europe is 
projected to moderate from 6.0 percent in 2017 
Box 1.3. Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
41
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
to 3.8 percent in 2018 and decline further to 
2.0 percent in 2019 (well below the April 2018 
WEO forecasts). Poland is in a strong cyclical 
upswing, with growth projected at 4.4 percent in 
2018 (revised up by 0.3 percentage point since the 
April 2018 WEO, reflecting stronger-than-expected 
investment growth), though it is expected to mod-
erate to 3.5 percent in 2019 and 2.8 percent in the 
medium term, held back by adverse demographics 
and structural bottlenecks. Romania’s economy grew 
at a robust 6.9 percent in 2017 on fiscal stimulus 
and strong external demand. Growth is expected to 
decline to 4 percent in 2018 and further to 3.4 per-
cent in 2019 (1.1 and 0.1 percentage points lower 
than in the April 2018 WEO) as the stimulus mod-
erates. Growth in Turkey was very strong in 2017 
and early 2018, but is expected to slow sharply. Real 
GDP growth is projected at 3.5 percent in 2018 
but to drop to 0.4 percent in 2019 (some 3.6 per-
centage points lower for 2019 than in the April 
2018 WEO) as the weaker lira, higher borrowing 
costs, and elevated uncertainty weigh on investment 
and consumer demand. Turkey’s economy remains 
highly vulnerable to sudden shifts in capital flows 
and geopolitical risks.
•• Growth is on the mend for sub-Saharan Africa, 
with the region’s average growth projected to rise 
to 3.1 percent in 2018 (from 2.7 percent in 2017) 
and 3.8 percent in 2019. The growth forecast for 
2018 is 0.3 percentage point lower than the April 
2018 WEO forecast. The acceleration relative 
to 2016–17 reflects a more supportive external 
environment, including stronger global growth, 
higher commodity prices, and improved capital 
market access, following efforts to improve fiscal 
balances in the aftermath of the commodity price 
slump. Growth performance varies, however, across 
countries. About half of the expected pickup in 
growth between 2017 and 2018 reflects the growth 
rebound in Nigeria. Nigeria’s growth is projected to 
increase from 0.8 percent in 2017 to 1.9 percent in 
2018 and 2.3 percent in 2019 (0.4 percentage point 
higher than in the April 2018 WEO for 2019), 
buoyed by the impact of recovering oil production 
and prices. In Angola, the region’s second largest oil 
exporter, real GDP is expected to shrink by 0.1 per-
cent in 2018, following a 2.5 percent contraction in 
2017, but is projected to increase by 3.1 percent in 
2019, with the recovery driven by a more efficient 
foreign currency allocation system and additional 
availability of foreign currency due to higher oil 
prices. Meanwhile, in South Africa, prospects remain 
modest amid uncertainty in the run-up to the 2019 
general elections, with growth projected to fall to 
0.8 percent in 2018 from 1.3 percent in 2017, 
before recovering to 1.8 percent in the medium 
term. The pace of structural reform implementation 
and the level of policy credibility will determine the 
extent of economic recovery.
•• In the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan region, growth is projected to increase from 
2.2 percent in 2017 to 2.4 percent in 2018 and to 
2.7 percent in 2019, stabilizing at about 3 percent 
in the medium term—a sizable downward revision 
compared with the April 2018 WEO forecast. The 
downward revisions reflect to an important extent 
the worsening of growth prospects for Iran, follow-
ing the reimposition of US sanctions. The economy 
is now forecast to contract in 2018 (−1.5 percent) 
and especially in 2019 (−3.6 percent) on account 
of reduced oil production, before returning to 
modest positive growth in 2020–23. Elsewhere, in 
Saudi Arabia, following a 0.9 percent contraction in 
2017, output is projected to expand by 2.2 percent 
in 2018 and 2.4 percent in 2019 (0.5 percentage 
point higher for both years than in the April 2018 
WEO), driven by a pickup in non-oil economic 
activity and a projected increase in crude oil pro-
duction in line with the revised Organization of 
the Petroleum Exporting Countries Plus agreement. 
Growth in Egypt is projected to rise to 5.3 percent 
in 2018 and 5.5 percent in 2019, up from 4.2 per-
cent in 2017, reflecting a recovery in tourism, rising 
natural gas production, and continued improve-
ments in confidence due to implementation of an 
ambitious reform program supported by the IMF’s 
Extended Fund Facility. Growth in Pakistan is 
expected to strengthen from 5.4 percent in 2017 to 
5.8 percent in 2018 (0.2 percentage point higher 
than in the April 2018 WEO), underpinned by 
improved energy supply, investment related to the 
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, and strong 
credit growth. However, macroeconomic stability 
gains have been eroding, putting the outlook at risk. 
Growth is expected to moderate to 4.0 percent in 
2019, and slow to about 3.0 percent in the medium 
term. The medium-term growth revisions for 
Pakistan, together with those for Iran and a sizable 
markdown in prospects for Sudan, explain the lower 
projected growth for the region beyond 2019.
Box 1.3 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
42
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Inflation in advanced economies is projected at 
2.0 percent in 2018, up from 1.7 percent in 2017. 
Inflation in emerging market and developing economies 
excluding Venezuela is expected to increase to 5.0 percent 
this year, up from 4.3 percent in 2017. These weighted 
averages mask significant heterogeneity across countries 
depending on their cyclical positions as well as the impact 
of currency depreciations and rising energy prices.
Advanced Economies
•• In the United States, headline consumer price inflation 
is projected to increase to 2.4 percent in 2018 and 
2.1 in 2019, from 2.1 percent in 2017. Core personal 
consumption expenditure price inflation, the Federal 
Reserve’s preferred measure, is expected to be 2.1 per-
cent in 2018 and 2.3 percent in 2019 compared with 
1.6 percent in 2017, as output climbs above potential 
following the sizable fiscal expansion. This projection 
slightly exceeds current Federal Reserve projections 
and suggests earlier-than-anticipated overshooting of 
the Federal Reserve’s target inflation rate. Toward the 
end of the projection horizon (2022–23), inflation is 
assumed to decline to the target, thanks to a mone-
tary policy response that will keep expectations and 
actual inflation well anchored.
•• Headline inflation in the euro area is expected to be 
1.7 percent in 2018 and 2019. With the recovery 
boosting growth above potential for 2018–19, core 
inflation is expected to increase to 1.2 percent in 
2018 and 1.6 percent in 2019, up from 1.1 percent 
in 2017. The core harmonized index of consumer 
prices is projected to increase slowly to 2 percent by 
2022, given a strong backward-looking element in 
the euro area inflation process.
•• In Japan, headline inflation is expected to increase to 
1.2 percent in 2018, up from 0.5 percent in 2017, 
again mainly due to rising global energy prices. Infla-
tion excluding fresh food and energy prices is expected 
to rise to 0.5 percent in 2018 and further to 0.8 per-
cent in 2019, up from 0.1 percent in 2017. Inflation 
is still expected to remain below the Bank of Japan’s 
target over the five-year forecast horizon, given tepid 
wage growth and stickiness in inflation expectations.
•• In the United Kingdom, as the pass-through effects 
of the pound depreciation fade, core inflation is 
expected to decline to 2.1 percent in 2018, down from 
2.4 percent in 2017, and is expected to stabilize at its 
medium-term level of 2.0 percent in early 2020. Head-
line inflation is expected to edge down to 2.5 percent 
The authors of this box are Wenjie Chen, Zsóka Kóczán, and 
Natalija Novta.
in 2018, from 2.7 percent in 2017, with a gradual 
convergence to 2 percent projected in 2020.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
•• Headline inflation in China is expected to pick up to 
2.2 percent this year, up from 1.6 percent in 2017, and 
to about 3 percent over the medium term, driven by 
higher food and energy prices. Inflation in India is on 
the rise, estimated at 3.6 percent in fiscal year 2017/18 
and projected at 4.7 percent in fiscal year 2018/19, 
compared with 4.5 percent in fiscal year 2016/17, amid 
accelerating demand and rising fuel prices.
•• In Mexico, inflation is projected to continue to fall—to 
4.8 percent in 2018—and to converge toward the cen-
tral bank’s 3 percent target in 2020, as monetary policy 
remains tight. In contrast, inflation is projected to 
accelerate in Brazil to 3.7 percent in 2018 and 4.2 per-
cent in 2019, as monetary policy remains supportive 
and food price inflation rebounds after a notable drop 
caused by an exceptional harvest in 2017. In Argentina, 
inflation is expected to reach 31.8 percent in 2018, 
driven by the significant currency depreciation, and 
to remain at broadly the same level (31.7 percent) in 
2019. Venezuela’s hyperinflation is expected to worsen 
rapidly, fueled by monetary financing of large fiscal 
deficits and loss of confidence in the currency.
•• Russia’s inflation, expected to average 2.8 percent 
in 2018, is below the target of 4 percent, driven by 
moderately tight monetary policy. However, it is 
projected to rise to 5.1 percent in 2019, supported by 
an ongoing recovery in domestic demand, higher fuel 
prices, and pass-through from the recent depreciation. 
Turkey’s inflation is projected at 15 percent in 2018 
and 16.7 percent in 2019, reflecting pass-through from 
the lira’s depreciation, higher energy prices, high wage 
growth, and unanchored inflation expectations.
•• Inflation pressures in sub-Saharan Africa have 
broadly softened, with annual inflation projected 
to drop to 8.6 percent in 2018 and 8.5 percent in 
2019, from 11 percent in 2017. In South Africa, 
inflation has moderated to 4.8 percent in 2018 from 
5.3 percent in 2017 with the easing of drought con-
ditions, but is expected to edge back to 5.3 percent 
in 2019 as temporary disinflationary effects subside. 
In Nigeria and Angola, tighter monetary policy and 
moderation in food price increases contributed to 
tapering inflation. In Nigeria, inflation is projected 
to fall to 12.4 percent in 2018, from 16.5 percent 
in 2017, and to rise to 13.5 percent in 2019. In 
Angola, inflation is projected to fall to 20.5 percent 
in 2018 from 29.8 percent in 2017 and to decline 
further to 15.8 percent in 2019.
Box 1.4. Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
43
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
A number of countries, including Greece, have 
suffered very large declines in GDP per capita in the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis. In some coun-
tries affected by conflict, such as Libya, South Sudan, 
Syria, and Yemen, ongoing declines in GDP per capita 
have been staggering.1 In Venezuela, GDP per capita 
is estimated to have declined by more than 35 percent 
over 2013–17 and is projected to decline by close to 
60 percent between 2013 and 2023. Are these episodes 
rare occurrences? To address this question, this box 
documents the frequency and characteristics of large 
declines in GDP per capita over the past 50 years. It 
shows that such episodes are unfortunately not rare. 
They tend to be protracted and originate from a vari-
ety of sources, and the post-trough recovery, in many 
cases, is insufficient to even restore the starting level of 
GDP per capita.
The chosen threshold (a decline in GDP per capita 
of at least 20 percent from peak to trough) is designed 
to isolate extreme episodes, typically occurring over 
several years, rather than more frequent cases of 
macroeconomic distress (caused, for example, by a 
financial or exchange rate crisis).
There is a vast literature on the macroeconomic 
implications of different types of crises (financial, 
external, currency, banking, fiscal). While these crises 
are typically associated with severe macroeconomic 
distress, such distress rarely causes a decline in the level 
of GDP exceeding 20 percent. The literature on large 
GDP declines is relatively small. An important study 
in this respect is by Becker and Mauro (2006), who 
examine output drops in a large panel of countries 
and systematically relate them to a variety of shocks 
(terms-of-trade declines, financial shocks, wars, and 
so on). A related literature looks at large declines in 
GDP and consumption (“disasters”) with the objec-
tive of calibrating the impact of these rare events on 
financial market variables such as equity premiums 
(see, for instance, Barro and Ursua 2008; Barro and 
Jin 2011; Nakamura and others 2013). These studies 
typically rely on long time series data (stretching to the 
The author of this box is Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti.
1Data for Syria since the start of the conflict are not available, 
but estimates presented in Gobat and Kostial (2016) and 
WB (2017) point to a dramatic collapse in GDP exceeding 
50 percent.
early 19th century) for advanced economies and a few 
emerging markets.2
There are four main causes, often intertwined, of 
GDP declines in the sample under consideration. 
These include strife (war, civil war, armed rebellion), 
commodity shocks,3 crises (including banking crises, 
external crises, and so on), and the transition from a 
centrally planned to a market economy. Misguided 
macroeconomic policies during the episodes play a role 
in a number of cases as well, often interacting with 
other factors. Prime examples are cases of hyperin-
flation, including the ongoing case of Venezuela. 
Declines attributable to other causes (for example, 
natural disasters) are much less frequent—the one 
example in the sample is the 2015 Ebola epidemic in 
Sierra Leone.
Stylized Facts on Sharp GDP Declines
The 133 episodes of large GDP per capita declines 
identified in the period 1960–2017 are listed in 
Table 1.5.1.4
They affect 92 countries (a number of them repeat-
edly).5 Figure 1.5.1 depicts the number of ongoing 
episodes of sharp declines in GDP per capita by year, 
as well as the share of countries affected (in relation 
to the total number with available data). The figure 
indicates that the lion’s share of episodes took place 
during the 1980s, following the global economic 
2Applying the same definition of output declines to the Barro 
and Ursua (2008) data set yields episodes concentrated around 
the two World Wars and the Great Depression.
3The “shock” can be a decline in a country’s export prices 
(such as oil price declines affecting fuel exporters), or a decline 
in domestic production (for instance, declining oil production in 
Timor-Leste in recent years or dwindling phosphate deposits in 
Kiribati in the 1970s).
4It should be kept in mind that data availability is spotty for 
the earlier part of the sample and that data limitations are severe, 
particularly for low-income countries. These limitations can 
become even more severe during periods of distress, such as those 
studied in this box.
5The length of an episode is measured as the number of years 
between a peak in GDP per capita and its subsequent trough, 
as long as the peak-to-trough decline in GDP per capita is at 
least 20 percent. If GDP per capita falls substantially below a 
previous trough within a few years of that trough the episode 
is deemed a continuation of the preceding one. Otherwise, the 
episode is potentially considered a distinct one (as long as GDP 
per capita falls by at least 20 percent between the new peak and 
the new trough).
Box 1.5. Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
44
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table 1.5.1. Episodes of Declines in GDP per Capita Exceeding 20 Percent
Peak
Trough
GDP per 
capita  
at peak
Percent 
change in GDP 
per capita
Peak
Trough
GDP per 
capita  
at peak
Percent 
change in GDP 
per capita
Albania
1989
1992
2,193
–41
Guinea-Bissau
1997
1999
732
–30
Algeria
1960
1962
2,466
–34
Guyana
1976
1984
2,156
–28
Andorra
1974
1994
44,648
–27
Haiti
1980
1994
1,106
–38
Andorra
2006
2012
49,708
–23
Iran
1976
1981
10,266
–57
Angola
1974
1982
3,029
–31
Iran
1983
1988
5,557
–34
Angola
1988
1994
2,248
–41
Iraq
1980
1985
3,346
–22
Antigua and Barbuda
2007
2011
15,467
–24
Iraq
1990
1991
4,079
–65
Argentina
1980
1990
8,053
–26
Iraq
1999
2003
4,379
–42
Argentina
1998
2002
8,729
–22
Jamaica
1972
1980
5,368
–32
Armenia
1990
1993
1,797
–51
Jordan
1986
1991
3,270
–28
Azerbaijan
1990
1995
3,119
–61
Kazakhstan
1990
1995
5,890
–37
The Bahamas
1969
1975
27,539
–39
Kiribati
1975
1981
4,521
–54
Bahrain
1978
1986
21,788
–24
Kiribati
1984
1995
2,225
–27
Bangladesh
1970
1972
406
–22
Kuwait
1971
1975
84,352
–26
Belarus
1990
1995
3,102
–35
Kuwait
1979
1982
64,424
–50
Bolivia
1977
1986
1,745
–26
Kuwait
1989
1991
32,605
–33
Brunei Darussalam
1979
1993
66,002
–44
Kuwait
1993
2001
49,737
–30
Burundi
1991
2005
338
–35
Kuwait
2007
2017
49,589
–32
Cameroon
1986
1994
1,834
–42
Kyrgyz Republic
1990
1995
1,096
–51
Central African 
Republic
1977
1983
625
–22
Lebanon
1973
1976
10,752
–71
Lebanon
1981
1982
5,653
–37
Central African 
Republic
1986
1996
530
–24
Lebanon
1987
1989
8,287
–59
Liberia
1979
1995
1,575
–93
Central African 
Republic
2012
2013
476
–37
Liberia
2002
2003
395
–31
Libya
1979
1988
24,382
–61
Chad
1962
1973
715
–25
Libya
1991
2002
12,012
–30
Chad
1977
1981
593
–32
Libya
2010
2011
12,121
–62
Chile
1971
1975
5,001
–22
Libya
2012
2016
10,209
–43
China
1960
1962
192
–31
Macao SAR
2013
2016
72,184
–28
Comoros
1984
1999
938
–20
Madagascar
1971
2002
755
–50
Congo, Democratic 
Republic of the
1974
1983
1,134
–29
Malawi
1979
1994
417
–24
Maldives
1972
1978
2,645
–26
Congo, Democratic 
Republic of the
1986
2002
832
–67
Marshall Islands
1995
1999
3,176
–22
Mauritania
1970
1994
1,296
–25
Congo, Republic of
1984
1999
3,292
–31
Moldova
1992
1999
1,611
–41
Côte d’Ivoire
1978
1994
2,392
–47
Mongolia
1989
1993
1,856
–27
Cuba
1985
1993
4,480
–38
Mozambique
1981
1986
195
–33
Cyprus
1973
1975
11,321
–33
Myanmar
1985
1988
240
–20
Djibouti
1990
2001
1,932
–37
Nicaragua
1977
1979
2,565
–36
El Salvador
1978
1986
3,157
–35
Nicaragua
1981
1993
1,704
–38
Equatorial Guinea
1980
1991
646
–25
Niger
1965
1976
716
–37
Equatorial Guinea
2008
2017
20,334
–44
Niger
1979
1984
545
–31
Eritrea
1997
2008
622
–24
Niger
1988
2000
408
–21
Ethiopia
1987
1992
223
–27
Nigeria
1965
1968
1,459
–25
Gabon
1976
1982
19,493
–40
Nigeria
1977
1987
2,040
–44
Gabon
1984
1987
12,666
–26
Papua New Guinea
1973
1990
1,943
–23
Gabon
1998
2009
11,926
–29
Papua New Guinea
1994
2003
2,105
–23
Georgia
1990
1994
3,525
–73
Peru
1987
1992
3,791
–31
Ghana
1971
1976
1,121
–20
Qatar
1973
1991
115,147
–67
Ghana
1978
1983
960
–27
Russian Federation
1990
1998
9,534
–42
Greece
2007
2013
30,055
–26
Rwanda
1962
1964
340
–24
(continued)
Box 1.5 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
45
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
downturn and the 1982 debt crisis. The number of 
episodes declined in the late 1980s but rose again in 
the early 1990s because of the GDP declines asso-
ciated with the transition to a market economy in 
countries of the former Soviet Union and in central 
and eastern Europe. The number of ongoing episodes 
has since declined sharply, despite some increase 
associated with the global financial crisis and its 
aftermath. Episodes associated with war are the most 
frequent, followed by commodity shocks, crises, and 
transition.
 Table 1.5.2 provides some stylized facts on these 
downturn episodes. It shows mean and median 
declines in GDP per capita of more than one-third. 
These episodes are typically protracted, lasting over five 
years, and the growth rate in the five years after the 
end of the episode generally fails to return GDP per 
capita to its predecline level. Distinguishing among 
episodes according to their main driving factor sug-
gests that for the median country in episodes involving 
wars, GDP and GDP per capita are lower, the median 
duration of the episode is shorter (4.5 years), and the 
increase in GDP per capita after the crisis is larger 
(some 15 percent). Transition episodes feature the 
largest median decline in GDP per capita (45 percent), 
a relatively short duration (five years), and an increase 
in GDP per capita after the crisis of about 14 percent. 
The median crises and commodity shock episodes last 
longer and have weaker postdecline rebounds in GDP 
per capita. 
The Aftermath of GDP Declines
The focus now turns to the speed at which GDP 
per capita rebounds after these sharp declines. For 
that purpose, the analysis considers both the growth 
rate in the five years following a trough as well as the 
length of time it takes for countries to return to their 
predecline levels of GDP, and explores whether these 
variables are correlated with basic characteristics of the 
episodes: the initial level of development, the size of 
the country, the extent of the GDP decline, and the 
duration of the episode. Constructing these postde-
cline variables reveals a striking stylized fact: out of 
the 92 countries experiencing a sharp decline in GDP 
Table 1.5.1. (continued)
Peak
Trough
GDP per 
capita  
at peak
Percent 
change in GDP 
per capita
Peak
Trough
GDP per 
capita  
at peak
Percent 
change in GDP 
per capita
Rwanda
1992
1994
401
–49
Togo
1980
1983
683
–21
San Marino
2008
2015
84,794
–38
Togo
1989
1993
561
–27
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
1980
1993
1,352
–36
Trinidad and Tobago
1982
1989
9,856
–34
Turkmenistan
1990
1997
3,713
–49
Saudi Arabia
1974
1987
39,125
–60
Uganda
1970
1980
407
–30
Senegal
1961
1994
1,083
–27
Ukraine
1990
1998
3,965
–57
Sierra Leone
1982
2001
502
–45
United Arab Emirates
1970
1978
126,104
–26
Sierra Leone
2014
2015
563
–22
United Arab Emirates
1980
1988
113,682
–50
Solomon Islands
1979
1986
1,643
–24
United Arab Emirates
1997
2010
64,176
–45
Solomon Islands
1995
2002
1,655
–36
Uruguay
1981
1984
7,420
–21
South Sudan
2011
2012
3,111
–54
Uzbekistan
1990
1996
997
–27
South Sudan
2013
2017
1,789
–26
Venezuela
1977
1985
15,557
–24
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
1972
1975
2,319
–28
Venezuela
1997
2003
12,787
–24
Venezuela
2012
2017
14,474
–37
Sudan
1962
1973
900
–22
West Bank and Gaza
1999
2002
2,683
–23
Sudan
1977
1985
984
–28
Yemen
2010
2017
1,309
–70
Suriname
1978
1987
8,724
–38
Zambia
1972
1994
1,613
–44
Tajikistan
1990
1996
1,278
–71
Zimbabwe
1974
1978
1,347
–21
Timor-Leste
2012
2014
4,058
–37
Zimbabwe
1998
2008
1,348
–56
Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from the World Economic Outlook and World Bank World Development Indicators databases.
Note: Peak indicates the year before the decline in GDP per capita begins, and trough the year in which GDP per capita is at the lowest level in the 
episode. GDP per capita at peak indicates GDP per capita in constant 2010 US dollars the year before the decline starts (source: World Bank). “Percent 
change in GDP per capita” indicates the percent change in per capita GDP from peak to trough.
   
Box 1.5 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
46
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
per capita in the sample, 45 had GDP per capita in 
2017 still below its predecline level.6 These countries 
account for over 5 percent of global GDP at pur-
chasing power parity in 2017, and about 7½ percent 
6Using the data from the World Economic Outlook projection 
period changes results only slightly—three countries (Djibouti, 
Kyrgyz Republic, Sierra Leone) are projected to reach their pre-
collapse levels of GDP per capita during 2018–23 but Sudan is 
projected to experience a more than 20 percent decline in GDP 
per capita during the projection period.
of world population. They are predominantly small. 
Exceptions include Iran, Ukraine, Venezuela, and some 
economies in the Gulf Cooperation Council with 
high GDP per capita that have experienced very rapid 
population growth, including because of immigration 
(Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates). 
Excluding these four countries, those countries still 
below their past peak in GDP per capita account for 
about 3 percent of global GDP.
•• Table 1.5.3 presents the results of simple regression 
analyses. In columns (1) and (2), the dependent 
variable is the growth rate in the five years after a 
trough; in columns (3) and (4), it is the number 
of years following the trough it takes for GDP 
per capita to return to its level immediately before 
the collapse. The purpose of these regressions is 
simply to identify correlations in the data—there 
are clearly many omitted factors that can play a role 
in explaining postcollapse economic performance, 
ranging from economic policies to the external 
environment (growth in trading partners, terms 
of trade, and so on). With those caveats in mind, 
a surprising result is that the postdecline growth 
rate is uncorrelated with the extent of the previ-
ous change in GDP per capita, holding constant 
the length of the episode. In other words, deeper 
downturns are not followed by sharper recoveries. 
However, the postdecline growth rate is strongly 
negatively correlated with the length of that decline. 
The regressions also suggest that, on average, recov-
eries tend to be weaker in smaller countries, consis-
tent with the evidence on challenges to economic 
performance in small states. The sample size for the 
second set of regressions, in which the dependent 
variable is the number of years it takes to return to 
the predecline level of GDP per capita, is consider-
ably smaller given that, as mentioned above, many 
countries have not yet reached that predecline level. 
Table 1.5.2. Declines in GDP per Capita: Stylized Facts
Mean
Median
Standard Deviation Observations
GDP per Capita at Beginning of Episode (in constant 2010 US dollars)
11,933
2,466
23,639
133
Percent Change in GDP per Capita in the Five Years before the Peak
24
14
34
101
Percent Change in GDP per Capita Peak to Trough
–36
–32
14
133
Length of Episode of GDP Decline in Years
8
6
6
133
Percent Change in GDP per Capita in the Five Years after the Trough
14
11
18
121
Number of Years to Return to Predecline GDP per Capita
12
10
7
70
Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from the World Economic Outlook and World Bank World Development Indicators databases.
    
Number of ongoing episodes
Share of countries affected (right scale)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Figure 1.5.1.  Ongoing Episodes of Large 
Declines in GDP per Capita (20 percent or 
more)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
1965 70
80
90
2000
10
17
Box 1.5 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
47
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
For this more restricted sample, results suggest that, 
as expected, it takes longer to recover from deeper 
and longer-duration GDP declines. They also sug-
gest that GDP per capita in poorer countries takes 
longer to recover from sharp declines. These results 
warrant a closer look at these episodes of large 
declines in GDP per capita and their driving factors 
in future research.
Table 1.5.3. Postcrisis Outcomes and Crisis Depth
Cumulative Growth in the Five Years after the Trough
Number of Years to Return to Precrisis Peak
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log GDP per Capita at Peak
–0.70
0.01
–1.41**
–1.13*
(–0.72)
(0.01)
(–2.28)
(–1.86)
Log GDP at Peak
1.75***
1.39**
–0.25
–0.15
(2.77)
(2.08)
(–0.62)
(–0.40)
Change in GDP per Capita
0.02
–0.02
–0.11*
–0.12**
(peak to trough)
(0.33)
(–0.23)
(–1.68)
(–2.13)
Length of GDP Decline (years)
–0.61***
–0.79***
0.39**
0.47***
(–2.84)
(–3.37)
(2.57)
(3.57)
Adjusted R 2
0.09
0.15
0.11
0.16
Number of Observations
120
102
69
64
Source: IMF staff calculations based on data from the World Economic Outlook and World Bank World Development Indicators databases.
Note: Robust errors in parenthesis. *** (**) indicate statistical significance at the 99 (95) percent confidence level. Columns (2) and (4) exclude 
episodes when the five years after the trough include the beginning of a new GDP decline episode.
   
Box 1.5 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
48
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Statistical models generally have limited success in 
accurately predicting recessions—a decline in the level 
of GDP.1 World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecasts 
might be expected to do better, given that they also 
incorporate judgment about how policies, external 
factors, and recent economic news affect economies’ 
growth trajectories. However, an analysis of WEO and 
private sector forecasts over 1991–2016 confirms the 
difficulties of forecasting recessions.2
The number of economies experiencing negative 
growth in any given year has been systematically 
underpredicted in the October WEO forecasts of 
the previous year, both for advanced economies and 
emerging market and developing economies (Fig-
ure 1.6.1). While the average country in the sample 
experienced 2.7 recessions during 1991–2016, out of 
the 313 recessions in a sample of 117 economies, only 
47 have been anticipated.3 Even for 2009, the year 
after global output shrank when Lehman Brothers col-
lapsed, only six advanced economies (and no emerging 
market and developing economies) had been predicted 
in the October 2008 WEO to enter into a recession; 
subsequently, output was estimated to have contracted 
in 56 (almost half) of the economies in the sample.4 
The accuracy in predicting a switch from positive (or 
zero) to negative growth has been even lower: only 
nine out of 212 “new” recessions were accurately fore-
cast between 1991 and 2016. 
The author of this box is Francesco Grigoli. Jungjin Lee and 
Jillian Zirnhelt provided research support.
1See, for example, Estrella and Mishkin (1998); Berge and 
Jordà (2011); Levanon (2011); Liu and Moench (2014); Ng 
(2014); Bluedorn, Decressin, and Terrones (2016); and Ergungor 
(2016). Stock and Watson (2003) provide a review of the vari-
ables generally used to predict recessions.
2IMF forecasts represent the growth outcome seen as most 
likely by IMF staff; that is, the mode, rather than the mean, of 
the distribution of expected growth.
3The analysis is based on annual data, which are available 
for most of the member countries. Observations corresponding 
to years in which natural disasters caused damage of at least 
1 percent of GDP, data for economies that had at least one 
conflict during 1991–2017, and data for economies with average 
populations smaller than 1 million people are excluded from the 
WEO data set.
4Forecasts are formulated based on the information set 
available in real time, hence ex post assessments of the forecasts’ 
accuracy should rely on first estimates rather than the latest 
estimates of actual data. The use of revised data would unfairly 
underestimate the forecasts’ accuracy, given that real GDP 
growth is generally revised downward over time.
The unsatisfactory record, however, is common 
across forecasters. Data from Consensus Economics, 
reflecting the average of private forecasters’ expecta-
tions for 44 economies (as of October of the previous 
year), reveal a pattern that is strikingly comparable 
to that of the WEO forecasts (Figure 1.6.2). For 
Actual recessions
Forecast recessions
Actual new recessions
Forecast new recessions
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1991
2000
10
16
0
6
12
18
24
30
1991
2000
10
16
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1991
2000
10
16
1. AEs
Figure 1.6.1.  World Economic Outlook Data: 
Recessions, Actual and Forecast
(Number of countries)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1991
2000
10
16
2. EMDEs
3. AEs
4. EMDEs
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging 
market and developing economies. In the top two panels, 
dots denote the number of recessions (output contractions) 
forecast in the October WEO of the previous year; bars 
denote the number of actual recessions (based on the 
October WEO estimates of the subsequent year). In the 
bottom two panels, dots denote the number of new 
recessions forecast in the October WEO of the previous 
year; bars denote the number of actual new recessions 
(based on the October WEO estimates of the subsequent 
year). New recessions are years in which growth turns from 
nonnegative to negative.
Box 1.6. Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
49
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
this restricted sample of 44 economies through 
1991–2016, the WEO and Consensus Economics 
forecasts projected a similar number of recessions, 16 
and 13, respectively, out of 107 cases of negative GDP 
growth. In 2009, only one advanced economy was 
projected to fall into recession, but by the end of the 
year output had contracted in 32 economies. Going 
back to the full period under analysis, if one exclu-
sively considers the instances in which the economies 
were not already in a recession in the previous year, 
Consensus Economics predicted only two out of 75 
“new” recessions in its forecasts.
The poor track record of predicting recessions is 
symptomatic of the overall difficulty of forecasting 
slowdowns in growth. WEO forecasts do a some-
what better job of predicting slowdowns—defined as 
declines in the rate of real GDP growth—compared 
with recessions. Across all economies over 1991–2016, 
growth slowdowns occurred about half of the time, 
and about half of those were accurately forecast (in 
the sense that the WEO forecasts predicted a decline 
in growth for that year). The predictive performance 
was somewhat better in 2009, when three-fourths of 
the 96 slowdowns were correctly predicted. However, 
restricting the 1991–2016 sample to “new” slowdowns 
reveals that the direction of the change in growth is 
correctly anticipated only about half of the time.
The slowdown metric does not distinguish between 
mild slowdowns and severe ones. Focusing only on 
severe slowdowns—defined as episodes in which real 
GDP growth fell by more than the 75th percentile of 
growth declines in the sample period—is an alternative 
approach. To account for differences in growth vola-
tility across advanced economies and emerging market 
and developing economies, thresholds are based on 
group-specific distributions, leading to the exclusion of 
growth declines smaller than 0.5 percentage point and 
0.6 percentage point in the two groups, respectively.5 
Over 1991–2016, the average country faced 9.3 severe 
slowdowns, and the count of severe slowdowns in the 
sample reached 1,040 (Figure 1.6.3). In these episodes, 
declines in growth were anticipated in 54 percent 
of the cases, while severe slowdowns (slowdowns of 
0.5–0.6 percentage point or more) were forecast only 
in 31 percent.6 
5The standard deviation of real GDP growth during severe 
slowdowns ranges between 2.6 percentage points in Latin 
America and the Caribbean and 4.4 percentage points in the 
Commonwealth of Independent States. Despite this, the results 
are qualitatively unchanged if the 75th percentiles are calculated 
using country-specific distributions.
6A severe slowdown is defined as being “anticipated” if the 
forecast decline in growth is at least 0.5 percentage point for 
advanced economies and 0.6 percentage point for emerging 
market and developing economies.
Actual recessions
Forecast recessions
Actual new recessions
Forecast new recessions
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1991
2000
10
16
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1991
2000
10
16
0
5
10
15
20
25
1991
2000
10
16
0
5
10
15
20
25
1991
2000
10
16
1. AEs
2. EMDEs
3. AEs
4. EMDEs
Figure 1.6.2.  Consensus Economics Data:
Recessions, Actual and Forecast
(Number of countries)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging 
market and developing economies. In the top two panels, 
dots denote the number of recessions (output contractions) 
forecast in the October Consensus Economics of the 
previous year; bars denote the actual number of recessions 
(based on the October Consensus Economics estimates of 
the subsequent year). In the bottom two panels, dots denote 
the number of new recessions forecasted in the October 
Consensus Economics of the previous year; bars denote the 
number of actual new recessions (based on the October 
Consensus Economics estimates of the subsequent year). 
New recessions are years in which growth turns from 
nonnegative to negative.
Box 1.6 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
50
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Errors in forecasting growth tend to be larger 
in years of severe slowdowns than in other years. 
The median forecast error (defined as actual minus 
predicted growth) during severe slowdowns is 
−1.6 percentage points, revealing a positive bias in 
the forecasts for those years (the median forecast 
error is −0.2 percentage point for nonsevere, or mild, 
slowdowns; −0.2 percentage point if all observations 
are considered; and 0.5 percentage point for nonslow-
down years). Across groups, the median forecast error 
during severe slowdowns is −1.4 percentage points for 
advanced economies and −1.7 percentage points for 
emerging market and developing economies (Fig-
ure 1.6.4). Across regions in the latter group, it ranges 
between −2.5 percentage points in the Commonwealth 
of Independent States and −1.3 percentage points 
in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan.7 
In years of synchronized slowdowns, accurately 
predicting the growth rate of advanced economies 
helps improve the accuracy of growth predictions 
for other economies. Severe slowdowns appear more 
7Means and medians of the forecast errors for all groups are 
different from zero at the 10 percent significance level, except the 
median for emerging and developing Asia.
Actual severe slowdowns
Forecast severe slowdowns
1. Advanced Economies
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1991
95
2000
05
10
16
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1991
95
2000
05
10
16
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Figure 1.6.3.  Severe Slowdowns, Actual and
Forecast
(Number of countries)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook. Bars denote the 
number of severe slowdowns (growth declines larger than 
0.5 percentage point and 0.6 percentage point for advanced 
economies and emerging market and developing economies, 
respectively) in the October WEO of the previous year; dots 
denote the number of forecasted severe slowdowns (based 
on the October WEO estimates of the subsequent year).
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
AE EMDE Fuel
Exp.
Other
Exp.
LAC MENAP CIS
SSA EMDE
Asia
Figure 1.6.4.  Forecast Errors during Severe
Slowdowns
(Percentage points)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AE = advanced economies; CIS = Commonwealth of 
Independent States; EMDE = emerging market and 
developing economies; Fuel exp. = fuel exporters; 
LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENAP = Middle 
East, North Africa, and Pakistan; Other exp. = other 
exporters; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa; WEO = World 
Economic Outlook. Bars denote the median of the real GDP 
growth forecast errors (calculated as the estimate for growth 
in year t as of the October WEO of year t +1 minus the 
forecast for growth in year t as of the October WEO of year 
t –1) during severe slowdowns. The vertical lines and the 
dots denote the interquartile ranges and the averages, 
respectively. 
Box 1.6 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
51
CHAPTER 1  GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
synchronized in some years. For instance, in 2001, 
2008, 2009, and 2012, more than 20 (40) advanced 
economies (emerging market and developing econo-
mies) experienced a significant decline in growth. The 
median decline in growth in these years was as large as 
2.7 percentage points, almost 1 percentage point larger 
than for the severe slowdowns that occurred in other 
years, consistent with a larger drag from weaker exter-
nal demand during synchronized slowdowns. Forecast 
errors were larger, at −2.4 percentage points, in these 
episodes, compared with −1.3 percentage points for 
other severe slowdowns. A simple regression of the 
probability of accurately predicting a severe slowdown 
in emerging market and developing economies on the 
share of the correctly predicted severe slowdowns in 
advanced economies suggests that, if severe slowdowns 
in advanced economies are missed, the chances of 
successfully predicting severe slowdowns elsewhere are 
significantly reduced.8
All in all, WEO forecasts perform somewhat better 
in predicting growth slowdowns than in predicting 
recessions, but the record leaves much room for 
improvement in both cases, and forecast errors during 
episodes of severe slowdowns are large (Figure 1.6.5).
8Probit regressions reveal that a 1 percentage point increase 
in the share of correctly predicted severe slowdowns in advanced 
economies is associated with a 29 percent higher probability of 
accurately predicting a severe slowdown in emerging market and 
developing economies.
Ratio of correctly forecast slowdowns
Ratio of correctly forecast recessions
Ratio of correctly forecast severe slowdowns
0
20
40
60
80
100
1991
95
2000
05
10
16
Figure 1.6.5.  Forecast Performance
(Percent)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Box 1.6 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
52
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Energy prices have increased since the release of the April 
2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO), mostly driven 
by higher oil prices. Notwithstanding record-high US pro-
duction, tight supply conditions and sustained economic 
activity in the first half of 2018 reduced Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
oil inventories rapidly, pushing up oil prices in May 
and June to their highest levels since November 2014. 
Since then, however, higher production in Saudi Arabia 
and Russia has rebalanced the oil market. A decline in 
metals demand from China and trade tensions have put 
downward pressure on metals prices. Agricultural market 
fundamentals, in contrast, remain solid and have partially 
offset the introduction of tariffs on some key agricul-
tural products. This special feature includes an in-depth 
analysis of the long-term determinants of energy demand.
The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index rose 
3.3 percent between February 2018 and August 2018, 
the reference periods for the April 2018 and current 
WEOs, respectively (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 1). Energy 
prices drove that increase, rising by 11.1 percent; food 
prices declined by 6.4 percent, while metals prices 
decreased by 11.7 percent because of trade tensions 
and weaker-than-expected metal demand from China. 
Oil prices increased to more than $76 a barrel in 
June, attaining their highest level since November 
2014. Since July, however, oil prices have stabilized as 
Organization for the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
(OPEC) and non-OPEC oil exporters (including Rus-
sia) agreed to boost production. Coal prices increased 
strongly because of relatively tight supply conditions, 
while natural gas prices increased in part following 
higher oil and coal prices. 
Oil Prices at the Highest Level since 2014
On June 22, 2018, OPEC agreed to increase its 
members’ oil output by 0.7 million barrels a day (mbd) 
to offset declining output in Angola and especially in 
Venezuela, both OPEC members, and regain its origi-
The authors of this special feature are Christian Bogmans, Lama 
Kiyasseh, Akito Matsumoto (team co-leader), Andrea Pescatori (team 
leader), and Julia Xueliang Wang, with research assistance from 
Rachel Yuting Fan, Lama Kiyasseh and Julia Xueliang Wang.
Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval
April 2017 WEO
October 2017 WEO
April 2018 WEO
October 2018 WEO
All commodities
Energy
Food
Metals
Aluminum
Copper
Iron ore
Nickel
0
40
80
120
160
200
2013
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
3. Brent Price Prospects2
(US dollars a barrel)
20
60
100
140
180
220
260
300
2005 06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Jul.
18
Figure 1.SF.1.  Commodity Market Developments
1. Commodity Price Indices
(2005 = 100)
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Dec. 2016 Dec. 17
Dec. 18
Dec. 19
Dec. 20
Dec. 21
Dec. 22 Dec. 23
2. Brent Futures Curves1
(US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Jan. 2014
Jan. 15
Jan. 16
Jan. 17
Jan. 18 Jul. 18
4. Metal Price Indices
(Jan. 2, 2014 = 100)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; IMF, Primary 
Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and are derived from 
futures prices. October 2018 WEO prices are based on August 13, 2018, closing.
2Derived from prices of futures options on August 13, 2018.
Special Feature Title: Special Feature Head
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts with a Focus on 
Recent Trends in Energy Demand
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
53
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND
nal target level set in the November 2016 agreement.1 
Notwithstanding record-high US production, tight 
supply conditions and sustained economic activity in 
the first half of 2018 reduced OECD oil inventories 
from historically high levels to their five-year average, 
pushing oil prices to more than $76 a barrel in June—
the highest level since November 2014. In July, how-
ever, oil prices retrenched from recent peaks and, as 
of August, stood at about $71 a barrel as higher Saudi 
and Russian production offset the effects of unplanned 
outages in Canada and Libya and a tougher US stance 
on the implementation of sanctions on Iran. Natural 
gas and coal prices have increased, supported by strong 
demand from China and India.
Oil futures contracts point to a decline of prices to 
about $60 a barrel in 2023 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 2). 
Baseline assumptions for the IMF’s average petroleum 
spot prices, based on futures prices, suggest average 
annual prices of $69.3 a barrel in 2018—an increase of 
31 percent from the 2017 average—and $68.8 a barrel 
in 2019 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 3). On one hand, global 
economic growth is expected to be relatively strong, 
albeit with regional differences, supporting underlying 
oil demand—the International Energy Agency expects 
oil demand to grow by 1.4 mbd and 1.5 mbd in 2018 
and 2019, respectively. On the other hand, the US 
Energy Information Administration expects US crude 
production to reach 10.7 mbd in 2018 and 11.7 mbd 
in 2019, putting downward pressure on oil prices in 
the medium term. Canada’s oil production is expected 
to grow steadily, too.
Although risks are balanced, uncertainty remains 
substantial around the baseline assumptions for oil 
prices because Saudi Arabia’s spare capacity is shrink-
ing and US sanctions against Iran will both weigh on 
Iran’s oil production prospects in the medium term 
and reduce Iran’s crude exports in the short term, 
requiring others with spare production capacity to step 
in. Upside risks to prices in the short term include 
a faster-than-expected deterioration of Venezuelan 
production and a larger-than-anticipated reduction in 
Iran’s crude exports. Downside risks include higher 
OPEC output and stronger-than-expected Cana-
dian and US production even though, in the short 
term, the United States faces bottlenecks caused by 
labor shortages and lack of pipeline infrastructure. 
1The 0.7 mbd increase is the production increase neces-
sary to bring OPEC output back to 100 percent compli-
ance from current overcompliance (the calculations are based 
on International Energy Agency data).
In addition, trade tensions and other risks to global 
growth (highlighted in the section titled “Risks” in 
Chapter 1) can potentially affect global activity and its 
prospects, reducing, in turn, oil demand. Coal prices 
are expected to decline from current levels due to a 
rebound in supply and in line with declining oil and 
natural gas prices.
 Metal Prices Decreasing
After peaking in February, metal prices declined by 
11.7 percent between February 2018 and August 2018 
because of weaker metal demand from China following 
stringent environmental regulations and tighter credit 
conditions. Global trade tensions have also added 
downward price pressures and substantially increased 
volatility in metal markets.
The price of iron ore, the key input in steelmaking, 
dropped by 12.4 percent between the reference periods 
because of US tariffs on steel, substitution with scrap 
by Chinese steelmakers, and China’s production curbs 
across major steel mills. Copper prices declined after 
the fear of a strike at the world’s largest copper mine 
in Chile faded, while aluminum prices went through 
a period of high volatility following US sanctions on 
the giant Russian aluminum and alumina producer 
(United Company Rusal), along with trade tensions. 
Nickel, the main input for stainless steel and batteries 
in electric vehicles, reached multiyear highs in early 
June 2018 and then declined to its February price 
on trade tensions. Zinc, mainly used to galvanize 
steel, dropped 28.9 percent between February and 
August 2018 following surging stockpiles and weak 
demand from China.
The IMF annual metals price index is projected to 
increase by 5.3 percent in 2018 (relative to its average 
in 2017) but to decline by 3.7 percent in 2019 from 
its 2018 average. Upside risks to the outlook for metal 
prices include sanctions against metals producers and 
easing environmental regulations in China. Down-
side risks are mounting because of trade tensions, 
higher-than-expected metals production in China, and 
a slowdown of the Chinese economy, which accounts 
for more than half of the world’s metals consumption.
Food Prices Decreasing and Trade Risks Remain
Although agricultural market fundamentals 
remain solid, the IMF’s agricultural price index 
decreased between February 2018 and August 2018 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
54
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
by 6.4 percent on trade tensions and concerns over 
global growth.
Wheat prices increased by 22.6 percent between 
February 2018 and August 2018 following adverse 
weather conditions during spring and summer in 
Russia and western Europe, respectively. Soybean 
prices fell sharply, however, in June and July after 
China announced a 25 percent retaliatory tariff on US 
soybean imports and US production numbers for 2018 
were revised upward. As a result, prices stood 14.7 per-
cent lower in August 2018 than in February 2018.
Food prices are projected to increase in 2018 by 
2.3 percent, and by a further 1.7 percent in 2019. 
Weather disruptions are an upside risk to the fore-
cast. As of August 9, 2018, the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration puts the chances of El 
Niño during winter 2018–19 at 70 percent. A deepen-
ing of the trade conflict between the United States—
the world’s largest food exporter—and several of its key 
trading partners constitutes a major downside risk.
Global Energy Demand
The consumption of energy services and liquid 
fuels is pervasive and essential in the economic system 
and is the major driver of demand for primary energy 
sources, such as fossil fuels, nuclear, and renewables. 
Increased energy efficiency, however, has raised the 
possibility of reaching a saturation point in the global 
demand for energy (or some of its primary energy 
sources), which could leave producer countries with 
overcapacity and stranded assets. Moreover, the 
use of energy, especially in the form of fossil fuels, 
gives rise to a multitude of environmental external-
ities, the severity of which, in turn, depends on the 
energy mix used and the technologies adopted (Stern 
2006; IPCC 2014).
This section analyzes the main drivers of energy 
demand and the evolution of the primary energy–
source mix by looking at long-term trends in energy 
efficiency; exploring the role of power generation in 
energy demand; and investigating the presence of an 
S-shaped relationship between energy and income that 
would, ultimately, induce saturation in energy demand 
(Wolfram, Shelef, and Gertler 2012).
Basic Facts
 The demand for energy services and liquid fuels 
induces a direct and indirect (through power gener-
ation) demand for primary energy sources. Electric-
ity has been a key force in the past decades: energy 
demand from power generation increased by nearly 
300 percent between 1971 and 2015—almost twice 
the rate of total energy. This phenomenon, dubbed 
electrification, has sustained the demand for coal and 
has led to a major decline of oil as a share of total 
energy and to increases in natural gas usage, and, more 
recently, in renewables (Figure 1.SF.2, panel 1). Indeed, 
power generation today accounts for more than 
40 percent of the demand for primary energy, and for 
about 55 percent if oil is excluded, which instead is 
mostly used in the transport sector. 
Although power generation has contributed 
significantly to global energy demand growth, it is 
worth looking at contributions by country. Emerging 
markets, especially China and, more recently, India, 
have driven most of the energy demand growth of 
the past 15 years (Figure 1.SF.2, panel 2), while the 
contribution of advanced economies has been mini-
mal, leading to a decline in their world consumption 
shares and raising the prospects of saturation in energy 
US 
AEs excluding US
China
India
Fuel exporters
Other EMs and LIDCs
0
10
20
30
40
50
2000 01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
2. Share of Primary Energy Consumption (Percent)
Figure 1.SF.2.  Primary Energy Consumption and Supply
Coal
Oil
Natural gas
Nuclear
Renewables
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
1971
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
1. Total Primary Energy Supply 1971–2015 (Mtoe)
Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income 
developing countries; Fuel exporters =  Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, 
Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Ecuador, Gabon, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Libya, 
Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; 
Mtoe = million tons of oil equivalent.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
55
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND
demand for advanced economies (Wolfram, Shelef, and 
Gertler 2012). This dissimilarity suggests a relation-
ship between stages of development and the elasticity 
of energy demand to income. Farrell (1954) and, 
more recently, Gertler and others (2016) postulate an 
S-shaped relationship between electricity demand and 
household purchases of durable goods (such as domes-
tic appliances and automobiles). Dargay and Gately 
(1999) and Dargay, Gately, and Sommer (2007) find 
such an S-shaped relationship for car ownership. The 
next section tests whether such a relationship holds 
more generally for energy demand and income.
Energy and Income: An S-Shaped Relationship
Using an unbalanced panel of 136 countries, this 
analysis tests for the presence of an S-shaped relation-
ship between energy demand and per capita income, 
controlling for the size of the country (that is, popu-
lation and land area) and fossil fuel abundance. Time 
fixed effects are used to capture worldwide gains in 
energy efficiency and fluctuations in global economic 
activity and energy prices. The sample is annual and 
spans 1971–2015, covering two major energy price  
cycles. Specifically, the exercise estimates the follow-
ing specification relating (log) total energy demand ​E​ 
to (log) population, ​pop​; a third-order polynomial in 
(log) income per capita, ​gdp​; and a vector of control 
variables, ​X​:2
​E​ it​  =  ​β​ 0​ + ​β​ 1​ po ​p​ it​ + ​β​ 2​ ​gdp​ it​ + ​β​ 3​ ​(​gdp​ it​)​ 2​
	
​+ ​β​ 4​ ​(​gdp​ it​)​ 3​ + ​β​ 5​ × ​X​ it​ + ​λ​ t​ + ​ε​ it​	
     (1.1)
in which ​λ​ t​ are year fixed effects, while ​X​ it​ includes a 
time-varying energy-export and coal producer dummy, 
distance from the equator, and the log of land area; the 
indices i and t refer to countries and years, respectively.3
Results for the baseline specification, column (2), 
and robustness checks are reported in Table 1.SF.1 and 
in Online Annex 1.SF.1.4 Not surprisingly, the analysis 
finds that energy demand moves in lockstep with popu-
lation. Point estimates suggest that having a sizable land 
2Energy demand (in million tons of oil equivalent) is the sum of 
electricity and primary energy supply (that is, coal, oil, natural gas, 
hydropower, nuclear energy, and renewables). Energy data are from 
the International Energy Agency; data on population, GDP per cap-
ita (in 2011 US dollars), and country area size (in square kilometers) 
are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database. 
Latitude is from the GeoDist database by Centre d’Etudes Prospec-
tives et d’Informations Internationales.
3An oil exporter is defined as having oil production exceeding 
consumption. A similar definition is used for natural gas and coal 
exporters. A coal producer is defined as having production able to 
satisfy between 60 percent and 100 percent of the country’s coal con-
sumption. Distance from equator is the absolute value of latitude.
4The annex is available online at www​.imf/​en/​Publications/​WEO.
Table 1.SF.1. Total Demand Determinants for Baseline Specification
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Population
1.079***
0.965***
0.959***
1.161***
GDP per Capita
–7.103*
–8.676**
–5.068*
–6.889***
(GDP per Capita)²
0.843*
1.044**
0.639*
0.865***
(GDP per Capita)³
–0.0293
–0.0378**
–0.0231
–0.0330***
Area
0.0798
0.0953*
Oil Exporter
–0.0173
0.00523
Gas Exporter
0.0483
–0.0478
Coal Exporter
0.378**
0.315**
Coal Producer
0.251*
0.132
Latitude
0.0138***
Static Saturation Point
401,087
179,389
323,516
82,921
Dynamic Saturation Point (1% eff. gain)
127,286
63,590
74,050
17,831
Dynamic Saturation Point (spec. eff. gain)
33,576
38,410
41,298
25,281
Inflection Point
14,447
10,039
10,184
6,204
Max Elasticity
0.9723
0.9416
0.8280
0.6660
Average Elasticity
0.9721
0.9233
0.8177
0.5888
R ²
0.95
0.96
0.97
1.00
Model
WLS
WLS
WLS
WLS – FE
Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Energy exporters and producers are derived from the International Energy Agency. Average elasticity is calculated at $15,000 2011 international US 
dollars. “eff. gain” is efficiency gain. “spec. eff. gain” is specific efficiency gain calculated using each specification’s average growth of time dummies. FE = 
fixed effects; WLS = weighted least squares. Latitude is the absolute value of latitude in degrees for national capitals.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
56
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
area, coupled with being a coal exporter (producer), 
increases energy demand by about 45 (33) percent. 
Turning to income, the data strongly support the 
presence of an S-shaped relationship between per capita 
energy consumption and per capita income. The inflec-
tion point in the energy-income relationship (that is, the 
maximum income elasticity) is about $10,000 (in 2011 
US dollars), which is below the global per capita income 
in 2015, which stood at $15,000 (2011 US dollars). 
Indeed, this inflection point has already been reached 
by many emerging markets. At that income level, the 
energy income elasticity is close to one.
At higher income levels, the elasticity starts to 
decline. Ultimately, as income keeps growing, the 
economy would reach a saturation point for energy 
demand; however, at an estimated $180,000 per capita 
(in 2011 US dollars) the saturation point looks, at 
current technology, to still be very far into the future.5
Energy-saving technologies, however, can lead to 
faster actual saturation by shifting the energy-income 
5An economy with a $50,000 per capita income today (for exam-
ple, Germany) growing at 2 percent a year would take 65 years to 
reach a per capita income of $180,000.
curve downward because the same economic activi-
ties (such as heating, cooling, and transport) require 
less energy. In the regression, improvements in energy 
efficiency globally are captured by the time dummies, 
which show a remarkably steady decline (Figure 1.SF.3).
Indeed, except for during 1990–92 (mostly affected 
by the inclusion in the sample of former Soviet 
Union countries, whose energy efficiency was lower), 
the improvement in energy efficiency has been very 
steady, averaging about 1 percent a year over the entire 
sample. If it is conservatively assumed that energy 
efficiency globally keeps increasing at its historical rate 
of 1 percent a year, the saturation point previously 
estimated drops to about $64,000 per capita.6
The estimated S-shaped energy-income relation-
ship (Figure 1.SF.4) not only predicts energy demand 
growth to be highest in emerging markets but also 
captures the behavior of energy demand at low-income 
levels. Typically, in most low-income countries, energy 
consumption initially declines in response to income 
growth probably as the result of graduation from bio-
mass (solid biofuels excluding charcoal)—an inefficient 
source of energy. Biomass, in fact, is an inferior good, 
implying that households reduce its use as income 
grows. The share of biomass in total primary energy 
supply of the country tends to decline as income grows 
(Figure 1.SF.5). 
In conclusion, the evidence suggests that the relation-
ship between energy demand and income follows an 
S-shaped curve, with an initial decline of energy demand 
at low levels of income followed by stages of acceleration 
and then saturation at middle- and high-income levels, 
respectively. Thus, the main driver of future energy 
demand hinges on the dynamics of middle-income 
countries. In fact, even though some advanced econ-
omies may have already reached saturation in energy 
demand, estimates suggest that global saturation is still 
far into the future. However, total energy is not all that 
matters. The same level of energy consumption can be 
the result of varying mixes of primary energy sources, 
which is the topic of the next section.
The Primary Energy Mix
The optimal energy mix in each country is the result 
of relative resource abundance, technology, and social 
6An economy with a $50,000 per capita income today (for exam-
ple, Germany) growing at 2 percent a year would take 13 years to 
reach a per capital income of $64,000.
–1.2
–1.0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
1971
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
Trend
Energy efﬁciency index (1971 = 0)
Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators 
database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The red line represents the time ﬁxed effects estimated in Table 1.SF.1 
column (2) with 95 percent conﬁdence intervals (shaded area). The blue line is a 
linear trend estimated for the period 1971–89 (1992–2015) with a slope of 0.23 
(0.13).
Figure 1.SF.3.  Energy Efﬁciency
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
57
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND
preferences. The local relative abundance or avail-
ability of an energy source determines its local costs, 
while the efficiency of use in production determines 
its desirability (that is, its marginal benefit).7 These 
two factors combined help determine the relative 
price of an energy source. Technical substitutability 
across resources then determines the impact of changes 
in efficiency of use or relative prices on the energy 
mix. For example, the relative importance of oil as a 
primary energy source has substantially declined over 
time as other energy sources became cheaper (such as 
coal and nuclear in the early part of the sample) or 
more desirable to use (such as natural gas and, more 
recently, renewables). The link between high and 
volatile crude oil prices and the decline in the oil share 
is indeed noticeable (Figure 1.SF.6).8 Over the long 
7It is up to policy to align private and social marginal benefits.
8In most advanced economies, the two oil shocks of the 1970s 
that generated high oil prices called into question the energy security 
of oil and led to a switch in the power sector, with oil being replaced 
by alternative sources of power generation, such as coal, natural gas, 
and nuclear power.
term, however, efficiency is also determined by capital 
investment, which allows the potential of an energy 
source (for example, investment in solar power or 
natural gas infrastructure) to be better exploited. This 
generates a relationship between the energy mix and 
the stage of development (see Online Annex 1.SF.1 for 
further details).
At medium- and low-income levels, the 
semi-elasticity of the oil share to income is positive 
as the transport sector expands (for example, car and 
truck ownership increases), but it turns negative at 
higher income levels when the stock of motor vehicles 
plateaus, fuel efficiency reduces gasoline consumption, 
and cleaner natural gas is preferred in heating and 
power generation. Regressions, indeed, suggest that 
peak oil demand may have already been reached for 
some advanced economies, given that their oil share 
declines while energy demand is close to saturation (see 
Online Annex 1.SF.1). In contrast, the share of natural 
gas seems mostly independent of income.
The relationship between income and the share of 
coal is weak because higher incomes are associated 
with cleaner energy sources but also with higher 
electrification rates (the main driver of coal consump-
tion). At medium incomes, however, coal has proved 
China
Japan
United States
India
Russia
France
Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators 
database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Adjusted ﬁtted values show the S-shaped energy-income relation 
(constructed using the cubic polynomial) while energy demand per capita is 
adjusted for estimated time ﬁxed effects. Estimates are from the baseline 
speciﬁcation.
Figure 1.SF.4.  Energy Demand and GDP per Capita
GDP per capita (constant 2011 international dollars), log scale
125
500
2000
8000
32000
128000
512000
0.0
0.1
1.0
10.0
Energy demand per capita (kilogram oil equivalent), log scale 
Sources: International Energy Agency, IEA Renewables Information Statistics; 
World Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels for countries with biomass shares greater than 40 percent are 
displayed in the ﬁgure. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes. PPP = purchasing power parity.
500
2000
8000
32000
128000
Share of biomass in total primary energy supply
(percent)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Income per capita 2014, PPP adjusted, log scale
Figure 1.SF.5.  Biomass
HTI
GTM
NIC
HND
LKA
NPL
MMR
KHM
ZWE
ZMB
TGO
TZA
SDN
SEN
NGA
NER
MOZ
KEN
GHA
GAB
ETH
COD
CIV
COG
CMR
BEN
AGO
PRY
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
58
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
to be a cheap and abundant energy source able to 
satisfy a quickly growing demand for electricity, espe-
cially in some large, coal-abundant emerging markets, 
such as China and India (being a coal producer or 
exporter increases a country’s coal share by 10 per-
centage points or 18 percentage points, respectively). 
Hence, notwithstanding a reduction of coal intensity 
at the country level, the legacy of high coal usage in 
large and fast-growing economies led to a surprise 
increase in global coal intensity in the mid-2000s 
(Figure 1.SF.7). As China and other major emerging 
markets develop, however, demand for cleaner fuels 
is expected to increase, leading to a decline in the 
coal share. 
Although it is too early to assess the evolution of 
renewables, the analysis clearly points to an increase 
in the use of renewables in high-income countries, 
especially for power generation. Advanced economies, 
in fact, are typically highly electrified while emerging 
markets, as they become more urbanized and expand 
the electricity grid, are expected to substantially 
increase their electrification rate in the medium term. 
The projected rise of the electric car and growth in the 
services sector, moreover, are expected to increase the 
electrification rate in advanced economies, too.
The implication of higher electrification rates 
is important for primary energy demand. In fact, 
while oil saturation will probably be reached sooner 
than total energy saturation (as oil’s share in the mix 
declines), saturation for natural gas and renewables 
will come later. Recent sharp declines in the price of 
solar photovoltaic cells and government support for the 
development of renewables are paving the way for the 
rapid growth of renewables (see Box 1.SF.1). Although 
coal may remain attractive for some countries, local 
air pollution has compelled China and India, to some 
extent, to shift toward renewables. Thus, cost changes 
and environmental concerns will play a key role for the 
increased penetration of renewables and the saturation 
point for coal.
Conclusion
Most of the increase in energy consumption is 
expected to come from emerging markets whose energy 
demand is approximately at its peak income elasticity, 
which is about one. In contrast, that elasticity is close 
to zero for advanced economies, suggesting that their 
Oil
Coal
Natural gas
Nuclear
Renewables
Sources: International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Sample is International Energy Agency world aggregate; grey shaded 
area = high and volatile oil prices; nonshaded area = low and stable oil prices.
Figure 1.SF.6.  Primary Energy Source Shares
(Percent)
1971
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Country intensity
Composition effects
World coal intensity (right scale)
Change in world coal intensity
Sources: International Energy Agency; World Bank, World Development Indicators 
database; and IMF staff calculations.
Figure 1.SF.7.  Decomposition of Change in World Coal 
Intensity
(Percent)
–8
6
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
1991
95
2000
05
10
15
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
59
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
SPECIAL FEATURE 
COMMODITY MARKET DEVELOPMENTS AND FORECASTS WITH A FOCUS ON RECENT TRENDS IN ENERGY DEMAND
contribution to energy demand growth will be more 
modest or possibly absent. Nonetheless, emerging 
markets’ saturation point for energy demand is still far 
in the future—even assuming steady gains in energy 
efficiency. Saturation, however, is probably much closer 
for some energy sources, such as coal and oil, raising the 
risk of stranded assets for high-cost projects, while other 
sources, such as natural gas and renewables, are expected 
to become more important in the energy mix as electri-
fication rates increase. Even though dynamics in energy 
transitions and technological innovations are hard to 
predict, substantial long-term investment is required to 
change the energy infrastructure of an economic system 
(for example, the life of power plants and airplanes is 
about 40 years). Nonetheless, climate concerns, energy 
policies, and market forces will be key in forging future 
energy markets as energy regulation and prices interact 
to stimulate or constrain technological innovation. It is 
the role of policymakers to exploit these interactions to 
develop ecologically sustainable economies.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
60
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
The rapid growth of renewable energy since 
the beginning of the 21st century (see Online 
Annex 1.SF.1) can be attributed to several demand- 
and supply-side factors. First, governments have 
implemented a variety of energy policies over the years 
that have helped countries lower their greenhouse gas 
emissions. Second, aided by regulatory pressure, tech-
nological innovation has reduced the cost of wind and 
solar energy substantially in recent years (Goldman 
Sachs 2015; IRENA 2017).1
Using a model that relates renewable energy capac-
ity to GDP per capita, population, a set of control 
variables, and a trend, this box analyzes the outlook 
for renewable energy capacity (see Online Annex 1.
SF.1). Results depend on whether the relationship is 
estimated over the full sample (1990–2015) or only 
over the most recent sample (2000–15), as the trend 
coefficient increases from 1.7 percent a year to 3.9 per-
cent in the most recent sample. The rising trend 
reflects performance improvements and price reduc-
tions in several major renewable energy technologies, 
most notably solar panels and wind turbines.
An out-of-sample prediction, focusing on 45 coun-
tries for which long-term forecasts for GDP per capita 
and population size are available (OECD 2014), shows 
that, under the conservative forecast, the world will 
have accumulated more than 4,600 gigawatt of renew-
able energy-generating assets by 2040. This number 
increases to more than 8,400 gigawatt in the baseline 
scenario—a fourfold increase from 2015.
The increase in renewable energy capacity under the 
conservative and baseline scenarios will, respectively, 
deliver 732 million tons and 1,733 million tons of 
oil equivalent of energy to the electricity grid, equal 
to 50 percent and 117 percent, respectively, of all 
electricity generated by fossil fuels in 2015. Indeed, 
if the new renewable energy capacity were to dis-
The authors of this box are Christian Bogmans and 
Lama Kiyasseh.
1Other factors of importance are the rate of interest; 
cross-country differences in endowments of human capital and 
raw potential for wind, solar, and hydro energy (Collier and Ven-
ables 2012); and government support for renewable industries 
(see Zhang and others 2013).
place fossil-fuel-based electricity generation, it would 
constitute a sizable step in reducing global greenhouse 
gas emissions.
Figure 1.SF.1.1. decomposes future renewable 
energy growth under the baseline scenario into 
income, population, and the trend effect. This shows 
that renewable energy investment is driven mostly 
by supply (technology) rather than demand (income 
and population), which is in line with the popular 
rationale of an energy transition led by innovations in 
wind, solar, and other technologies. The same depen-
dence on a persistence in the trend factor, however, 
makes the outlook for renewable energy uncertain.
Existing capacity
Trend effect
GDP per capita effect
Population effect
Renewables capacity (conservative)
Renewables capacity (baseline)
Figure 1.SF.1.1.  Renewables Capacity
(Gigawatts)
0
1,000
9,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
40
1990 95 2000 05
10
15
20
25
30
35
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; US Energy Information Administration; World 
Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Box 1.SF.1. The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
61
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
Europe
3.1
2.3
1.9
2.6
3.1
3.2
2.4
2.4
2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Europe 
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.7
1.8
1.8
3.0
2.9
2.8
7.9
7.2
7.0
Euro Area4,5
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.5
1.7
1.7
3.5
3.0
2.9
9.1
8.3
8.0
Germany
2.5
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.8
1.8
7.9
8.1
7.9
3.8
3.5
3.4
France
2.3
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.9
1.8
–0.6
–0.9
–0.7
9.4
8.8
8.5
Italy
1.5
1.2
1.0
1.3
1.3
1.4
2.8
2.0
1.6
11.3
10.8
10.5
Spain
3.0
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.2
1.2
17.2
15.6
14.7
Netherlands
2.9
2.8
2.6
1.3
1.4
1.6
10.5
9.9
9.7
4.9
3.9
3.8
Belgium
1.7
1.5
1.5
2.2
2.2
1.8
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
7.1
6.4
6.6
Austria
3.0
2.8
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.1
1.9
2.2
1.8
5.5
5.2
5.1
Greece
1.4
2.0
2.4
1.1
0.7
1.2
–0.8
–0.8
–0.4
21.5
19.9
18.1
Portugal 
2.7
2.3
1.8
1.6
1.7
1.6
0.5
0.0
–0.3
8.9
7.0
6.7
Ireland
7.2
4.7
4.0
0.3
0.7
1.2
8.5
7.4
6.7
6.7
5.3
5.1
Finland
2.8
2.6
1.8
0.8
1.2
1.7
0.7
0.9
0.9
8.5
7.7
7.4
Slovak Republic
3.4
3.9
4.1
1.3
2.6
2.2
–2.1
–1.8
–0.9
8.1
7.5
6.9
Lithuania
3.9
3.5
2.9
3.7
2.5
2.2
0.8
0.3
0.0
7.1
6.5
6.3
Slovenia
5.0
4.5
3.4
1.4
2.1
2.0
7.1
6.3
5.5
6.6
5.8
5.4
Luxembourg
2.3
4.0
3.5
2.1
1.5
1.8
5.0
4.9
4.8
5.8
5.4
5.2
Latvia
4.5
3.7
3.3
2.9
2.7
2.4
–0.8
–2.0
–2.6
8.7
7.9
7.8
Estonia
4.9
3.7
3.2
3.7
3.0
2.5
3.1
2.2
1.1
5.8
6.7
6.9
Cyprus 
3.9
4.0
4.2
0.7
0.8
1.8
–6.7
–3.1
–5.2
11.1
9.5
8.0
Malta
6.7
5.7
4.6
1.3
1.8
2.1
13.6
11.6
11.1
4.6
4.1
4.1
United Kingdom
1.7
1.4
1.5
2.7
2.5
2.2
–3.8
–3.5
–3.2
4.4
4.1
4.2
Switzerland
1.7
3.0
1.8
0.5
1.1
1.4
9.8
10.2
9.8
3.2
2.8
2.8
Sweden
2.1
2.4
2.2
1.9
1.9
1.7
3.3
2.6
2.8
6.7
6.2
6.2
Norway
1.9
2.1
2.1
1.9
1.9
2.0
5.5
7.8
7.8
4.2
3.8
3.7
Czech Republic
4.3
3.1
3.0
2.4
2.3
2.3
1.1
–0.4
–0.9
2.9
2.5
3.0
Denmark
2.3
2.0
1.9
1.1
1.4
1.7
7.6
7.7
7.5
5.7
5.4
5.3
Iceland
4.0
3.7
2.9
1.8
2.5
2.6
3.5
2.4
2.0
2.8
3.2
3.3
San Marino
1.9
1.4
1.0
1.0
1.5
1.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
8.1
8.2
8.3
Emerging and Developing Europe6
6.0
3.8
2.0
6.2
8.3
9.0
–2.6
–2.8
–1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Turkey
7.4
3.5
0.4
11.1
15.0
16.7
–5.6
–5.7
–1.4
10.9
11.0
12.3
Poland
4.6
4.4
3.5
2.0
2.0
2.8
0.3
–0.8
–1.3
4.9
4.1
4.0
Romania
6.9
4.0
3.4
1.3
4.7
2.7
–3.4
–3.5
–3.4
4.9
4.7
4.8
Hungary
4.0
4.0
3.3
2.4
2.8
3.3
3.2
2.3
2.1
4.2
3.9
3.5
Bulgaria5
3.6
3.6
3.1
1.2
2.6
2.3
4.5
2.4
1.6
6.2
5.6
5.5
Serbia
1.9
4.0
3.5
3.1
2.1
2.3
–5.7
–5.7
–5.6
14.1
13.8
13.5
Croatia
2.8
2.8
2.6
1.1
1.6
1.5
3.9
2.7
2.3
12.4
12.0
11.2
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia. 
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia, and Montenegro.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
62
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
Asia
5.7
5.6
5.4
2.1
2.7
2.9
2.1
1.5
1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Asia
2.4
2.1
1.8
1.0
1.4
1.6
4.4
4.1
4.1
3.4
3.4
3.3
Japan
1.7
1.1
0.9
0.5
1.2
1.3
4.0
3.6
3.8
2.9
2.9
2.9
Korea 
3.1
2.8
2.6
1.9
1.5
1.8
5.1
5.0
4.7
3.7
3.7
3.7
Australia
2.2
3.2
2.8
2.0
2.2
2.3
–2.6
–2.8
–3.1
5.6
5.3
5.0
Taiwan Province of China
2.9
2.7
2.4
1.1
1.5
1.3
14.5
13.8
13.6
3.8
3.8
3.7
Singapore
3.6
2.9
2.5
0.6
1.0
1.4
18.8
18.5
18.3
2.2
2.0
1.9
Hong Kong SAR
3.8
3.8
2.9
1.5
2.3
2.1
4.3
3.4
3.1
3.1
2.6
2.6
New Zealand
3.0
3.1
3.0
1.9
1.4
1.7
–2.7
–3.6
–3.8
4.7
4.5
4.4
Macao SAR 
9.1
6.3
6.3
1.2
2.2
2.4
33.3
35.9
38.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.5
6.5
6.3
2.4
3.0
3.2
0.9
0.1
0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
China
6.9
6.6
6.2
1.6
2.2
2.4
1.4
0.7
0.7
3.9
4.0
4.0
India4
6.7
7.3
7.4
3.6
4.7
4.9
–1.9
–3.0
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
ASEAN-5
5.3
5.3
5.2
3.1
2.9
3.2
2.0
1.3
1.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Indonesia
5.1
5.1
5.1
3.8
3.4
3.8
–1.7
–2.4
–2.4
5.4
5.2
5.0
Thailand
3.9
4.6
3.9
0.7
0.9
0.9
11.2
9.1
8.1
0.7
0.7
0.7
Malaysia
5.9
4.7
4.6
3.8
1.0
2.3
3.0
2.9
2.3
3.4
3.2
3.0
Philippines
6.7
6.5
6.6
2.9
4.9
4.0
–0.8
–1.5
–1.5
5.7
5.5
5.5
Vietnam
6.8
6.6
6.5
3.5
3.8
4.0
2.5
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.2
2.2
Other Emerging and Developing 
Asia5
6.2
6.1
6.3
4.9
5.3
5.5
–2.0
–3.4
–2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Emerging Asia6
6.5
6.5
6.3
2.3
2.9
3.1
1.0
0.3
0.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia,  
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) economies, China, and India.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
63
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
North America
2.2
2.7
2.5
2.5
2.7
2.3
–2.3
–2.5
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
United States 
2.2
2.9
2.5
2.1
2.4
2.1
–2.3
–2.5
–3.0
4.4
3.8
3.5
Canada
3.0
2.1
2.0
1.6
2.6
2.2
–2.9
–3.0
–2.5
6.3
6.1
6.2
Mexico
2.0
2.2
2.5
6.0
4.8
3.6
–1.7
–1.3
–1.3
3.4
3.5
3.5
Puerto Rico4
–2.4
–2.3
–1.1
1.8
2.7
1.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
10.8
11.0
11.0
South America5
0.7
0.6
1.9
6.4
6.9
7.1
–1.4
–1.6
–1.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Brazil
1.0
1.4
2.4
3.4
3.7
4.2
–0.5
–1.3
–1.6
12.8
11.8
10.7
Argentina
2.9
–2.6
–1.6
25.7
31.8
31.7
–4.9
–3.7
–3.2
8.4
8.9
9.4
Colombia
1.8
2.8
3.6
4.3
3.2
3.4
–3.3
–2.4
–2.4
9.3
9.2
9.1
Venezuela
–14.0
–18.0
–5.0
1,087.5 1,370,000.0 10,000,000.0
2.0
6.1
4.0
27.1
34.3
38.0
Chile
1.5
4.0
3.4
2.2
2.4
3.0
–1.5
–2.5
–2.7
6.7
6.9
6.5
Peru
2.5
4.1
4.1
2.8
1.4
2.0
–1.1
–1.8
–2.2
6.9
6.9
6.8
Ecuador
2.4
1.1
0.7
0.4
–0.2
0.5
–0.3
–0.5
0.7
4.6
4.8
5.2
Bolivia
4.2
4.3
4.2
2.8
3.2
4.2
–6.3
–5.2
–5.1
4.0
4.0
4.0
Uruguay
2.7
2.0
3.2
6.2
7.6
6.7
1.5
0.9
0.2
7.6
7.9
7.6
Paraguay
4.8
4.4
4.2
3.6
4.2
4.0
–0.8
–1.3
–0.9
5.7
5.7
5.7
Central America6
3.7
2.8
3.8
2.6
3.0
3.4
–2.0
–3.2
–3.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Caribbean7
2.6
4.4
3.7
3.7
4.3
4.3
–0.9
–1.6
–1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
  
Latin America and the Caribbean8
1.3
1.2
2.2
6.0
6.1
5.9
–1.5
–1.6
–1.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
East Caribbean Currency Union9
1.8
2.0
3.8
1.1
1.7
1.8
–8.0
–11.6
–10.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Aggregates exclude Venezuela, but include Argentina starting from 2017 onward. Year-end to year-end 
changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5Includes Guyana and Suriname. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America comprises Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See country-specific notes for Argentina and 
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as 
Anguilla and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
64
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 1.1.4.  Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account 
Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
Commonwealth of Independent States4
2.1
2.3
2.4
5.5
4.5
5.7
1.1
4.1
3.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Net Energy Exporters 
2.0
2.1
2.2
4.8
4.0
5.6
1.6
5.1
4.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Russia
1.5
1.7
1.8
3.7
2.8
5.1
2.2
6.2
5.2
5.2
5.5
5.3
Kazakhstan
4.0
3.7
3.1
7.4
6.4
5.6
–3.4
–0.2
0.2
5.0
5.0
5.0
Uzbekistan
5.3
5.0
5.0
12.5
19.2
14.9
3.5
–0.5
–1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Azerbaijan
0.1
1.3
3.6
13.0
3.5
3.3
4.1
6.6
8.1
5.0
5.0
5.0
Turkmenistan
6.5
6.2
5.6
8.0
9.4
8.2
–11.5
–8.2
–6.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Net Energy Importers 
3.2
3.9
3.2
10.2
7.9
6.2
–2.6
–4.1
–4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ukraine 
2.5
3.5
2.7
14.4
10.9
7.3
–1.9
–3.1
–3.9
9.2
9.4
9.2
Belarus
2.4
4.0
3.1
6.0
5.5
5.5
–1.7
–2.5
–4.2
0.8
0.8
0.8
Georgia
5.0
5.5
4.8
6.0
2.8
2.7
–8.9
–10.5
–10.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Armenia
7.5
6.0
4.8
0.9
3.0
4.4
–2.8
–3.8
–3.8
18.9
18.9
18.6
Tajikistan
7.1
5.0
5.0
7.3
5.8
5.5
–0.5
–4.7
–4.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kyrgyz Republic
4.6
2.8
4.5
3.2
2.9
4.6
–4.0
–12.3
–11.8
7.1
7.0
7.0
Moldova 
4.5
3.8
3.8
6.6
3.6
4.9
–6.3
–7.4
–6.3
4.1
4.1
4.0
Memorandum
Caucasus and Central Asia5
4.1
4.0
4.0
9.0
8.4
7.2
–2.5
–1.3
–0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income CIS Countries6
5.5
4.9
4.9
9.5
12.8
10.7
–0.9
–4.6
–4.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Net Energy Exporters Excluding Russia
3.9
3.8
3.9
9.6
9.2
7.7
–2.2
–0.3
0.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), are included in this group for reasons of geography and 
similarity in economic structure.
5Caucasus and Central Asia comprises Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
6Low-Income CIS countries comprise Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
65
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current 
Account Balance, and Unemployment 
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
2.2
2.4
2.7
6.4
10.8
10.2
–0.7
1.8
1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
1.2
1.4
2.0
3.6
9.8
9.9
1.6
4.7
4.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
–0.9
2.2
2.4
–0.9
2.6
2.0
2.2
8.4
8.8
6.0
. . .
. . .
Iran 
3.7
–1.5
–3.6
9.6
29.6
34.1
2.2
1.3
0.3
11.8
12.8
14.3
United Arab Emirates
0.8
2.9
3.7
2.0
3.5
1.9
6.9
7.2
7.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
1.4
2.5
2.7
5.6
6.5
6.7
–13.2
–9.0
–7.9
11.7
11.6
12.3
Iraq
–2.1
1.5
6.5
0.1
2.0
2.0
2.3
6.9
3.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
1.6
2.7
2.8
0.4
3.7
3.5
3.8
4.8
6.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kuwait
–3.3
2.3
4.1
1.5
0.8
3.0
5.9
11.3
11.0
1.1
1.1
1.1
Oil Importers5
4.1
4.5
4.0
12.4
12.9
10.8
–6.6
–6.5
–6.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Egypt
4.2
5.3
5.5
23.5
20.9
14.0
–6.3
–2.6
–2.4
12.2
10.9
9.9
Pakistan
5.4
5.8
4.0
4.1
3.9
7.5
–4.1
–5.9
–5.3
6.0
6.1
6.1
Morocco
4.1
3.2
3.2
0.8
2.4
1.4
–3.6
–4.3
–4.5
10.2
9.5
9.2
Sudan
1.4
–2.3
–1.9
32.4
61.8
49.2
–10.5
–14.2
–13.1
19.6
19.5
19.6
Tunisia
2.0
2.4
2.9
5.3
8.1
7.5
–10.5
–9.6
–8.5
15.5
15.2
15.0
Lebanon
1.5
1.0
1.4
4.5
6.5
3.5
–22.8
–25.6
–25.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Jordan
2.0
2.3
2.5
3.3
4.5
2.3
–10.6
–9.6
–8.6
18.3
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Middle East and North Africa
1.8
2.0
2.5
6.7
11.8
10.6
–0.3
2.6
2.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Israel6
3.3
3.6
3.5
0.2
0.9
1.3
2.9
2.3
2.3
4.2
3.9
3.9
Maghreb7
5.6
3.2
3.4
5.3
6.7
6.0
–8.0
–6.6
–5.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mashreq8
3.9
4.8
5.0
20.8
18.8
12.6
–9.5
–7.2
–6.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, Oman, and Yemen. 
5Includes Afghanistan, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation.
6Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
7The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia. 
8The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
66
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
2017
2018
2019
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.7
3.1
3.8
11.0
8.6
8.5
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
0.0
1.4
2.3
18.2
13.4
13.5
1.1
0.9
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
0.8
1.9
2.3
16.5
12.4
13.5
2.8
2.0
1.0
16.5
. . .
. . .
Angola
–2.5
–0.1
3.1
29.8
20.5
15.8
–1.0
–2.1
–1.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Gabon
0.5
2.0
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.5
–4.9
–1.6
–0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Chad
–3.1
3.5
3.6
–0.9
2.1
2.6
–5.7
–4.2
–5.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Republic of Congo
–3.1
2.0
3.7
0.5
1.2
2.0
–12.9
9.1
12.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle-Income Countries5
3.1
2.7
3.3
5.1
4.7
4.9
–2.6
–3.4
–3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
1.3
0.8
1.4
5.3
4.8
5.3
–2.5
–3.2
–3.5
27.5
27.9
28.3
Ghana
8.4
6.3
7.6
12.4
9.5
8.0
–4.5
–4.1
–4.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Côte d’Ivoire 
7.8
7.4
7.0
0.8
1.7
2.0
–4.6
–4.6
–4.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Cameroon
3.5
3.8
4.4
0.6
1.0
1.1
–2.7
–3.2
–3.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Zambia
3.4
3.8
4.5
6.6
8.5
8.2
–3.9
–4.0
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Senegal
7.2
7.0
6.7
1.3
0.4
0.9
–7.3
–7.7
–7.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income Countries6
6.1
5.7
6.2
8.9
7.3
6.6
–6.3
–6.7
–7.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ethiopia
10.9
7.5
8.5
9.9
12.7
9.5
–8.1
–6.2
–6.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kenya
4.9
6.0
6.1
8.0
5.0
5.6
–6.3
–5.6
–5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tanzania
6.0
5.8
6.6
5.3
3.8
4.7
–2.8
–4.3
–5.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Uganda
4.8
5.9
6.1
5.6
3.8
4.2
–4.6
–6.9
–8.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Madagascar
4.2
5.0
5.4
8.3
7.8
7.2
–0.3
–2.2
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Democratic Republic of the Congo
3.4
3.8
4.1
41.5
23.0
13.5
–0.5
0.0
–1.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Sub-Saharan Africa Excluding  
South Sudan
2.8
3.1
3.8
10.4
8.3
8.2
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table  A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP. 
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles.
6Includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger, 
Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
67
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 
(Annual percent change; in international currency at purchasing power parity)
Average
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
World
2.4
4.0
3.0
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.1
2.0
2.4
2.5
2.5
2.4
Advanced Economies
1.1
2.5
1.1
0.7
0.9
1.6
1.7
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.1
United States
0.9
1.8
0.8
1.5
1.1
1.7
2.1
0.8
1.5
2.2
1.9
0.7
Euro Area1
1.0
1.8
1.3
–1.1
–0.5
1.2
1.7
1.6
2.3
1.8
1.8
1.3
Germany
0.9
4.2
3.7
0.5
0.3
1.8
0.6
1.3
2.1
1.8
1.8
1.2
France
0.8
1.5
1.7
–0.2
0.1
0.5
0.6
0.7
2.0
1.1
1.2
1.2
Italy
0.1
1.2
0.2
–3.2
–2.3
–0.3
0.9
1.1
1.6
0.9
1.1
0.7
Spain
1.3
–0.4
–1.4
–3.0
–1.3
1.7
3.7
3.2
3.1
2.8
2.3
1.8
Japan
0.4
4.2
–0.3
1.7
2.2
0.5
1.5
1.0
1.9
1.4
1.3
0.9
United Kingdom
1.2
0.9
0.8
0.8
1.4
2.2
1.5
1.0
1.1
0.7
0.9
1.2
Canada
1.0
1.9
2.1
0.6
1.3
1.7
0.1
0.3
1.8
0.9
1.1
0.7
Other Advanced Economies2
2.6
5.0
2.5
1.3
1.6
2.1
1.3
1.5
2.1
2.0
1.7
1.6
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
4.4
5.9
4.9
3.6
3.6
3.2
2.8
2.9
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.6
Commonwealth of Independent 
States
5.9
4.3
4.7
3.2
2.0
1.4
–2.5
0.0
1.7
1.8
2.1
1.9
Russia
5.7
4.5
5.0
3.6
1.7
0.6
–2.6
–0.3
1.5
1.7
1.8
1.4
CIS Excluding Russia
7.0
4.3
4.7
2.7
3.4
2.6
–1.7
1.0
2.7
2.7
3.1
3.5
Emerging and Developing Asia
6.9
8.5
6.7
5.9
5.9
5.8
5.8
5.4
5.5
5.5
5.3
5.2
China
9.6
10.1
9.0
7.4
7.3
6.7
6.4
6.1
6.3
6.1
5.7
5.5
India3
5.2
8.7
5.2
4.1
5.0
6.0
6.8
5.7
5.3
5.9
6.0
6.3
ASEAN-54
3.6
5.5
3.2
4.7
3.7
3.3
3.6
3.7
4.1
4.0
3.9
4.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
3.5
3.7
6.2
2.0
4.3
3.5
4.3
2.8
5.5
3.2
1.5
2.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
1.6
4.8
3.4
1.7
1.7
0.2
–0.9
–1.8
0.2
0.3
1.4
2.0
Brazil
2.1
6.5
3.0
1.0
2.1
–0.4
–4.3
–4.2
0.2
0.7
1.7
1.6
Mexico
0.2
3.8
2.4
2.4
0.2
1.7
2.2
1.8
1.0
1.2
1.6
2.1
Middle East, North Africa, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
1.9
2.3
3.9
0.6
0.0
–0.1
0.3
2.9
–0.5
0.4
0.7
1.1
Saudi Arabia
0.5
1.6
6.8
2.5
–0.1
1.1
3.3
–0.7
–3.3
0.2
0.4
0.3
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.7
4.3
2.4
1.5
2.5
2.5
0.6
–1.3
0.0
0.5
1.1
1.5
Nigeria
5.4
8.3
2.1
1.5
2.6
3.5
–0.1
–4.2
–1.9
–0.8
–0.5
–0.3
South Africa
2.3
1.6
1.8
0.7
1.0
0.3
–0.3
–1.0
–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
0.2
Memorandum
European Union
1.4
1.8
1.5
–0.6
0.1
1.6
2.0
1.7
2.4
1.9
1.9
1.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.7
5.0
3.5
1.6
3.7
3.8
2.3
1.2
2.4
2.4
3.0
3.2
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 
1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.
2Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3See country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
68
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
References
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Grif-
fith, and Peter Howitt. 2005. “Competition and Innovation: 
An Inverted-U Relationship.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
120 (2): 701–28.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Pat-
terson, and John van Reenen. 2017. “The Fall of the Labor 
Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” NBER Working 
Paper 23396, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Baker, Scott, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven Davis. 2016. “Mea-
suring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 131 (4): 1593–636.
Barro, Robert J., and Tao Jin. 2011. “On the Size Distri-
bution of Macroeconomic Disasters.” Econometrica 79 
(5): 1567–89.
Barro, Robert J., and Jose F. Ursua. 2008. “Macroeconomic 
Crises since 1870.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 39 
(1): 255–350.
Baumeister, Christiane, and James D. Hamilton. 2015. “Sign 
Restrictions, Structural Vector Autoregressions, and Useful 
Prior Information.” Econometrica 83 (5): 1963–99.
Becker, Torbjörn, and Paolo Mauro. 2006. “Output Drops and 
the Shocks That Matter.” IMF Working Paper 06/172, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Berge, Travis J., and Òscar Jordà. 2011. “Future Recession 
Risks: An Update.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Economic Letter 35.
Bluedorn, John C., Jörg Decressin, and Marco E. Terrones. 
2016. “Do Asset Price Drops Foreshadow Recessions?” Inter-
national Journal of Forecasting 32 (2): 518–26.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2018. “Measuring 
Geopolitical Risk.” Working Paper, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve Board, January.
Collier, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 2012. “Greening Africa? 
Technologies, Endowments and the Latecomer Effect.” Energy 
Economics 34: S75–S84.
Dargay, Joyce, and Dermot Gately. 1999. “Income’s 
Effect on Car and Vehicle Ownership, Worldwide: 
1960–2015.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and 
Practice 33 (2): 101–38.
Dargay, Joyce, Dermot Gately, and Martin Sommer. 2007. 
“Vehicle Ownership and Income Growth, Worldwide: 
1960–2030.” Energy Journal 28 (4): 143–170.
De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2017. “The Rise of Market 
Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 23687, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
———. 2018. “Global Market Power.” NBER Working 
Paper 24768, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
De Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski. 2012. “Markups and 
Firm-Level Export Status.” American Economic Review 102 
(6): 2437–71.
Díez, Federico, Daniel Leigh, and Suchanan Tambunlertchai. 
2018. “Global Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Impli-
cations.” IMF Working Paper 18/137, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2018. “Petroleum, 
Natural Gas, and Coal Still Dominate US Energy Consump-
tion.” EIA, Washington, DC. Accessed August 23.
Ergungor, O. Emre. 2016. “Recession Probabilities.” Economic 
Commentary 2016–09.
Estrella, Arturo, and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1998. “Predicting US 
Recessions: Financial Variables as Leading Indicators.” Review 
of Economics and Statistics 80 (1): 45–61.
Farrell, M. J. 1954. “The Demand for Motor-Cars in the United 
States.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 117 (2): 171–201.
Fell, Michael James. 2017. “Energy Services: A Concep-
tual Review.” Energy Research and Social Science 27 
(May): 129–40.
Gertler, Paul J., Orie Shelef, Catherine D. Wolfram, and Alan 
Fuchs. 2016. “The Demand for Energy-Using Assets among 
the World’s Rising Middle Classes.” American Economic 
Review 106 (6): 1366–401.
Gobat, Jeanne, and Kristina Kostial. 2016. “Syria’s Conflict 
Economy.” IMF Working Paper 16/123, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC.
Goldman Sachs. 2015. “The Low Carbon Economy.” Goldman 
Sachs Equity Research. https://​www​.goldmansachs​.com/​
insights/​pages/​new​-energy​-landscape​-folder/​report​-the​-low​
-carbon​-economy/​report​.pdf. Accessed December 10, 2017.
Greening, Lorna A., David L. Greene, and Carmen Difiglio. 
2000. “Energy Efficiency and Consumption—The Rebound 
Effect—A Survey.” Energy Policy 28 (6–7): 389–401.
Gruss, Bertrand. 2014. “After the Boom—Commodity Prices 
and Economic Growth in Latin America and the Carib-
bean.” IMF Working Paper 14/154, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. “Declining 
Competition and Investment in the US.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 23583, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some 
Countries Produce So Much More Output per Worker Than 
Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 83–116.
Hamilton, James D. 2009. “Understanding Crude Oil Prices.” 
Energy Journal 30 (2): 179–206.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2014. 
“Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report.” Contribution 
of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Geneva: IPCC.
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). 2017. 
Electricity Storage and Renewables: Costs and Markets to 2030. 
Abu Dhabi: IRENA. http://​www​.irena​.org/​publications/​2017/​
Oct/​Electricity​-storage​-and​-renewables​-costs​-and​-markets. 
Accessed December 10.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
69
CHAPTER 1 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Jevons, William Stanley. 1865. The Coal Question: An 
Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation, and the 
Probable Exhaustion of the Coal-Mines. London and New 
York: Macmillan.
Levanon, Gad. 2011. “Forecasting Recession and Slow-Down 
Probabilities with Markov Switching Probabilities as 
Right-Hand-Side Variables.” Business Economics 46 (2): 99–110.
Liu, Weiling, and Emanuel Moench. 2014. “What Predicts US 
Recessions?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report 
691, September.
Medlock, Kenneth B., and Ronald Soligo. 2001. “Economic 
Development and End-Use Energy Demand.” Energy Journal 
22 (2): 77–105.
Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert J. Barro, and José Ursua. 
2013. “Crises and Recoveries in an Empirical Model of Con-
sumption Disasters.” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
nomics 5 (3): 35–74.
Ng, Serena. 2014. “Boosting Recessions. Canadian Journal of 
Economics/Revue canadienne d’économique 47 (1): 1–34.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2014. “Long-Term Baseline Projections.” 95 
(Edition 2014). OECD Economic Outlook: Statistics and 
Projections (database). https://​doi​.org/​10​.1787/​eo​-data​-en.
Silva, J. M. C. Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of 
Gravity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 641–58.
Sorrell, Steve. 2009. “Jevons’ Paradox Revisited: The Evidence 
for Backfire from Improved Energy Efficiency.” Energy Policy 
37 (4): 1456–69.
Stern, Nicholas. 2006. The Economics of Climate Change: The 
Stern Review. London: HM Treasury.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2003. “Forecasting 
Output and Inflation: The Role of Asset Prices.” Journal of 
Economic Literature 41 (3): 788–829.
United Nations (UN). 2017. “World Population Prospects: The 
2017 Revision.” DVD edition. United Nations, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York.
van Benthem, Arthur A. 2015. “Energy Leapfrogging.” Journal 
of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 2 
(1): 93–132.
Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef, and Paul J. Gertler. 2012. 
“How Will Energy Demand Develop in the Developing 
World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26 (1): 119–38.
World Bank (WB). 2017. The Toll of War: The Economic and 
Social Consequences of the Conflict in Syria. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.
Zhang, Sufang, Philip Andrews-Speed, Xiaoli Zhao, and 
Yongxiu He. 2013. “Interactions between Renewable Energy 
Policy and Renewable Energy Industrial Policy: A Critical 
Analysis of China’s Policy Approach to Renewable Energies.” 
Energy Policy 62 (November): 342–53.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
This page intentionally left blank 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
71
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
This chapter takes stock of the global economic recovery a 
decade after the 2008 financial crisis. Output losses after 
the crisis appear to be persistent, irrespective of whether 
a country suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08. Sluggish 
investment was a key channel through which these losses 
registered, accompanied by long-lasting capital and total 
factor productivity shortfalls relative to precrisis trends. 
Policy choices preceding the crisis and in its immedi-
ate aftermath influenced postcrisis variation in output. 
Underscoring the importance of macroprudential policies 
and effective supervision, countries with greater finan-
cial vulnerabilities in the precrisis years suffered larger 
output losses after the crisis. Countries with stronger 
precrisis fiscal positions and those with more flexible 
exchange rate regimes experienced smaller losses. Unprec-
edented and exceptional policy actions taken after the 
crisis helped mitigate countries’ postcrisis output losses.
Introduction
Over the weekend of September 13–14, 2008, two 
large US financial institutions teetered close to failure 
while a third urgently sought a buyer to avoid that same 
fate. By Sunday night that weekend, Merrill Lynch was 
acquired by Bank of America. Insurance giant AIG still 
desperately pursued credit lines, just days away from a 
ratings downgrade that looked likely to push it over the 
edge. And in the early hours of Monday, September 15, 
2008, the investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for 
bankruptcy, brought down largely by its exposure to a 
US housing market in deep decline.
The post-Lehman scramble for liquidity in global 
markets heralded the most acute phase of the financial 
turmoil that, by then, had been brewing in the United 
States and Europe close to 18 months.1 The ensu-
The authors of this chapter are Wenjie Chen, Mico Mrkaic, 
and Malhar Nabar (lead), with contributions from Deniz Igan, 
Christopher Johns, and Yuan Zeng, and supported by Luisa Calixto, 
Meron Haile, and Benjamin Hilgenstock.
1Identifying a precise starting point for the timeline—the “patient 
zero” of the epidemic—is difficult. This chapter takes the April 
2007 collapse of subprime mortgage lender New Century Finan-
cial as the first major distress sign following the mid-2006 turn in 
the US housing market. Key markers of financial stress over the 
subsequent 18 months include the suspension of redemptions from 
ing panic—marked by distressed asset sales, deposit 
withdrawals from banks and money market funds, 
and the freezing of credit—triggered a collapse in 
cross-border trade and led to the worst global recession 
in seven decades.
Ten years later, the sequence of aftershocks and 
policy responses that followed the Lehman bankruptcy 
has led to a world economy in which the median 
general government debt-GDP ratio stands at 52 per-
cent, up from 36 percent before the crisis; central bank 
balance sheets, particularly in advanced economies, 
are several multiples of the size they were before the 
crisis; and emerging market and developing econo-
mies now account for 60 percent of global GDP in 
purchasing-power-parity terms (compared with 44 per-
cent in the decade before the crisis), reflecting, in part, 
a weak recovery in advanced economies.
Against this backdrop, this chapter takes stock of the 
global economic recovery 10 years after the financial 
meltdown of 2008 and the policy lessons that can help 
prepare for the next downturn. Specifically, the chapter 
addresses the following questions:
•	 Compared with precrisis trends, how did output 
evolve across countries in the aftermath of the crisis?
•	 How did the associated components—capital, labor 
inputs, total factor productivity (TFP)—advance 
after the crisis? What does this decomposition show 
about why it took a long time for output in many 
economies to return to its precrisis level?
•	 Even as the world economy experienced its worst 
slump in seven decades, postcrisis macroeconomic 
performance varied across countries. What accounts 
for this variation? Which policies and structural attri-
butes helped limit the damage and facilitate recovery?
The chapter uses a sample of 180 countries—
covering advanced, emerging market, and low-income 
mortgage-related hedge funds associated with Bear Sterns (June 
2007) and BNP Paribas (August 2007); the United Kingdom’s first 
bank run since the 19th century, on Northern Rock (September 
2007); the failure of mortgage lender Countrywide Financial (Jan-
uary 2008); JPMorgan’s acquisition of Bear Sterns with US Federal 
Reserve support (March 2008); and the US government’s takeover of 
mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (September 2008).
THE GLOBAL ECONOMIC RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER 
THE 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
2
CHAPTER
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
72
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
developing economies—to quantify output losses, 
explore the precrisis correlates of postcrisis variation 
in output performance, and examine whether actions 
taken in the immediate aftermath of the crisis are 
associated with limiting output losses over the medium 
term (2015–17). Previous World Economic Outlook 
(WEO) analysis (October 2009) examines output per-
formance after an earlier set of financial crises during 
1970–2002. The current chapter builds on that by 
zeroing in on the aftermath of the 2008 crisis.
An important consideration when comparing pre- 
and postcrisis output patterns is the extent to which 
precrisis growth was fueled by excessive credit growth 
and unsustainable investment that had to be worked off. 
A related issue is whether structural change unrelated 
to the crisis may have affected trend growth over time 
in some countries (specifically, whether some coun-
tries experienced temporarily elevated potential growth 
rates before the crisis that subsequently reverted to the 
long-term average). As discussed in the next section, the 
analysis attempts to adjust precrisis trends for the influ-
ence of factors, such as credit growth, that may affect the 
path of output beyond the influence of typical demand 
fluctuations. Even with this correction, for some coun-
tries, the output deviations from precrisis trends may still 
capture the effect of slow-moving structural changes in 
trend growth rates over time. Nonetheless, the chapter’s 
cross-country analysis—comparing countries that expe-
rienced banking crises in 2007–08 with those that did 
not, as well as across income levels—can help identify 
precrisis drivers of postcrisis output deviations.
Among the main findings of the analysis are that 
output losses appear to be persistent and not restricted 
to countries that suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08. 
Sluggish investment appears to be a key channel 
through which these losses registered, with associated 
long-lasting capital and TFP shortfalls relative to their 
precrisis trends. Consistent with these TFP shortfalls, 
research and development expenditure and technol-
ogy adoption appear to have increased more slowly 
in countries that suffered larger output losses. The 
findings are similar to those of recent papers showing 
that output tends to stay below previous trends after 
crises and recessions (for example Cerra and Saxena 
2008, 2017; Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers 2015; 
and Aslam and others, forthcoming).
The analysis finds that policy choices leading up to 
the crisis and in its immediate aftermath influenced 
postcrisis variations in output performance. These can 
be grouped into three categories.
•	 Financial: Underscoring the importance of macro­
prudential policies and effective supervision, the 
analysis finds that countries in which financial 
vulnerabilities had accumulated to a larger degree 
in the precrisis years suffered greater output losses 
after the crisis. In the years running up to the crisis, 
countries with larger excess current account deficits 
and those with more rapid credit growth found 
that constraints bound relatively more strongly 
when financial conditions tightened after the crisis. 
Stricter banking regulation (proxied by an index of 
restrictions on certain aspects of bank activity) in 
the precrisis years is associated with a lower proba-
bility of a banking crisis in 2007–08.
•	 Policy constraints and frameworks: The evidence 
suggests that countries with stronger precrisis fiscal 
positions experienced smaller output losses in the 
aftermath. The analysis also finds that flexible 
exchange rate regimes helped lessen GDP damages.
•	 Postcrisis actions: Several countries took unprece-
dented and exceptional policy actions to support 
their economies after the 2008 financial meltdown. 
The chapter finds that these actions (specifically, 
quasi-fiscal measures to support the financial sector, 
including guarantees and capital injections) helped 
temper postcrisis output losses.
Some of these factors appear to be particularly 
relevant for the euro area. The 2008 financial crisis 
exposed thin buffers in some member economies and 
gaps in the architecture of the currency union. The 
interaction of domestic and area-level factors exacer-
bated adjustment difficulties in the euro area follow-
ing the 2008 shock and gave rise to an intensifying 
sovereign debt crisis during 2010–12, which spurred 
efforts to strengthen the architecture of the currency 
union (IMF 2012, 2013a; Allard and others 2013; 
Goyal and others 2013; Berger, Dell’Ariccia, and 
Obstfeld 2018). In contrast to the 2009 shock, euro 
area countries hit by the sovereign crisis were not in 
a position to use expansionary fiscal policy to counter 
the “sudden stop.” Rather, they needed to reduce 
their fiscal deficits to regain creditors’ confidence 
and contain sovereign borrowing costs. In the event, 
the contractionary effect of this fiscal tightening was 
larger than anticipated at the time (Blanchard and 
Leigh 2013; IMF 2013b, 2015).
The next section quantifies the losses in output and 
discusses the channels through which they occurred. 
The subsequent section examines the policy and 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
73
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
structural attributes that, in part, account for variation 
in postcrisis output. The main takeaways are summa-
rized in the conclusion.
Persistent Post–Global Financial Crisis 
Deviations in Output
Following the global financial meltdown in late 
2008, 91 economies, representing two-thirds of global 
GDP in purchasing-power-parity terms, experienced 
a decline in output in 2009. By way of comparison, 
during the 1982 global recession, 48 economies, 
accounting for 46 percent of world GDP, registered 
output declines compared with the previous year.
To get a sense of the long-lasting changes in output 
after the 2008 crisis, this chapter measures postcrisis 
deviations of output from the level that would have 
prevailed had output followed its pre‑2009 trend 
growth rate (Ball 2014). Considering that generally 
accommodative financial conditions likely contrib-
uted to unsustainable growth in many countries prior 
to 2008, it is important to adjust for these influ-
ences when estimating an underlying trend path for 
output as the benchmark for comparison (Online 
Annex 2.2.B).2,3 Nevertheless, despite this adjustment, 
in some cases, the measured output deviations may 
include country-specific changes in trend growth rates 
that are unrelated to the crisis. Consider the world’s two 
largest economies, for example. In the United States, a 
slowdown in total productivity growth that predates the 
2008 crisis has contributed to lower potential growth 
over time (Fernald 2015; Adler and others 2017). 
China’s economy has experienced major structural shifts 
that span the 2008 crisis and an associated transition 
to slower, albeit still-robust, growth—an example 
of a more general phenomenon of changes in trend 
growth rates documented by Pritchett and Summers 
(2013). Given these developments (and possibly similar 
underlying shifts over this period in trend growth rates 
in other countries), comparisons of current GDP with 
precrisis outcomes must be careful to avoid attributing 
all of the observed changes to the 2008 crisis.4
2All annexes are available online at www.imf.org/en/Publications/
WEO.
3Online Annex 2.2.B discusses the differences between the chap-
ter’s approach and the standard filtering approach used for separating 
output into trend and business cycle components.
4For the United States, for example, there is a range of estimates 
regarding the postcrisis output loss due to the 2008 financial crisis 
versus those related to changes in potential output growth already 
underway prior to the crisis (see CBO 2014; Hall 2014; and 
Barnichon, Matthes, and Ziegenbein 2018).
The post-2008 output deviations exhibit strong 
persistence over time (Figure 2.1).5 A second note-
worthy aspect is that economies with larger output 
and employment losses in the initial aftermath of the 
crisis registered greater increases in income inequality 
compared with their precrisis average (Figure 2.2).6 
These developments help shed light on the lingering 
sense of subpar economic performance in many econ-
omies and concerns about a “new mediocre” (Lagarde 
2014, 2016). They may also hold clues to the disen-
chantment with existing institutions and establishment 
political parties, and the growing appeal of protection-
ism (Lipton 2018). 
5The correlation coefficient between GDP deviations for 2011–13 
and 2015–17 is about 0.90. As shown in Online Annex Figure 2.2.4, 
the output deviations close to a decade after the 2008 crisis are more 
skewed toward losses than those registered at a similar interval after 
the 1982 global recession.
6Employment losses are measured as the gap between the number 
of employed workers and the number consistent with employment 
growing at the same rate during the postcrisis period as the economi-
cally active cohort between the ages of 15 and 65 (Schanzenbach and 
others 2017; see Online Annex 2.2.B).
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: GDP deviations are average percent deviations from precrisis trend.
Postcrisis performance is persistent, with a correlation coefﬁcient between GDP 
deviations for 2011–13 and 2015–17 of about 0.90.
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
2015–17
2011–13
Figure 2.1.  Correlation of GDP Deviations between Periods
(Percent)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
74
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Output Remains below Precrisis Trend in More than 
60 Percent of Economies
The deviations from pre-2009 trends are estimated 
for two broad samples of economies: those that experi-
enced banking crises in 2007–08 (as defined in Laeven 
and Valencia 2013) and all other economies.7 Accord-
ing to the Laeven-Valencia definition, there were bank-
ing crises in 24 countries during 2007–08, 18 of which 
were in advanced economies (see Online Annex 2.2.A 
7The Laeven-Valencia (2013) definition of a banking crisis is based 
on two criteria: significant financial distress (including bank runs 
and liquidations) and significant government intervention in the 
banking system (including recapitalization, liability guarantees, and 
nationalization).
for the list). Figure 2.3 summarizes the distribution of 
postcrisis output deviations from precrisis trends when 
deviations are averaged over 2015–17. 
Among the 24 economies in the banking crisis 
group, about 85 percent still show negative devi-
ations from the pre-2009 trend a decade after the 
2008 meltdown. In light of earlier evidence (see, 
for example, Abiad and others 2009; Chapter 4 of 
the April 2009 WEO; and Blanchard, Cerutti, and 
Summers 2015), it is not surprising that economies 
in the banking crisis group suffered persistent losses 
thereafter. As Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers 
(2015) show, recessions associated with financial 
crises are more likely to lead to persistent shortfalls 
in output relative to precrisis trends. Less credit 
intermediation—from a combination of supply and 
demand factors—is a significant channel (Bernanke 
2018). On the supply side, impaired financial systems 
cannot intermediate credit to the same extent as 
before the crash, and postcrisis regulatory tightening 
can also affect loan origination. In parallel with the 
supply disruptions, several factors may have held back 
Sources: Standardized World Income Inequality Database (Solt 2016); and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: The Gini coefﬁcient is based on income before taxes and transfers and 
ranges from 0 to 100. The change in Gini coefﬁcient is calculated as the difference 
between the averages during 2005–08 and 2014–15. Movement from left to right 
on the x-axis indicates less negative/more positive average deviations from 
precrisis trend in 2011–13.
Economies with larger output and employment losses in the initial aftermath of the 
crisis registered greater increases in income inequality compared with the 
precrisis average.
–8
–6
–4
–2
4
2
0
6
8
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
Average change in Gini coefﬁcient
Percent deviations from precrisis trend
Figure 2.2.  Postcrisis Change in Inequality
1. Output Deviations
–8
–6
–4
–2
4
2
0
6
8
–20
–10
0
10
20
Average change in Gini coefﬁcient
Percent deviations from precrisis trend
2. Employment Deviations
Banking crisis
No banking crisis
Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17. 
See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises country list.
Output losses are persistent for a variety of economies, not just those that suffered 
a systemic banking crisis in 2007–08.
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
Figure 2.3.  Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend, 
2015–17
(Kernel density)
0.00
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
75
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
credit demand. These include weak growth expec-
tations, impaired corporate and household balance 
sheets weighing on collateral quality, and an impera-
tive to rebuild net worth.
However, Figure 2.3 shows the persistence of output 
losses relative to precrisis trends for several econo-
mies, not just those that suffered a banking crisis in 
2007–08 (consistent with Cerra and Saxena 2017 and 
Aslam and others, forthcoming, who find persistent 
losses associated with most recessions, not just those 
associated with financial crises). In the group without 
a banking crisis in 2007–08, output remains below 
precrisis trends in about 60 percent of economies. A 
possible channel—discussed later in the chapter—that 
affected this group is weaker external demand from 
trading partners that suffered banking crises, which 
contributed to lower investment and associated capital 
shortfalls (also see Candelon and others 2018).
Grouping the sample by advanced economies, 
emerging markets, and low-income developing coun-
tries shows that output deviations tend to be large 
across all groups (Figure 2.4). Output deviations are 
relatively more balanced across gains and losses for 
noncommodity-exporting (diversified) low-income 
developing countries and emerging market economies 
than for the other two groups. More generally, the 
greater variability in output deviations across emerging 
markets and low-income developing countries com-
pared with advanced economies may reflect the variety 
of forces acting on their growth processes, including 
commodity price developments, export links to China, 
and receipt of outward investment from China (see 
also Aslam and others, forthcoming).
Proximate Causes: Sluggish Investment, Capital, and 
Total Factor Productivity Shortfalls
The persistence of output deviations suggests 
supply-side shifts in the factors of production. As 
shown in Online Annex Figure 2.2.3, deviations in 
output per worker trace similar patterns to deviations 
in aggregate output, indicating that changes in labor 
input cannot account for the bulk of the observed 
output deviations.8 This similarity suggests shifts in 
other factors of production associated, for instance, 
8Nevertheless, as noted in Box 2.1, postcrisis economic perfor-
mance appears to have had an impact on migration and fertility 
decisions, with attendant implications for future labor input.
with weaker aggregate investment, as documented in 
Chapter 4 of the April 2015 WEO.9
Investment shortfalls may have resulted from a 
lack of access to credit after the crisis, or from weak 
expectations of future growth and profitability (the 
latter view reprises the 1930s notion of secular 
stagnation—see Summers 2016 for a discussion; see 
also Kozlowski, Veldkamp, and Venkateswaran 2017). 
A similar calculation for output, as described earlier in 
this chapter, suggests shortfalls in investment relative 
to precrisis trends. Figure 2.5 shows the average across 
all economies of deviations relative to precrisis trends. 
By 2017, on average, investment was about 25 percent 
below precrisis trend. 
9An important exception is China, where the investment share 
of GDP rose from below 40 percent in precrisis years to almost 
50 percent after the crisis, driven by credit-fueled expansion of 
infrastructure, residential and commercial real estate, and corporate 
capital expenditure.
AEs
LIDC commodity exporters
EMs
LIDC noncommodity exporters
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17. 
AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; LIDC = low-income 
developing country. See Online Annex 2.1 for country groupings.
Postcrisis output deviations tend to be large across advanced economies, 
emerging markets, and low-income developing countries, with relatively more 
balanced gains and losses for noncommodity-exporting low-income developing 
countries and emerging markets than for the other two groups.
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
40
20
30
Figure 2.4.  Postcrisis Output Deviations from Precrisis Trend 
by Country Group, 2015–17
(Kernel density)
0.00
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
76
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Two important consequences of sluggish invest-
ment that may hold clues to why the recovery 
appears to have been so slow, are shortfalls in the 
capital stock and, to the extent technology is embed-
ded in machinery, slower technology adoption. A 
useful way to see this is to decompose the deviations 
in output per worker from precrisis trends into devi-
ations in capital stock per worker and residual TFP 
deviations. A caveat here is that, even though TFP, in 
principle, reflects both technology and the efficiency 
of combining inputs, in practice it also reflects 
measurement error in the factors of production 
and changes in capacity utilization. Evidence from 
standard growth accounting techniques (described 
in Online Annex 2.2.B and summarized in Fig-
ure 2.6) suggests that there are large capital shortfalls 
relative to precrisis trends. Close to 80 percent of 
economies that suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08 
experienced shortfalls in capital relative to precrisis 
trends. Among economies without a banking crisis in 
2007–08, capital stocks of about 65 percent appear 
to be lower than they would be if capital accumu-
lation had followed the extrapolated precrisis trend 
path.10 At the sectoral level, these capital shortfalls 
are widespread, extending beyond the construction 
sector, which underwent a needed correction after the 
precrisis boom (Online Annex Figure 2.2.5). 
A second possible consequence of sluggish investment 
is slow technology adoption—to the extent that new 
technologies are embodied in equipment. The growth 
accounting approach attributes a significant role to the 
residual (TFP) component of deviations from precri-
sis trend in output per worker once the influence of 
deviations in capital per worker is taken into account 
(Figure 2.7). These estimated deviations in TFP from 
precrisis trends are consistent with evidence of wide-
spread postcrisis deceleration in TFP growth discussed in 
Adler and others (2017). As reported in Table 2.1, the 
median share of output per worker deviation accounted 
for by TFP deviation is close to 80 percent for both 
groups of economies. While the evidence points to the 
10Online Annex 2.2.B shows that the distributions of capital stock 
deviations are not distinguishable across the two groups in a statisti-
cal sense, while those of output and TFP are.
Log investment
Trend log investment
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: 2008 log investment normalized to zero. 
Investment dropped below precrisis trend during the crisis and deviated further in 
2012. By 2017, on average, investment was about 25 percent below precrisis 
trend.
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
2000
17
Figure 2.5.  Postcrisis Investment Deviations from Precrisis 
Trend: Mean Trajectory
(Percent)
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–80
40
Banking crisis
No banking crisis
Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17. 
See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises country list.
Close to 80 percent of economies that suffered a banking crisis in 2007–08 
experienced shortfalls in capital relative to precrisis trend. Among economies that 
did not suffer a banking crisis in 2007–08, about 65 percent appear to be 
operating with capital stocks below precrisis trend.
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
40
20
30
Figure 2.6.  Postcrisis Capital Stock Deviations from Precrisis 
Trend, 2015–17
(Kernel density)
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.03
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
77
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
importance of TFP deviations in accounting for output 
per worker deviations, the cross-country data do not 
permit a further separation of TFP deviations into those 
due to sluggish investment from those related to worsen-
ing efficiency or other factors unrelated to investment. 
Slower Technology Adoption
The estimates of TFP deviation suggest that the 
pace of technology adoption (and associated pace of 
upgrading of capital stock with embodied technology) 
may have slowed following the crisis. However, as 
noted above, TFP is an imperfect proxy for the pace of 
technology adoption. A clearer picture emerges from 
examining variables directly associated with innovation 
and technology adoption. Cross-country evidence on 
a key innovation input—research and development 
spending—suggests that countries with above‑median 
output losses registered slower increases in research and 
development shares of GDP. This is especially evident 
among advanced economies (Figure 2.8).
Further confirmation of slower innovation and 
technology adoption among countries hit harder by the 
crisis is seen through the example of industrial robots—
an observable and much-discussed class of automation 
technology expected to replace human labor in an 
increasing range of tasks. (Box 2.2 examines the postcri-
sis employment impact of industrial robots.)11  
An inspection of the industrial robot data (Figure 2.9) 
indicates that the average change in density—measured 
as robot shipments per thousand hours worked—during 
the postcrisis period was higher in countries that had 
smaller postcrisis losses in output. 
As with the general measure of innovation (research 
and development expenditure), the gap in changes in 
robot density between high- and low-output-loss coun-
tries is higher among advanced economies than among 
emerging markets. As part of the generalized slower 
investment in the postcrisis period, robot adoption 
may have been affected more negatively in countries 
hit harder by the crisis.12 This “suppressed-investment” 
11As described in Online Annex 2.3.A, data from the International 
Federation of Robotics, which compiles information on worldwide 
shipment of robots, are used to examine the postcrisis diffusion of 
automation technology. The data are reported at the level of indus-
tries for 75 countries extending back to 2004 (for some countries, 
data are available going back to 1993).
12While there is possibly an element of reverse causality in these 
correlations (lower robot investment contributed to higher output 
loss), empirically, the magnitude of robot investment compared with 
manufacturing output in the United States, for example, suggests 
that the effect of robot investment on manufacturing—as well as 
aggregate—output is small. Based on US Bureau of Economic 
Analysis data, the International Federation of Robotics (the data 
source for robots used in the analysis) reports that the value of 
industrial robot shipments to the United States as a share of US 
gross manufacturing output ranged between 0.016 percent in 2002 
and 0.027 percent in 2016.
Banking crisis
No banking crisis
Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Distribution of average percent deviations from precrisis trend, 2015–17.
TFP = total factor productivity. See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises 
country list.
Estimated deviations in TFP from precrisis trend are consistent with the evidence 
of a widespread postcrisis deceleration in TFP growth. These TFP deviations 
account for close to 80 percent of output per worker deviations for both groups of 
economies, that is, those that suffered banking crises in 2007–08 and those that 
did not.
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
40
20
30
Figure 2.7.  Postcrisis Total Factor Productivity Deviations 
from Precrisis Trend, 2015–17
(Kernel density)
0.00
0.06
0.04
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.03
Table 2.1. Total Factor Productivity Deviations 
Account for a Large Share of GDP per Worker 
Deviations
(Percent)
Median Share of GDP Deviation Accounted for by Deviation  
in GDP per Worker, 2015–17
Countries without banking crisis in 2007–08
70.4
2007–08 banking crisis countries
80.5
Median Share of GDP per Worker Deviation Accounted for  
by Total Factor Productivity, 2015–17
Countries without banking crisis in 2007–08
79.3
2007–08 banking crisis countries
78.2
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex Table 2.2.1 for banking crises country list.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
78
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
effect likely more than offset any tendency to automate 
rather than rehire unemployed workers.13
Policy Frameworks, Measures, and Postcrisis 
Output Performance
A large number of economies registered output losses 
relative to precrisis trends, but the postcrisis experience 
varied by individual country. In part, this variation may 
reflect differences in the nature of the shock at the level 
of individual countries. Some suffered severe banking 
crises as part of the global financial panic, while others 
were affected mostly through their trade and financial 
links to the first set of countries. But initial conditions 
13Analysis at the industry-country level (Online Annex 2.3.B) 
corroborates this finding. Industries in advanced economies that 
suffered relatively bigger investment and TFP losses during the crisis 
experienced slower robot diffusion.
in the buildup to the meltdown of 2008, policy choices 
in the immediate aftermath of the crisis, and structural 
aspects may have also helped shape postcrisis variation 
in output performance—in the first instance, by influ-
encing countries’ vulnerability to the disruptive forces 
the financial meltdown of 2008 unleashed, and subse-
quently, by affecting the damage they experienced and 
their ability to recover.
Identifying why economies’ responses differed 
can provide important lessons for the most effective 
policy responses. The exercise can also help shed light 
on actions that may help limit damage and facilitate 
recovery in future downturns.
Empirical Approach
The previous section noted the persistence of 
output losses, with a strong correlation between GDP 
Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The bars depict the difference in averages between 2014–16 and 2011–13. 
The bar chart shows the interquartile range, and lines display lesser of the 
maximum (minimum) and +/– 1.5 times the upper (lower) quartile range. High 
(low) loss indicates above (below) median losses in output relative to precrisis 
trend as calculated in Online Annex 2.2.B. 
Countries with above-median output losses registered slower increases in 
research and development expenditure shares of GDP. This was especially evident 
among advanced economies.
Figure 2.8.  Changes in Research and Development 
Expenditure, by Output Losses and Country Groups  
(Percent of GDP)
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
–0.3
0.3
High loss
Low loss
High loss
Low loss
Advanced economies
Emerging markets
Sources: International Federation of Robotics; World Input-Output Database; and 
IMF staff calculations.
Note: Robot density is deﬁned as robot shipment/1,000 hours worked. The bar 
chart shows the interquartile range, and lines display lesser of the maximum 
(minimum) and +/– 1.5 times the upper (lower) quartile range. High (low) loss 
indicates above (below) median losses in output relative to precrisis trend as 
calculated in Online Annex 2.2.B.
+denotes differences in medians between high- and low-output loss samples 
among advanced economies statistically signiﬁcant at 10 percent. See Online 
Annex 2.3 and Online Annex Table 2.3.2 for further details on data and estimation.
The gap in changes in robot density between high and low loss countries is higher 
among advanced economies than among emerging markets.
Figure 2.9.  Average Change in Robot Density, by Output 
Losses and Country Groups, 2010–14
(Robot shipment per 1,000 hours worked)
High loss+
Low loss+
High loss
Low loss
Advanced economies
Emerging markets
–0.01
–0.02
0.04
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
79
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
deviations for 2011–13 and 2015–17. Understanding 
the sources of variation in output performance during 
2011–13 can therefore provide insight into output 
patterns observed during 2015–17.
As explained in Online Annex 2.2.C, the empirical 
approach estimates cross-sectional regressions similar 
to those of other studies that have examined various 
aspects of cross-country variation in the impact of 
the global financial crisis (Blanchard, Faruqee, and 
Das 2010; Claessens and others 2010; Lane and 
Milesi-Ferretti 2010, 2014; Giannone, Lenza, and 
Reichlin 2011; Berkmen and others 2012; Tsangarides 
2012; Cerra, Panizza, and Saxena 2013). The approach 
builds on Chapter 4 of the October 2009 WEO, 
which studies the determinants of medium-term 
output losses following financial crises in advanced, 
emerging market, and developing economies during 
1970–2002 (see also Abiad and others 2009).
The Nature of the Shock Matters
Although the 2008 financial crisis originated in the 
United States and Europe, it had a global macroeco-
nomic impact. The origins of the crisis are by now 
well documented.14 Four aspects are common to most 
accounts. First, abundant global liquidity enabled a 
lending boom in the United States, United Kingdom, 
euro area, and central and eastern Europe before 2008. 
As discussed in Chapter 2 of the October 2018 Global 
Financial Stability Report (GFSR), the credit expansion 
was intermediated through complex links between 
traditional banks and nonbank financial institutions 
beyond the regulatory perimeter. Second, as a wave 
of US adjustable rate mortgages began to reset in 
2006–07 and subprime borrowers found it difficult to 
stay current on their loans or refinance them, the US 
housing market began to turn in an unprecedented, 
synchronized manner across many states. Third, unlike 
the late-1990s US subprime mortgage collapse, which 
affected mostly loan originators, the financial losses 
were amplified in 2007–08 by the poorly monitored 
practice of securitizing subprime loans into complex 
financial products that became impossible to price in 
a declining market. Fourth, tightening global finan-
cial conditions during 2007–08 hastened the end of 
the lending boom in the euro area, United Kingdom, 
14See, for example, Obstfeld and Rogoff 2009; Sorkin 2009; Lewis 
2010; Lowenstein 2010; Rajan 2010; Blinder 2013; Paulson 2013; 
Geithner 2014; Bernanke 2015; Bayoumi 2017; and Toloui 2018.
and central and eastern Europe, triggering a wave 
of defaults by overextended property developers and 
households unable to roll over their loans, which 
further strained the balance sheets of European banks 
already caught in the web of losses on US subprime 
mortgage exposures. In the euro area, a debilitating 
nexus soon emerged between banks and sovereigns: 
taxpayer bailouts and guarantees of distressed banks 
severely undermined public debt sustainability in some 
countries; in others, weak fiscal positions and widening 
government spreads critically compromised banks with 
large holdings of sovereign securities.
For economies that experienced banking crises 
in 2007–08, the loss of intermediation services and 
diminished credit volumes, not surprisingly, had a 
far-reaching impact on activity. The associated corpo-
rate failures and employment losses undermined the 
ability of borrowers to service their loans, spiraled back 
to sap bank balance sheets, forced banks to retrench 
credit further, and amplified the output decline.15 
The analysis suggests that, on average, countries that 
experienced banking crises suffered a 4 percentage 
point higher output loss during 2011–13 relative to 
the precrisis trend than those that did not experience 
banking crises in 2007–08. (Online Annex Table 2.2.5; 
Table 2.2 summarizes the direction of impacts for the 
various drivers.) 
Macroeconomic Imbalances and Financial Factors
Regardless of whether a country suffered a banking 
crisis in 2007–08, tighter financial conditions after the 
crisis brought out the central role of precrisis financial 
vulnerabilities in influencing postcrisis output perfor-
mance. This influence is reflected, at a general level, in 
the variation of output performance as a function of 
initial macroeconomic and financial imbalances. It is 
also seen in the role played by specific factors, such as 
the pace of precrisis credit growth.
A useful summary statistic of macroeconomic imbal-
ances is the gap between the actual current account 
balance and its level consistent with medium-term 
fundamentals. This gap can be thought of as a 
real-time estimate of imbalances resulting from private 
15Gertler and Gilchrist (2018) examine the relative contribu-
tions of banking disruption and household balance sheets to the 
contraction of US employment during the Great Recession. They 
find that banking disruption is key to the aggregate decline in US 
employment, while household balance sheet strength is relatively 
more important for explaining regional variation.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
80
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
and public saving-investment disparities (see Lee and 
others 2008; and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2010). The 
results suggest that countries with current account 
balances weaker than the level consistent with funda-
mentals entering the crisis suffered bigger output losses 
relative to precrisis trends (Online Annex Table 2.2.5; 
Table 2.2). This may, in part, reflect the more severe 
adjustment forced on countries with higher precrisis 
excess deficits.
In addition, countries more dependent on credit 
(those with faster credit growth in the buildup to 
the crisis) suffered larger losses in an environment of 
tighter financial conditions.
Labor Market Structure
Some economies are more flexible than others when 
it comes to relocating workers in the face of shocks. The 
strength of employment protection legislation—the bal-
ance it provides between security for workers and flexi-
bility for firms—is a key influence on firms’ decisions to 
hire new workers. The evidence suggests that economies 
in which it was more difficult for firms to terminate 
labor contracts (proxied by an index of ease of dismissal 
compiled by the Centre for Business Research [CBR] at 
Cambridge University) suffered larger postcrisis losses 
in output relative to precrisis trends (Table 2.2).16 This 
16The Cambridge University CBR index (Adams, Bishop, and 
Deakin 2016) is based on an average of nine detailed indicators of 
dismissal procedures constructed using leximetric coding methodol-
ogy on country-level labor legislation. The index is used here because 
it has broader country coverage than the Organisation for Economic 
may indicate reluctance on the part of firms during the 
postcrisis recovery phase to expand operations and lock 
themselves into costly contracts in economies where 
subsequent exit would be more difficult.
Spillovers
The results in Table 2.2 are also consistent with 
spillover effects through trade. Controlling for the 
effect of banking crises, economies relatively more 
exposed to demand from advanced economies suffered 
larger output losses in the aftermath.
The size of gross external financial exposure acted as 
another key channel through which financial distress 
from the crippled core of advanced economies trans-
mitted to the rest of the global economy. Countries 
more integrated into global financial markets (repre-
sented by larger fractions of external assets and liabil-
ities relative to GDP) experienced bigger deviations 
from the precrisis trend.17 This may reflect, in part, 
retrenchment in global banking after the crisis.
Co-operation and Development’s (OECD’s) strength of employment 
protection indices. The index correlates well with the OECD mea-
sures for countries covered by the OECD’s indices, as well as with a 
typical measure of labor market churn and dynamism (the probabil-
ity of entering and exiting employment), which can be constructed 
for a limited set of countries along the lines of Elsby, Hobijn, and 
Sahin (2013), as described in Online Annex 2.2.C.
17This is consistent with Perri and Quadrini (2018), who develop a 
model of global, synchronized recessions that follow from cross-border 
transmission of liquidity shortages in highly integrated capital mar-
kets. The extensive cross-border financial links—particularly among 
advanced economies—on the eve of the crisis was unprecedented and 
may have compounded countries’ vulnerabilities. See also Chapter 4 of 
Table 2.2. Impact of Precrisis Conditions on 2011–13 GDP Deviations from Precrisis Trend
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
All Countries
AEs
EMs
Domestic Credit Growth
–**
–***
–***
–***
–***
–**
Demand Exposure to Advanced Economies
–***
–
+
+
–
–
Demand Exposure to China
+
+
+
+*
+**
+
Financial Openness
–*
–
–
–
–
–
CA Balance
+
+***
–
CA Gap
+***
+***
+
Share of Manufacturing in GDP
+
+
+
Difficulty of Dismissal
–**
–*
–**
Precrisis GG Debt Change
–***
–***
–***
De Facto Peg Dummy
–**
–***
–
Banking Crisis
–**
–
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: + denotes positive impact, – denotes negative impact. Precrisis conditions are averaged over 2005–08. Results in columns (1) and (2) are reported in 
Online Annex Table 2.2.5. Results in columns (3) through (6) are reported in Online Annex Table 2.2.7. AEs = advanced economies; CA = current account; 
CA Gap = excess external balance, Lee and others (2008); EMs = emerging markets; GG = general government.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
81
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
There is a similar pattern for postcrisis investment 
deviations among countries that did not experience a 
banking crisis in 2007–08 (Online Annex Table 2.2.6). 
In particular, countries with stronger trade ties to 
advanced economies going into the crisis experienced 
larger deviations in investment during 2011–13 
relative to precrisis trends. This finding is consistent 
with the earlier observation (Figure 2.6) that persistent 
capital shortfalls were observed also in countries that 
did not experience a banking crisis in 2007–08.
An important offsetting influence on weak demand 
from advanced economies during this period was 
demand from China. China’s 4 trillion yuan stimulus 
during 2008–11 (close to 10 percent of 2008 GDP) 
supported a large nationwide infrastructure expansion 
and construction of social housing, with associated 
favorable impacts on exporters of commodities and 
heavy equipment (Ahuja and Nabar 2012). The results 
in Online Annex Table 2.2.7 (summarized in Table 2.2), 
grouped according to advanced and emerging mar-
ket economies, indicate that economies whose export 
baskets were more exposed to China before the crisis 
benefited disproportionately in the aftermath from 
higher exposure to China’s domestic demand (measured 
as the share of trading partner demand accounted for by 
China), especially among emerging market economies.
Precrisis Policies and Policy Frameworks
The incidence of bank crises in 2007–08 was a key 
driver of subsequent losses. Regulatory and supervisory 
structures may thus have played a preemptive role in 
influencing subsequent damage. The bank regulation 
index constructed by Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2013) 
illustrates this link. Specifically, stronger restrictions in 
2006 on banks’ ability to underwrite, broker, and deal 
in securities; offer mutual fund products; and engage in 
insurance underwriting, real estate investment, devel-
opment, and management are associated with a lower 
probability of a banking crisis during 2007–08 (Fig-
ure 2.10).18 However, the index measures the strength 
of restrictions only on specific aspects of bank activity. 
Other dimensions (for instance, strength of capital, 
funding, and liquidity requirements; the accompanying 
supervisory approach to stress-testing balance sheets; 
the April 2009 WEO, which documents the role of international links 
in transmitting financial stress across borders.
18The association shown here is robust to controlling for some 
other influences on the likelihood of a bank crisis (Online Annex 
Table 2.2.4).
overall intensity of financial sector monitoring activity; 
the porosity of the regulatory perimeter and opportuni-
ties for regulatory arbitrage) likely also played a role.   
In general, the initial policy space available prior 
to a crisis can affect the extent of activity decline 
afterward (Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro 2010; 
Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor 2016; Romer and Romer 
2018). For the 2008 episode specifically, countries 
with smaller increases in general government debt 
over 2005–08 experienced smaller losses relative to 
trends (Table 2.2). Countries with lower public sector 
borrowing requirements going into the crisis appear 
to have had more room to deploy fiscal policy for 
demand support in the immediate aftermath.
Policy frameworks also appear to matter for postcri-
sis output outcomes. Exchange rate flexibility is associ-
ated with less damage, pointing to a buffering role of 
nominal exchange rates (Table 2.2). This finding may, 
in part, reflect the difficulties experienced by some 
euro area economies. In these countries, the absence 
of an independent nominal exchange rate, together 
with fiscal stress and the lack of a common area-wide 
Probit
Logit
Linear probability model
Sources: Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2013); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Movement from left to right on the x-axis indicates stronger restrictions on 
banking activities. Figure is based on Online Annex Table 2.2.3.
Stronger restrictions in 2006 on banks’ ability to underwrite, broker, and deal in 
securities; offer mutual fund products; and engage in insurance underwriting, real 
estate investment, development, and management are associated with a lower 
probability of banking crisis in 2007–08.
Figure 2.10.  Probability of Banking Crisis
(Probability)
–2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
0.8
Strength of restrictions on banking activities
–1
0
1
2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
82
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
banking union and fiscal backstop, meant the burden 
of adjustment after the crisis fell entirely on domestic 
prices and output.
The median output loss for euro area economies is 
notably higher than for other advanced economies in 
2011–13 (Figure 2.11), covering an intense phase of 
the sovereign debt crisis, deposit flight from stressed 
euro area economies, and financial fragmentation 
within the euro area (see IMF 2012, 2013a). The dif-
ference in losses widened through 2015–17, pointing 
to a weaker recovery compared with other advanced 
economies. The divergence may, in part, reflect the 
limited policy levers available within a currency union 
for adjustment to asymmetric shocks, differences in 
the speed of financial sector repair (as discussed in 
Box 2.3), and—despite substantial progress toward a 
banking union and the creation of the European Sta-
bility Mechanism for crisis management—remaining 
gaps in the euro area architecture.19 
Extraordinary Actions Taken in the Aftermath 
of the Crisis
Several countries took exceptional and unprecedented 
policy measures to support their economies after the 
2008 financial crisis. In many cases, notably among the 
advanced economies most severely affected by the crisis, 
the measures comprised (1) central bank monetary pol-
icy actions—unconventional monetary policy support 
through asset purchases as policy rates approached their 
effective lower bounds, and liquidity support to specific 
segments of credit markets through targeted central 
bank facilities; (2) discretionary fiscal stimulus; and (3) 
financial sector operations—bank balance sheet stress 
tests, government guarantees of banking sector liabil-
ities, purchases of toxic assets from banks, and capital 
injections. Central banks also established ad hoc bilat-
eral swap lines to support foreign exchange liquidity in 
jurisdictions beyond home markets.
Advanced economy monetary policy actions, in 
particular, represented a significant change in the 
approach to providing monetary accommodation—
necessitated in some cases by central banks rapidly 
reducing policy rates to their effective lower bounds 
during the crisis (Bernanke 2017). The particular mix 
of tools varied across individual cases, but generally 
included a combination of quantitative easing (mas-
sive balance sheet expansion with purchases mainly of 
government bonds, mortgage-backed securities, and 
corporate bonds); state-dependent forward guidance 
(specifying particular levels of unemployment and 
inflation as conditions for rate hikes); negative interest 
rates (charging commercial banks a penalty on excess 
reserves held at the central bank); and yield-curve 
control (targeting the yields of longer-maturity govern-
ment bonds through central bank purchases).
Estimates of the impact of advanced economy 
central banks’ quantitative easing on interest rates and 
financial conditions vary (Gagnon 2016). In general, 
the positive effect of the actions on domestic output in 
19Thomsen (2017); Arnold and others (2018); and Berger, 
Dell’Ariccia, and Obstfeld (2018) discuss the reforms implemented 
to strengthen the euro area architecture and the remaining steps to 
complete the banking and fiscal union.
Euro area
Other advanced economies
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Other advanced economies are advanced economies that are not in the euro 
area. PPP = purchasing power parity.
The median and PPP GDP-weighted mean of output loss for euro area economies 
are higher than for other advanced economies.
–12
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2011–13
Figure 2.11.  Postcrisis Deviations of Euro Area and 
Other Advanced Economies
(Percent)
1. Median
–12
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2011–13
2. PPP GDP-Weighted Mean
2015–17
2015–17
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
83
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
advanced economies and imports from trading partners 
is believed to have outweighed negative effects as a 
result of elevated capital inflows and currency appre-
ciation pressure elsewhere (IMF 2014). More broadly, 
quantitative easing may have also helped stabilize activ-
ity by reducing the tail risk of debilitating asset price 
declines. Nevertheless, the actions were the subject of 
controversy, with policymakers in emerging market 
and developing economies, at times, raising concern 
about adverse spillovers from advanced economy cen-
tral banks’ unconventional monetary policy approaches 
(Mantega 2010; Zhou 2010; Rajan 2014).
The analysis in this chapter focuses on the impact 
of fiscal and quasi-fiscal measures in support of the 
financial sector undertaken by some economies in 
the aftermath of the crisis (Table 2.3). The Group 
of Twenty (G20) economies, for example, on aver-
age, injected discretionary fiscal stimulus of just over 
2 percent of GDP in 2009 and 2010. (The IMF 
was among the early advocates of the effort in the 
days leading up to the November 2008 G20 Sum-
mit.)20 The number of such actions is larger than the 
20During 2008 and 2009, the G20 forum (Argentina, Australia, 
Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, 
Japan, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South Korea, 
Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, European Union) was piv-
otal in forging international consensus on fiscal expansion, augment-
ing the lending resources of the IMF and multilateral development 
banks, and the need to strengthen financial regulation (see https://​
www​.g20​.org/​en/​g20/​timeline). For the IMF’s November 2008 call 
for fiscal stimulus by the G20 economies, see http://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​
News/​Articles/​2015/​09/​14/​01/​49/​pr08278.
instances of asset purchase programs by advanced 
economy central banks and therefore more easily stud-
ied in a regression framework to assess their impact on 
output deviations. 
Estimating the immediate effect of the actions is 
difficult. In the case of discretionary fiscal stimulus, 
for example, causality runs in both directions, with 
larger output collapses likely to prompt larger policy 
responses, all else equal. It is nonetheless possible to 
detect lagged effects of the measures on output devia-
tions from precrisis trends averaged over 2015–17.
As shown in Figure 2.12, conditional on the size of 
initial losses during 2011–13, quasi-fiscal actions taken 
to stabilize the financial sector helped limit damage 
during 2015–17. Overall headline support for the 
financial sector has a statistically significant positive 
correlation with subsequent output deviations from 
trend; among the specific actions, capital injections 
and guarantees appear to have helped limit subsequent 
output losses. These interventions may have helped 
thaw credit markets, and resumption of credit services 
subsequently contributed to raising output. 
Beyond action at the national level, as discussed 
in Chapter 2 of the October 2018 GFSR, there were 
extensive multilateral efforts to strengthen financial 
regulatory standards (aimed at expanding the regu-
latory perimeter, containing the buildup of systemic 
risk, strengthening resilience to shocks, and develop-
ing resolution frameworks). Multilateral cooperation 
also helped craft an important component of the 
monetary response to the crisis, with the IMF pro-
Table 2.3. Financial Sector Support and Discretionary Fiscal Stimulus in Group of Twenty Economies
(Percent of GDP)
1. Headline Support for the Financial Sector (as of February 2009)
Capital  
Injection
Purchase of 
Assets, Lending 
by Treasury
Central Bank 
Support with 
Treasury Backing
Central Bank 
Liquidity  
Support
Guarantees
Total
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(A+B+C+D+E)
G20 Average (PPP GDP-weighted)
2.0
3.3
1.0
9.2
14.3
29.8
Advanced Economies
2.9
5.0
1.2
12.9
21.3
43.3
Advanced Europe
2.4
3.6
2.1
1.0
19.5
28.6
Emerging Markets
0.3
0.1
0.3
1.8
0.2
2.7
2. Crisis-Related Discretionary Fiscal Stimulus in G20 Economies (as of October 2010)
2009
2010
2011
G20 Average
2.1
2.1
1.1
Advanced Economies
1.9
2.1
1.2
Emerging Markets
2.4
2.0
0.9
Sources: IMF (2009); IMF Fiscal Affairs and Monetary and Capital Markets departments database on public interventions; Chapter 1 of the November 2010 
Fiscal Monitor.
Note: Panel 1 is calculated based on country statistics originally published in IMF (2009). The data on guarantees for Australia are based on Schwartz and Tan 
(2016). In panel 1, G20 calculations do not include Mexico and South Africa. G20 = Group of Twenty.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
84
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
viding unconditional financial resources to its mem-
bers through a general allocation of SDR 204 billion 
($316 billion) during August–September 2009.21 In 
addition, several economies relied on the global finan-
cial safety net to ease their adjustment to the funding 
shock after the crisis. The IMF, for example, approved 
SDR 420 billion in support to its members during 
2008–13, of which SDR 119 billion was drawn 
during that interval.22
21The IMF’s special drawing right (SDR), an international reserve 
asset based on a basket comprising the US dollar, Chinese renminbi, 
Japanese yen, euro, and British pound, is a claim on freely usable 
currencies of IMF members. The 2009 general SDR allocation 
augmented IMF members’ international reserves, with the aim of 
easing postcrisis liquidity constraints (https://​www​.imf​.org/​en/​News/​
Articles/​2015/​09/​14/​01/​49/​pr09283).
22The gross figure includes precautionary arrangements. See IMF 
(2015) for details.
Summary
The 2008 financial crisis had its roots in the US 
housing boom of the preceding half-decade. Its impact 
was seen worldwide from shuttered maquiladora facto-
ries in Mexico to the restructuring of regional savings 
and loan cajas in Spain and extended joblessness for 
migrant workers in China’s Pearl River Delta. Output 
losses following the 2008 financial meltdown were per-
sistent and experienced by a broad set of countries, not 
just the group afflicted by banking crises at the time. 
Protracted weak investment after the crisis was a major 
contributing factor, associated with persistent shortfalls 
in capital and total factor productivity, relative to pre-
crisis trends, and slower technology adoption among 
countries hit harder by the crisis.
The crisis prompted a still-ongoing rethink of the 
nature of economic fluctuations, as well as of the 
role of policy frameworks and measures to combat 
downturns. The policy lessons of the crisis discussed 
in this chapter follow from the lens adopted to view 
its aftermath and to understand why the recovery 
appeared so slow in many countries. Other important 
developments covered in previous WEO reports, such 
as the declining share of labor income (Chapter 3 of 
the April 2017 WEO), subdued wage growth, and the 
rise of part-time work (Chapter 2 of the October 2017 
WEO), pose additional policy challenges for ensuring 
the income security and welfare of those who rely 
mostly on their labor income.
The evidence documented in this chapter suggests 
that policy choices in the run-up to the crisis and in 
its immediate aftermath influenced postcrisis out-
put performance in multiple ways. Stronger banking 
regulation—proxied by restrictions on certain aspects 
of bank activity—appears to have played a preventive 
role by lowering the probability of a banking crisis in 
2007–08. The finding is relevant for ongoing debates 
on rolling back the regulatory standards adopted fol-
lowing the crisis.
Countries with stronger fiscal positions entering the 
crisis suffered smaller losses, suggesting that greater 
room for policy maneuver may have helped defend 
against harm. Extraordinary fiscal and quasi‑fiscal 
actions to support the financial sector after the crisis 
appear to have helped lessen output losses over the 
medium term. Economies that moved quickly to assess 
the health of their banking systems and recapitalize 
banks appeared to have suffered smaller output losses 
subsequently. As IMF (2013c), Auerbach (2017), 
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Movement from left to right on the x-axis indicates less negative/more 
positive deviations from precrisis trend. Extraordinary measures were taken during 
2008–09. Coefﬁcient bars correspond to estimates in Online Annex Table 2.2.8.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. 
Actions taken to stabilize the ﬁnancial sector helped limit damages during 
2015–17. Overall headline support for the ﬁnancial sector has a statistically 
signiﬁcant positive correlation with subsequent output deviations from precrisis 
trend. Among speciﬁc actions, capital injections and guarantees have helped limit 
subsequent output losses.
Figure 2.12.  Impact on 2015–17 GDP Deviations from 
One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers
(Percent)
0
Percent deviations from precrisis trend
**
*
*
Guarantees
(excluding deposit 
insurance)
Purchase of assets and
lending by treasury
Capital injections
Total headline support for
ﬁnancial and other sectors
1
2
3
4
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
85
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Blanchard and Summers (2017), and Furman (2018) 
note, there is renewed recognition of discretionary 
fiscal policy as a countercyclical demand management 
tool. Moreover, as the analysis shows, China’s large 
fiscal stimulus during 2008–11 appears to have had 
favorable spillovers on trading partners. Altogether, the 
evidence presented here suggests some confirmation 
of the efficacy of fiscal measures in limiting persistent 
losses after a recession. And as noted in earlier IMF 
research (IMF 2014), unconventional monetary policy 
actions by advanced economy central banks helped 
limit output declines and employment losses at home 
while supporting imports from abroad.
The policy efforts of the past decade helped fore-
stall an even worse outcome with deeper output and 
employment losses. After faltering at times over the 
past 10 years, the global economic recovery experi-
enced a long-awaited synchronized growth upswing in 
2017–18. Nevertheless, large challenges loom for the 
global economy. The extraordinary policy actions to 
prevent a second Great Depression have had important 
side effects. The extended period of ultralow interest 
rates in advanced economies has contributed to the 
buildup of financial vulnerabilities, as discussed in the 
April and October 2018 GFSRs. The large accumu-
lation of public debt and the erosion of fiscal buffers 
in many economies following the crisis point to the 
urgency of rebuilding those defenses to prepare for the 
next downturn. Moreover, some of the crisis manage-
ment tools deployed in 2008–09 are no longer available 
(the Federal Reserve’s bailouts of individual institutions, 
for example), suggesting financial rescues in the future 
may not be able to follow the same playbook.
Beyond these aspects, more fundamental challenges 
relate to long-lasting legacies of the crisis. There are 
already signs of possible long-term consequences of 
the crisis on potential growth through its impacts on 
migration, fertility, and future labor input (Box 2.1). 
And societal support for openness and global economic 
integration appears to have weakened in many coun-
tries after the crisis. The corollary of these develop-
ments is the rising appeal of protectionist nostrums 
and populism. A fuller reckoning of such long-lasting 
legacies of the 2008 financial crisis must necessarily 
await the broader perspective that will emerge with 
further passage of time.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
86
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Empirical and anecdotal evidence suggest that 
changes in economic performance affect migration 
flows and fertility rates. This box explores the rela-
tionships between postcrisis economic performance, 
policies, migration, and fertility. The main finding of 
the box is that postcrisis economic performance had 
a significant impact on both migration and fertil-
ity. Through these channels, the crisis has likely left 
long-lasting scars on future growth. The box also iden-
tifies several policies associated with significant impacts 
on migration and fertility.
The Great Recession and Migration
The decades leading up to the global finan-
cial crisis saw large increases in net migration 
(immigration-emigration) rates between advanced 
economies.1 This trend, however, reversed after the 
crisis. Meanwhile, net migration has been consis-
tently neutral in emerging markets through both 
periods, while low-income developing countries have 
increased net migration rates in the postcrisis years, 
even as they are generally more prone to volatile net 
migration rates (Figure 2.1.1, panel 1). Motivated by 
this heterogeneity of net migration among coun-
try groups, the analysis examines the relationship 
between the changes in trends before and after the 
crisis, looking at per capita GDP and migration 
flows by using data on migration inflows from 
143 source countries to 20 destination advanced 
economies.2
Immigrants are typically more vulnerable to 
economic shocks than natives. They are often over-
represented in sectors most sensitive to the business 
cycle (OECD 2009) and may face discrimination in 
a tight labor market (Arai and Vilhelmsson 2004). 
Immigrants have also responded to changes in labor 
demand more strongly than natives (Kahanec and 
Guzi 2017). Simple correlations confirm the conjec-
The authors of this box are Christopher Johns, Mico Mrkaic, 
and Yuan Zeng.
1Net migration rate is defined as the number of immigrants 
minus the number of emigrants over a period, divided by the 
person-years lived by the population of the destination country 
over that period. It is expressed as net number of migrants per 
1,000 population.
2The analysis uses migration inflows, given that inflows are 
tracked more precisely and more frequently than bilateral migra-
tion outflows and migrant stocks. Data on bilateral migration 
inflows facilitates accurate analysis of the push and pull factors 
influencing international migration.
ture that migrants respond to economic performance 
(Figure 2.1.1, panel 2), measured by the deviations 
of GDP per capita from precrisis trend (calculated as 
described in Online Annex 2.2.B).
Beyond the correlations, the analysis explores the 
links between economic performance and migra-
tion in a multivariate setting, controlling for the 
additional main drivers mentioned in the October 
2016 World Economic Outlook—structural factors 
and immigration policies. While the box’s discussion 
centers on the role of economic factors in migra-
tion decisions, it should be mentioned that some 
LIDCs
EMs
AEs
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs, World Population Prospects: The 2017 
Revision; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market 
economies; LIDCs = low-income developing countries. Net 
migration rate by country group is population-weighted average. 
Losses are based on calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B. 
1. Net Migration Rate
(per 1,000 of population)
2. Output Losses and Emigration
Figure 2.1.1.  International Migration and the 
Global Financial Crisis
–100
140
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
–3
4
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
1980
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
Percent change in emigration rate,
2014–16 versus 2005–08
Source country GDP per capita losses, 2011–13
Box 2.1. The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
87
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
migration decisions are driven entirely by such factors 
as political instability and war in the source country 
or region. To avoid biasing results, migration flows 
data exclude flows of refugees and asylum seekers.3 
Figure 2.1.2, panel 1 shows the impact of losses in 
GDP per capita on differences between emigration 
rates in 2011–13 and 2014–16 compared with years 
before the crisis (2005–08).4 Losses in GDP per cap-
ita significantly impact migration flows in the short 
and medium terms. In addition to economic perfor-
mance, migration flows are affected by the strength of 
poverty constraints in source countries5 and the GDP 
per capita in the destination relative to the source 
country, education in destination and source coun-
tries, and the distance between destination country 
and source country.6,7
Policies imposed in the wake of the crisis to limit 
migration and reduce competition in labor markets 
also affect migration (Figure 2.1.2, panel 2). The 
analysis examines restrictions on legal entry, stay, 
and quotas (an increase in each variable denotes 
greater restrictiveness). Increased postcrisis restric-
tions significantly reduced migration flows, mostly 
in the medium term, over and above the impact of 
economic losses.
The Great Recession and Fertility
During a recession, relatively elevated unemploy-
ment rates may lead to deferred decisions on mar-
riage, having children, or both. In nearly all recent 
recessions in advanced economies, the impact on 
fertility has been mainly to postpone births, which 
contributes to a short-run reduction in the number 
of births in the aftermath (long-run effects tend to be 
3Inflows of foreign population data are from the Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD). 
Refugees and asylum seekers are excluded from the data for all 
countries except: Germany, Netherlands, and Norway—included 
if living in private households (as opposed to reception centers 
or hostels for immigrants); and United Kingdom—included if 
stayed in country longer than one year.
4Emigration rate is defined as inflows to destination country 
from source country over a period, divided by 1,000 population 
in source country.
5Defined as the disposable income Gini coefficient divided by 
the square of PPP GDP per capita.
6Distance is defined as great-circle distance between most 
populated cities in destination country and source country.
7Controls based on measures used in Borjas (1987); Hatton and 
Williamson (2002); and Clark, Hatton, and Williamson (2007).
less pronounced).8 Although immigration may be a 
partial solution for low fertility and an aging popula-
tion in the short term, in the long term, immigrants’ 
8Neels (2010); Cherlin, Cumberworth, and Morgan (2013).
Short term
Medium term
Sources: International Migration Institute; Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development; Standardized World 
Income Inequality Database (Solt 2016); World Bank, World 
Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Explanatory variables are contemporaneous with 
dependent variable unless noted otherwise. All postcrisis 
variables except GDP per capita losses are average changes 
from precrisis (2005–08) levels. Losses are based on 
calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B. All coefﬁcients are 
statistically signiﬁcant at 5 percent. Increases in policy variables 
correspond to increases in restrictiveness. S = source country; 
D = destination country. Short term = 2011–13 average; 
Medium term = 2014–16 average.
Figure 2.1.2.  Impact on Emigration Rate from 
One Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at 
Different Horizons
(Percentage points)
20
–20
–10
0
10
Distance
GDP per capita (D/S), 2005–08
Poverty constraint (S), 2005–08
Education level (S)
Education level (D)
GDP per capita losses (S)
GDP per capita losses (D)
1. Effect of GDP per Capita Losses
–20
–10
0
10
20
Distance
GDP per capita (D/S), 2005–08
Poverty constraint (S), 2005–08
Quotas (D), 2011–13
Legal entry (D), 2011–13
GDP per capita losses (S)
GDP per capita losses (D)
2. Effect of Policies
Average percent change from
precrisis migration rate 
Box 2.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
88
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
fertility rates generally converge to that of natives 
(Espenshade 1994).
In the decade before the crisis, the total fertility rate 
rose in several advanced economies, only to decline 
afterward (Figure 2.1.3).9 In the United States, the 
rate fell from a peak of 2.12 in 2007 to 1.8 in 2016. 
Similarly, the birth rate of foreign-born women (ages 
15–50) in the United States declined by 16 births per 
thousand women from its peak of 76 in 2008 to its 
2016 level. For European countries, such as Greece 
and Spain that suffered a double-dip recession, the 
fertility rate decreased from 1.5 to about 1.3 over the 
9Total fertility rate in a specific year is defined as the total 
number of children that would be born to each woman if she 
were to live to the end of her child-bearing years and give birth 
to children in alignment with the prevailing age-specific fertility 
rates. It is calculated by aggregating age-specific fertility rates as 
defined over five-year intervals.
same time span. These persistently low fertility rates 
over the past decade may weigh on future labor input 
and thus weaken potential growth in the long run. 
Evidence from OECD and partner countries shows 
that average changes in the fertility rate for the post-
crisis period relative to the precrisis period (2005–08) 
have been negatively impacted by the crisis through 
several channels, of which employment losses were 
the most significant (Figure 2.1.4). Further evidence 
in the literature (Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov 
2011) shows that other complex social changes (higher 
female labor participation rate, smaller desired family 
size, and so on) and burdened welfare systems could 
affect women’s reproductive decisions.
The fertility rate can be affected by labor market 
policies as well. Figure 2.1.5 shows how policies 
1.0
2.2
2000
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD); World Bank, World Development 
Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: OECD is the average fertility rate for OECD and partner 
countries. AEs = OECD and partner advanced economies; 
EMs = OECD and partner emerging market economies. See 
Online Annex 2.1 for country list.
Figure 2.1.3.  Total Fertility Rate
(Number of births per woman)
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
OECD
AEs
EMs
United States
Italy
Spain
Greece
Short term
Medium term
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Explanatory variables are contemporaneous with 
dependent variable. Average changes in fertility rate are the 
difference between postcrisis term and precrisis (2005–08) level. 
Losses are based on calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B. Short 
term = 2011–13 average; Medium term = 2015–16 average.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
Figure 2.1.4.  Impact of Crisis Exposure on 
Fertility Rate at Different Horizons
(Average change in fertility rate on x-axis; 
postcrisis minus precrisis)
–0.10 –0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Employment losses
GDP per capita losses
GDP losses
***
***
*
*
Box 2.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
89
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
affected fertility after the crisis. On one hand, the 
result in panel 1 demonstrates that a higher precrisis 
tax wedge on couples reduces fertility in the short 
term. On the other hand, panel 2 suggests that post-
crisis increases in family allowances and improvements 
in job protection during maternity are associated 
with higher fertility rates. These findings are in line 
with evidence and case studies from European Union 
countries.10
10See, for example, Hoem (2008), Kalwij (2010), and 
Thévenon (2011).
Short term
Medium term
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Explanatory variables are contemporaneous with 
dependent variable. Precrisis policy variables are average of 
period 2005–08. Policy changes are average postcrisis 
changes from precrisis (2005–08) levels. Average changes 
in fertility rate are of difference between postcrisis term and 
precrisis (2005–08) level. Short term = 2011–13 average; 
Medium term = 2015–16 average.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
Figure 2.1.5.  Impact on Fertility from One 
Standard Deviation Increase in Drivers at 
Different Horizons
(Average change in fertility rate on x-axis; postcrisis 
minus precrisis)
–0.10 –0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15
Average tax wedge
of couple
Total protected
maternity leave
Family allowance
Child-care beneﬁts
Public spending on
child education and care
1. Effect of Precrisis Policies
**
–0.10 –0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15
Average tax wedge
of couple
Total protected
maternity leave
Family allowance
Child-care beneﬁts
Public spending on
child education and care
2. Effect of Policy Changes
***
**
Box 2.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
90
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
As discussed in the chapter, an important change in 
the production process after the global financial crisis 
appears to be the pace of technology adoption. This box 
addresses the following questions related to technology 
adoption, using the example of industrial robots: How 
did the diffusion of robots affect employment in the 
aftermath of the crisis? What type of workers were par-
ticularly affected? Did certain labor market policies alter 
the impact of robot adoption on employment?
Forces of automation were at work prior to the 
crisis (Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; Goos and 
Manning 2007; Acemoglu and Autor 2011; Autor 
and Dorn 2013), and one much-discussed aspect of 
the transformation of the workplace is the diffusion 
of industrial robots. Yet, existing work has mostly 
focused on exploring precrisis diffusion of automation 
in the United States (Autor, Levy, and Murnane 2003; 
Acemoglu and Autor 2011; Autor and Dorn 2013; 
Acemoglu and Restrepo 2017), and in a few European 
countries (Graetz and Michaels forthcoming; Chiacchio, 
Petropoulos, and Pichler 2018). Thus, less is known 
about postcrisis robot diffusion in and beyond these 
countries. Exploring these recent developments may 
provide some perspective on possible future workplace 
dynamics and labor market outcomes, where artificial-​
intelligence-powered equipment is expected to replace 
human input in an expanding range of nonroutine 
tasks (Berg, Buffie, and Zanna 2017; Frey and Osborne 
2017; Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2018 and forthcoming).
Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment
As noted in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017), robot 
diffusion can affect employment in different ways. 
Greater diffusion of robots can affect employment 
negatively through displacement (by directly replacing 
workers performing certain tasks), but also positively, 
through productivity gains, as robots can free up 
human labor for other tasks, incentivize investment, 
and create employment.
Estimation results show that increased robot 
diffusion in industries located in countries with more 
negative output losses during the crisis is associated 
with lower employment growth (Figure 2.2.1) in the 
The authors of this box are Wenjie Chen and Malhar Nabar.
All
High output loss
Low output loss
–0.04
0.04
1. All Countries
–0.04
0.04
2. Advanced Economies
Figure 2.2.1.  Effect of Robot Diffusion on 
Employment Growth
(Percent)
Sources: IFR (2017); World Input-Output Database; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Robot diffusion is deﬁned as average change in robot 
shipments/1,000 hours worked 2010–14. Error bars around 
coefﬁcient estimate are two standard errors. Losses are 
based on calculations in Online Annex 2.2.B. Figure is based 
on coefﬁcients in Online Annex Table 2.3.4.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
–0.02
0.00
0.02
3. Emerging Markets
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
***
–0.02
0.00
0.02
***
Displacement effect
dominates 
**
Productivity effect
dominates 
Box 2.2. The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis: The Case of 
Industrial Robots
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
91
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
aftermath of the crisis. This is particularly driven by 
industries in advanced economies with relatively bigger 
output deviations relative to precrisis trend. In emerg-
ing markets with relatively lower output deviations 
relative to precrisis trend, increased robot diffusion is 
associated with higher employment growth.
Hollowing Out of the Employment-Skills 
Distribution
The negative association between labor and robot 
diffusion appears to be more pronounced in indus-
tries initially more reliant on medium-skilled work-
ers. The effect is largely seen in advanced economies 
(Figure 2.2.2). This finding is consistent with the 
hollowing-out effects documented by Autor, Levy, and 
Murnane (2003), and Goos, Manning, and Salo-
mons (2014). 
Labor Market Policies
To explore whether labor market policies can mit-
igate the impact of robot diffusion on employment, 
regression analysis is conducted on samples divided by 
the severity of crisis exposure.1
A consistent picture emerges (Figure 2.2.3): the 
postcrisis displacement effect of robots on employ-
ment was more pronounced in countries with more 
rigid labor market policies and less labor market 
dynamism (churn) prior to the crisis.2 More specifi-
cally, lower active labor market spending as a share of 
GDP, stricter dismissal policies, less churn in the labor 
market, and more stringent employment protection 
legislation are associated with higher displacement 
effects of robot diffusion in countries that experienced 
relatively high output losses. 
1Four specific measures of labor market policy are under 
consideration: (1) active labor market policy (ALMP) spending 
as share of GDP, (2) ease of dismissal index by Cambridge 
University’s Center for Business Research, (3) labor churn 
as calculated in Online Annex 2.2.B, and (4) employment 
protection legislation index compiled by the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. All measures are 
calculated as precrisis averages to capture the initial extent of 
labor market rigidities.
2Labor market dynamism, also referred to as job churn, is 
measured as described in Online Annex 2.2.B, following Elsby, 
Hobijn, and Sahin (2013).
High medium-skill share
Low medium-skill share
–0.08
–0.06
–0.04
–0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
–0.10
0.06
1. All Countries
Figure 2.2.2.  Hollowing-Out Effect of Robot 
Diffusion on Employment Growth
(Percent)
Sources: IFR (2017); World Input-Output Database (WIOD); 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Robot diffusion is deﬁned as robot shipment/1,000 
hours worked. Level of worker skills is based on education 
attainment from WIOD. Medium-skilled workers have 
attained secondary and/or postsecondary nontertiary 
education in 2009. Error bars around coefﬁcient estimate 
are two standard errors. Figure is based on coefﬁcients in 
Online Annex Table 2.3.5.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
2. Advanced Economies
–0.10
–0.08
–0.06
–0.04
–0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
3. Emerging Markets
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
**
**
Hollowing-out effect
Box 2.2 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
92
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
In sum, industries in advanced economies with rel-
atively bigger output losses experienced displacement 
effects from robot diffusion in the aftermath of the 
crisis. This negative effect on employment growth was 
particularly severe in industries in advanced economies 
with relatively large shares of medium-skilled workers. 
At the same time, in countries with more rigid labor 
market policies and less churn, the labor displace-
ment effect of robot diffusion was more pronounced, 
suggesting that policies supportive of creating more 
flexible labor markets can help absorb employment 
displacement associated with automation.
ALMP
Job churn
Dismissal
EPL
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
–0.15
0.20
1. High Output Losses
2. Low Output Losses
Figure 2.2.3.  Labor Market Policies and 
Effect of Robot Diffusion on Employment 
Growth
(Average change in employment growth, 2010–14)
Sources: Cambridge University Center for Business Research 
(CBR); IFR (2017); Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development; World Input-Output Database; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: More ﬂexible labor market comprises countries that 
have above-median ALMP spending (percent of GDP), 
above-median job churn rates, below-median dismissal 
regulations as measured by CBR, and below-median EPL. 
Error bars around coefﬁcient estimate are two standard 
errors. Losses are based on calculations in Online Annex 
2.2.B. Figure is based on coefﬁcients in Online Annex Table 
2.3.6. ALMP = active labor market policy; EPL = employment 
protection legislation.
* p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01.
More ﬂexible
labor market
Less ﬂexible
labor market
More ﬂexible
labor market
Less ﬂexible
labor market
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
***
***
***
**
Box 2.2 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
93
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
As the financial crisis started rattling markets, 
policymakers broadly followed the crisis management 
rulebook: step one—stop panic from spreading (con-
tainment phase), step two—repair the damage (resolu-
tion phase). The principal forms of intervention were 
(1) liquidity provision through collateralized lending 
and other arrangements; (2) support for short-term 
wholesale funding markets; (3) (more extensive) 
guarantees of retail deposits and other liabilities; (4) 
purchases or exchanges of nonperforming or illiquid 
assets; and (5) capital injections to banks. Interven-
tions often started with liquidity support to relieve the 
immediate pressure and then moved on to identifying 
and meeting recapitalization needs.
Yet the timing and strength of the response varied 
across countries, especially when it came to the chal-
lenge of repairing the damage (Figure 2.3.1). Part of 
the variation certainly reflected when and how severely 
a country was affected, plus how large the banking sec-
tor was relative to GDP, but there are differences even 
after controlling for crisis severity. Specific forms of 
intervention also differed. Some governments acquired 
minority stakes in distressed banks while others chose 
to close or nationalize them. Stress tests were intro-
duced to restore confidence, with different approaches 
in design and governance. Sometimes, but not always, 
measures aiming to reduce debt overhang in the 
nonfinancial sector accompanied the interventions 
targeted at the financial institutions. Last but not least, 
cross-country differences in structural features, such as 
resolution frameworks, bankruptcy regimes, and the 
degree to which the system depended on bank- versus 
market-based financing, came into focus.
Drawing on this variation, several insights can be 
gained from comparing crisis management in the 
United States and in Europe:
•	 The containment phases were fairly similar. The 
major central banks were quick to offer liquidity 
support through traditional facilities and established 
unconventional facilities to ensure that pressure in 
funding markets subsided. They also established 
swap lines as early as December 2007 and extended 
these to other central banks as the crisis spread. In 
many respects, the response in the containment 
phase was better coordinated internationally during 
the recent crisis than in past crises (Laeven and 
Valencia 2013).
The author of this box is Deniz Igan.
•	 The resolution phases diverged more, laying bare 
stark differences in regulatory and supervisory archi-
tecture across the two regions.
•	 The United States mobilized recapitalization plans 
faster than did countries in the European Union 
(EU) (Figure 2.3.2).
•	 In addition to speed, the actions taken in the 
United States were more decisive. Banks replenished 
their eroded capital base by issuing new equity 
early in the crisis, whereas, in the EU, there was 
no matching effort (Figure 2.3.3). At least in part, 
this was driven by the supervisory approach: US 
banks were compelled to raise fresh capital (and 
were able to do so because of support from the 
Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: To adjust for crisis severity, ﬁscal costs of bank 
restructuring and liquidity support are divided by the peak 
NPL. NPL = nonperforming loan ratio.
Figure 2.3.1.  Containment and Resolution
Liquidity support
(% of total deposits and liabilities to nonresidents)
Liquidity support
(Divided by peak NPL)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
Fiscal costs of bank restructuring
(divided by peak NPL)
Fiscal costs of bank restructuring
(percent of GDP)
1. Unadjusted Cost and Support
2. Cost and Support Adjusted for Crisis
 Severity
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
y = 0.247x + 0.808
R 2 = 0.059
y = 0.639x + 1.740
R 2 = 0.223
Box 2.3. The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
94
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Federal Reserve and other agencies); EU banks 
were instructed to improve their risk-weighted 
capital ratios, but options were left open on how to 
do that. Faced with tight funding conditions and 
broader uncertainty, banks chose to cut lending and 
increase their sovereign debt holdings—which carry 
a zero risk weight under Basel III.
•	 Further, while stress tests were conducted on both 
sides of the Atlantic, market perceptions of what 
they accomplished differed. In the United States, 
the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program aimed 
to address uncertainty about the solvency of sys-
temic institutions (Bernanke 2009). Moreover, the 
Treasury Department committed to making capital 
available to eligible banks. Test results were publicly 
available on a bank-by-bank basis, providing the 
needed information to nervous markets (Fernandes, 
Igan, and Pinheiro 2015). In the European Union, 
the Committee of European Banking Supervisors 
conducted two rounds of tests. Individual results 
were kept confidential in the 2009 round, though 
released in the 2010 exercise. The scenarios were 
criticized for being too benign and not capturing 
the risk of sovereign default—a major concern 
at the time (Abramovich 2011).1 Moreover, the 
newly created European Financial Stability Facility 
(EFSF)—tasked with potential capital assistance—
could offer funding to member states by selling 
bonds rather than investing directly in banks.2 
Finally, despite the seal of approval gained by pass-
ing the stress tests, many banks continued to strug-
gle. Taken together, these led markets to label the 
exercise a “nonevent” with no useful information 
content (Shah 2010).3 The EU experience under-
1Regulators reportedly chose not to include a default scenario 
“partly because they said that a sovereign default was unlikely 
and partly due to worries that it would send the wrong political 
message” (Enrich 2010).
2The EFSF was succeeded by the European Stability Mech-
anism, which, under some conditions, can provide funding 
directly to recapitalize banks.
3Regulators will prefer to fully reveal banks’ capital short-
fall at times of crisis if they are able to recapitalize them, but 
will hold onto some information if they cannot recapitalize 
(Spargoli 2012).
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
–4
5
Sources: Laeven and Valencia (2013); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Timing is measured by the months between moments 
when liquidity support became extensive and implementation 
of recapitalization. Data labels use International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Figure 2.3.2.  Timing of Recapitalization
(Months)
IRL
LVA
AUT
DNK
BEL
DEU
NLD
LUX
GBR
USA
United States
European Union
Figure 2.3.3.  New Share Issuance by Banks
(Percent)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
06
2005
Sources: Homar and van Wijnbergen (2015); and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: New share issuance by banks is measured by the
volume in percent of the consolidated balance sheet. 
Box 2.3 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
95
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
scored the importance of credibility—established 
through independent governance, the requisite tech-
nical expertise, and clearly communicated plans for 
any backstop needs (Ong and Pazarbasioglu 2013).
•	 Because the epicenter of the crisis in many countries 
was housing markets, mortgage defaults became 
endemic. In the United States, the Making Home 
Affordable (MHA) program was introduced in 
2009 to help struggling homeowners (Chapter 3 
of the April 2012 World Economic Outlook). The 
refinancing program under the MHA program, 
in particular, provided substantial welfare gains to 
highly indebted households (Mitman 2016) and 
boosted consumption (Agarwal and others 2015). 
In European countries caught up in their own 
credit-fueled housing boom-bust, there were no 
corresponding widespread programs at the outset 
of the crisis. Nonperforming loan ratios increased 
more than in the United States and remain high 
(Figure 2.3.4).4
•	 More generally, many European countries continue 
to grapple with large stocks of impaired assets a 
decade after the onset of the crisis. A large conflu-
ence of factors—the global financial crisis hit many 
hard and particularly hurt those with their own 
homegrown bubbles (Claessens and others 2010)—
exposed the monetary union’s incomplete architec-
ture and triggered a sovereign debt crisis, subjecting 
banks to a second round of shocks. The deep and 
prolonged economic downturn that followed further 
weakened borrowers’ debt service capacity, leading 
to an increase in loan defaults and large corporate 
and household debt overhangs. The nonperform-
ing loans are concentrated most notably in small 
and medium-sized enterprises, which contribute 
almost two-thirds of Europe’s output and employ-
ment and tend to rely more on bank financing than 
large firms. In addition, many European countries 
have bank-based financial systems.5 Together with 
4Ireland and Spain were chosen for illustrative purposes as 
they both had housing booms and busts and significant banking 
distress. Other EU countries that could be used for direct 
comparison (for example, Greece, Italy, Portugal) either did not 
have a similar precrisis boom-bust pattern in housing markets, or 
their experience was dominated by the sovereign debt crisis that 
followed the global financial crisis.
5Market-based economies experience significantly and durably 
stronger rebounds than those that are bank-based; in particular, 
the more bank-based economies of continental Europe (Allard 
and Blavy 2011).
the concentration of debt overhang in small and 
medium-sized enterprises, this further amplified the 
impact of the banks’ problems and debt overhang 
on investment and consumption. Inadequate capital 
buffers, prudential problems with collateral valuation 
and treatment of nonperforming loans, legal obstacles 
to debt enforcement, loan restructuring and foreclo-
sure, and a lack of distressed debt markets have been 
identified as primary obstacles to nonperforming 
loan resolution (Aiyar and others 2015).
•	 A related point of comparison between the US and 
EU experiences involves the resolution framework for 
banks themselves. In the former, having an estab-
lished resolution authority that can act independently 
on the best option to resolve distressed banks (across 
state borders)—the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation—helped ensure swift resolution of fail-
ing banks (although dealing with systemic financial 
institutions required further action). In the latter, the 
troubles of the banking system started a search for 
new mechanisms that culminated in the creation of a 
single supervisor and a unified resolution framework 
(Goyal and others 2013).
The postcrisis paths for credit, investment, consump-
tion, and growth differed accordingly (Figure 2.3.5). 
The United States recovered faster and more strongly. 
United States
Ireland
Spain
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2005 06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
Figure 2.3.4.  Nonperforming Loan Ratio
(Percent)
Source: World Bank, Global Financial Development Database.
Box 2.3 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
96
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
The deleveraging phase, notably, has been shorter and 
more shallow—consistent with the importance of 
repairing bank balance sheets in restoring growth.6
Summing up, comparison of the US and European 
experiences and cross-country studies highlights the 
following:
•	 Swift and decisive action: Recapitalizing or resolving 
banks shortly after the containment phase is key. 
The alternative leads to zombification, with signifi-
cant macroeconomic costs. From a structural point 
of view, resolution frameworks should aim to ensure 
that such swift and decisive action is possible.
•	 Appropriate backstops: In extreme circumstances, 
establishing credibility and preventing panic and 
contagion may require use of public funds. In this 
context, having enough fiscal room and mitigat-
ing the sovereign-bank nexus become crucial. Any 
actual use of these backstops, however, should be 
a last-resort measure accompanied by appropriate 
burden sharing and clear exit strategies to mini-
mize moral hazard, as well as the potential costs 
associated with direct government involvement in 
financial markets (for example, efficiency concerns).
6Other evidence corroborates this insight: early and decisive 
recapitalization of distressed banks helps corporate investment 
recover (Sun and Tong 2015) and can take several years off the 
duration of a recession (Homar and van Wijnbergen 2015).
United States
Ireland
Spain
60
80
100
120
40
60
80
100
120
2000
05
09
13
17
2000
05
09
13
17
20
40
60
80
100
120
2000 04
08
12
16
Figure 2.3.5.  Postcrisis Paths
(Percent; 2007 = 100)
1. Bank Credit
2. Private
Investment 
4. GDP
2000
05
09
13
17
3. Private
Consumption
60
80
100
120
140
Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; World Bank, World Development Indicators 
database; and IMF staff calculations.
Box 2.3 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
97
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
References
Abiad, Abdul, Ravi Balakrishnan, Petya Koeva Brooks, Daniel 
Leigh, and Irina Tytell. 2009. “What’s the Damage? Medium-​
Term Output Dynamics after Banking Crises.” IMF Working 
Paper 09/245, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Abramovich, Alexander. 2011. “Comparative Analysis of Stress 
Testing in the United States and Europe.” North Carolina 
Banking Institute 15 (1), Article 16, University of North 
Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, NC.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Autor, David. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and 
Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.” 
Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier.
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks, and 
Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings.” In 
Handbook of Labor Economics (4), edited by Orley Ashenfelter 
and David E. Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2017. “Robots and Jobs: 
Evidence from US Labor Markets.” NBER Working Paper 
23285, National Bureau of Economic Research,  
Cambridge, MA.
———. 2018. “Artificial Intelligence, Automation, and Work.” 
NBER Working Paper 24196, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
———. Forthcoming. “The Race between Man and Machine: 
Implications of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares, and 
Employment.” American Economic Review. 
Adams, Zoe, Louise Bishop, and Simon Deakin. 2016. CBR 
Labour Regulation Index. Cambridge: Centre for Business 
Research. 
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kiliç 
Çelik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 
2017. “Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Souphala Chomsisengphet, 
Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao. 2015. “Mort-
gage Refinancing, Consumer Spending, and Competition: 
Evidence from the Home Affordable Refinancing Program.” 
NBER Working Paper 21512, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Ahuja, Ashvin, and Malhar S. Nabar. 2012. “Investment-Led 
Growth in China: Global Spillovers.” IMF Working Paper 
12/267, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Wolfgang Bergthaler, Jose M. Garrido, Anna Ily-
ina, Andreas Jobst, Kenneth Kang, Dmitriy Kovtun, Yan Liu, 
Dermot Monaghan, and Marina Moretti. 2015. “A Strategy 
for Resolving Europe’s Problem Loans.” IMF Staff Discussion 
Note 15/19, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Allard, Céline, Petya Koeva Brooks, John C. Bluedorn, Fabian 
Bornhorst, Katharine Christopherson, Franziska Ohnsorge, 
Tigran Poghosyan, and an IMF Staff Team. 2013. “Toward a 
Fiscal Union for the Euro Area.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 
13/09, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Allard, Julien, and Rodolphe Blavy. 2011. “Market Phoenixes 
and Banking Ducks: Are Recoveries Faster in Market-Based 
Economies?” IMF Working Paper 11/213, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Arai, Mahmood, and Roger Vilhelmsson. 2004. “Unemploy-
ment-Risk Differentials between Immigrant and Native 
Workers in Sweden.” Industrial Relations 43: 690–98.
Arnold, Nathaniel, Bergljot Barkbu, Elif Ture, Hou Wang, and 
Jiaxiong Yao. 2018. “A Central Fiscal Stabilization Capacity 
for the Euro Area.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 18/03, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aslam, Aqib, Patrick Blagrave, Eugenio Cerutti, Sung Eun Jung, 
and Carolina Osorio-Buitron. Forthcoming. “Recessions and 
Recoveries: Are EMs Different from AEs?” IMF Working 
Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Auerbach, Alan. 2017. “Fiscal Policy.” Peterson Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, DC.
Autor, David, and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill 
Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market.” 
American Economic Review 103 (5): 1553–1597.
Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane. 2003. “The 
Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empir-
ical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 
1279–333.
Ball, Laurence. 2014. “Long-Term Damage from the Great 
Recession in OECD Countries.” NBER Working Paper 
20185, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, 
MA.
Barnichon, Regis, Christian Matthes, and Alexander Ziegenbein. 
2018. “The Financial Crisis at 10: Will We Ever Recover?” 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 
2018–19, August.
Barth, James R., Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine. 2013. 
“Bank Regulation and Supervision in 180 Countries from 
1999 to 2011.” NBER Working Paper 18733, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bayoumi, Tamim. 2017. Unfinished Business: The Unexplored 
Causes of the Financial Crisis and the Lessons Yet to Be Learned. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Berg, Andrew, Ed Buffie, and Felipe Zanna. 2017. “Should We 
Fear the Robot Revolution? (The Correct Answer Is Yes).” 
Manuscript prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester NYU Con-
ference Series.
Berger, Helge, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Maurice Obstfeld. 
2018. “Revisiting the Economic Case for Fiscal Union in 
the Euro Area.” Departmental Paper, Research Department, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Berger, Helge, Thomas Dowling, Sergi Lanau, Weicheng Lian, 
Mico Mrkaic, Pau Rabanal, and Marzie Taheri Sanjani. 2015. 
“Steady as She Goes—Estimating Potential Output during 
Financial ‘Booms and Busts’.” IMF Working Paper 15/233, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Berkmen, S. Pelin, Gaston Gelos, Robert Rennhack, and James 
P. Walsh. 2012. “The Global Financial Crisis: Explaining 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
98
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Cross-Country Differences in the Output Impact.” Journal of 
International Money and Finance 31: 42–59.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2009. “Statement Regarding the Supervisory Cap-
ital Assessment Program.” May 7. http://www.federalreserve.gov/ 
newsevents/press/bcreg/bernankescap20090507.htm.
———. 2015. The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its 
Aftermath. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
———. 2017. “Monetary Policy for a New Era.” Prepared for 
conference titled “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,”  
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington 
DC, October 12–13.
———. 2018. “The Real Effects of Disrupted Credit: Evidence 
from the Global Financial Crisis.” The Per Jacobsson Foun-
dation Lecture, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 
and forthcoming in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers. 
2015. “Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their 
Monetary Policy Implications.” NBER Working Paper 21726, 
National Bureau for Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro. 
2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy.” IMF Staff Position 
Note 10/03, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Blanchard, Olivier, Hamid Faruqee, and Mitali Das. 2010. “The 
Initial Impact of the Crisis on Emerging Market Countries.” 
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity (Spring): 263–23.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Daniel Leigh. 2013. “Growth Forecast 
Errors and Fiscal Multipliers.” American Economic Review 103 
(3): 117–20.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2017. “Rethink-
ing Stabilization Policy: Back to the Future.” Conference titled 
“Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” Peterson Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, DC, October 12–13.
Blinder, Alan S. 2013. After the Music Stopped: The Financial 
Crisis, the Response, and the Work Ahead. New York, NY: The 
Penguin Press.
Borjas, George J. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of 
Immigrants.” American Economic Review 77 (4): 531–53.
Candelon, Bertrand, Alina Carare, Jean-Baptiste Hasse, and Jing 
Lu. 2018. “Globalization and the New Normal.” IMF Work-
ing Paper 18/75, International Monetary Fund, Washington, 
DC. 
Cerra, Valerie, Ugo Panizza, and Sweta Saxena. 2013. “Interna-
tional Evidence on Recovery from Recessions.” Contemporary 
Economic Policy 31 (2): 424–39.
Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Saxena. 2008. “Growth Dynamics: The 
Myth of Economic Recovery.” American Economic Review 98 
(1): 439–57. 
———. 2017. “Booms, Crises, and Recoveries: A New Par-
adigm of the Business Cycle and Its Policy Implications.” 
IMF Working Paper 17/250, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Cherlin, Andrew, Erin Cumberworth, and Christopher Morgan. 
2013. “The Effects of the Great Recession on Family Struc-
ture and Fertility.” The ANNALS of the American Academy of 
Political and Social Science 650: 214–31.
Chiacchio, Francesco, Georgios Petropoulos, and David Pichler. 
2018. “The Impact of Industrial Robots on EU Employment 
and Wages: A Local Labour Market Approach.” Bruegel 
Working Paper 02, Bruegel, Brussels.
Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc 
Laeven. 2010. “Cross-Country Experiences and Policy Impli-
cations from the Global Financial Crisis.” Economic Policy 
April: 267–93.
Clark, Ximena, Timothy J. Hatton, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 
2007. “Explaining U.S. Immigration, 1971–98.” Review of 
Economics and Statistics 89 (2): 359–73.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2014. “Revisions to CBO’s 
Projection of Potential Output since 2007.” https://www.cbo.
gov/publication/45150.
Elsby, Michael W.L., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2013. 
“Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD.” Review of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 95 (2): 530–48.
Enrich, David. 2010. “EU Banks Survive Stress Test.” The Wall 
Street Journal, July 24. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001
424052748703294904575384940544522582.html.
Espenshade, Thomas J. 1994. “Can Immigration Slow US 
Population Aging?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 
13 (4): 759–68.
Fernald, John G. 2015. “Productivity and Potential Output 
before, during, and after the Great Recession.” NBER Macroe-
conomics Annual 2014 29 (1): 1–51.
Fernandes, Marcelo, Deniz Igan, and Marcelo Pinheiro. 2015. 
“March Madness in Wall Street: (What) Does the Market 
Learn from Stress Tests?” IMF Working Paper 15/271, Inter-
national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Frey, Carl Benedikt, and Michael A. Osborne. 2017. “The Future of 
Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?” 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 114 (C): 254–80. 
Furman, Jason. 2018. “The Fiscal Response to the Great 
Recession: Steps Taken, Paths Rejected, and Lessons for Next 
Time.” Brookings Institution.
Gagnon, Joseph E. 2016. “Quantitative Easing: An Underappre-
ciated Success.” Peterson Institute of International Economics 
Policy Brief 16–4, Peterson Institute of International Eco-
nomics, Washington, DC.
Geithner, Timothy F. 2014. Stress Test: Reflections on Financial 
Crises. New York, NY: Broadway Books. 
Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist. 2018. “What Happened: 
Financial Factors in the Great Recession.” NBER Working 
Paper 24746, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, and Lucrezia Reichlin. 
2011. “Market Freedom and the Global Recession.” IMF 
Economic Review 59 (1): 111–35.
Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning. 2007. “Lousy and Lovely 
Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in Britain.” The Review 
of Economics and Statistics 89 (1): 118–133.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
99
CHAPTER 2 
THE GLOBAL economic RECOVERY 10 YEARS AFTER the 2008 FINANCIAL MELTDOWN
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
———, and Anna Salomons. 2014. “Explaining Job Polariza-
tion: Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshoring.” 
American Economic Review 104 (8): 2509–26.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2012. “Stories 
of the Twentieth Century for the Twenty-First.” American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1): 226–65.
Goyal, Rishi, Petya Koeva Brooks, Mahmood Pradhan, Thierry 
Tressel, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Ross Leckow, Ceyla Pazarba-
sioglu, and an IMF Staff Team. 2013. “A Banking Union for 
the Euro Area.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/01, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Graetz, Georg, and Guy Michaels. Forthcoming. “Robots at 
Work.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Hall, Robert E. 2014. “Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the US 
Economy from the Financial Crisis.” NBER Macroeconomics 
Annual 29: 71–128.
Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. “What 
Fundamentals Drive World Migration?” NBER Working Paper 
9159, National Bureau of Economic Research,  
Cambridge, MA.
Hoem, Jan M. 2008. “The Impact of Public Policies on Euro-
pean Fertility.” Demographic Research (19): 249–60.
Homar, Timotej, and Sweder J. G. van Wijnbergen. 2015. “On 
Zombie Banks and Recessions after Systemic Banking Crises: 
Government Intervention Matters.” CEPR Discussion Paper 
DP10963, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
International Federation of Robotics (IFR). 2017. “World 
Robotics 2017 Industrial Robots.” https://ifr.org.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2009. “The State of 
Public Finances: Outlook and Medium-Term Policies after 
the 2008 Crisis.” Fiscal Affairs Department publication, 
Washington, DC.
———. 2012. “Euro Area Policies: 2012 Article IV Consulta-
tion.” IMF Country Report 12/181, Washington, DC.
———. 2013a. “Euro Area Policies: 2013 Article IV Consulta-
tion—Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 13/231, Washing-
ton, DC.
———. 2013b. “Greece: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional 
Access under the 2010 Stand-By Arrangement.” IMF Coun-
try Report 13/156, Washington, DC.
———. 2013c. “Reassessing the Role and Modalities of Fiscal 
Policy in Advanced Economies.” IMF Policy Paper, Washing-
ton, DC.
———. 2014. “IMF Multilateral Policy Issues Report.” IMF 
Spillover Report, Washington, DC.
———. 2015. “Crisis Program Review.” Strategy, Policy and 
Review Department, International Monetary Fund, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2016. 
“Sovereigns versus Banks: Credit, Crises, and Consequences.” 
Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (1): 45–79.
Kahanec, Martin, and Martin Guzi. 2017. “How Immigrants 
Helped EU Labor Markets to Adjust during the Great Reces-
sion.” International Journal of Manpower 38 (7): 996–1015.
Kalwij, Adriaan. 2010. “The Impact of Family Policy Expenditure 
on Fertility in Western Europe.” Demography 47 (2): 503–519.
Kozlowski, Julian, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran. 
2017. “The Tail That Wags the Economy: Beliefs and Per-
sistent Stagnation.” NBER Working Paper 21719, National 
Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabián Valencia. 2013. “Systemic Banking 
Crises Database.” IMF Economic Review 61 (2): 225–70.
Lagarde, Christine. 2014. “The Challenge Facing the Global 
Economy: New Momentum to Overcome a New Mediocre.” 
Speech at Georgetown University School of Foreign Service, 
Washington, DC, October 2.
———. 2016. “Decisive Action to Secure Durable Growth.” 
Lecture at an event hosted by Bundesbank and Goethe Uni-
versity, Frankfurt, Germany, April 5. 
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2010. “The 
Cross-Country Incidence of the Global Crisis.” IMF Work-
ing Paper 10/171, International Monetary Fund, Washing-
ton, DC.
———. 2014. “Global Imbalances and External Adjustment 
after the Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 14/151, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
———. 2017. “International Financial Integration in the After-
math of the Global Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 
17/115, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Lee, Jaewoo, Jonathan D. Ostry, Alessandro Prati, Luca A. Ricci, 
and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2008. “Exchange Rate Assess-
ments: CGER Methodologies, IMF Occasional Paper 261, 
International Monetary Fund.” Washington, DC.
Lewis, Michael. 2010. The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday 
Machine. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Lipton, David. 2018. “Trust and the Future of Multilateralism.” 
IMF Blog. 
Lowenstein, Roger. 2010. The End of Wall Street. New York, NY: 
The Penguin Press.
Mantega, Guido. 2010. International Monetary and Financial 
Committee, Statement by Guido Mantega, Minister of 
Finance, Ministerio da Fazenda, Brazil, October 9.
Mitman, Kurt. 2016. “Macroeconomic Effects of Bankruptcy 
and Foreclosure Policies.” American Economic Review 106 (8): 
2219–55.
Neels, Karel. 2010. “Temporal Variation in Unemployment 
Rates and Their Association with Tempo and Quantum of 
Fertility: Some Evidence for Belgium, France, and the Neth-
erlands.” Paper prepared for the session titled “Low Fertility 
and Its Association with Macroeconomic Trends” of the 
Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. “Global Imbal-
ances and the Financial Crisis: Products of Common Causes.” 
Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October 
2009.
Ong, Li Lian, and Ceyla Pazarbasioglu. 2013. “Credibility and 
Crisis Stress Testing.” IMF Working Paper 13/178, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
100
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD). 2009. International Migration Outlook.
Paulson, Jr., Henry H. 2013. On the Brink: Inside the Race to 
Stop the Collapse of the Global Financial System. New York, 
NY: Business Plus.
Perri, Fabrizio, and Vincenzo Quadrini. 2018. “International 
Recessions.” American Economic Review 108 (4–5): 935–84.
Pritchett, Lant, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2013. “Asia-Phoria 
Meet Regression to the Mean.” Proceedings, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco (November): 1–35. 
Rajan, Raghuram G. 2010. Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures 
Still Threaten the Global Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 
———. 2014. “Competitive Monetary Easing: Is It Yesterday 
Once More?” Remarks at the Brookings Institution, Washing-
ton, DC, April 10.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2018. “Phillips 
Lecture—Why Some Times Are Different: Macroeconomic 
Policy and the Aftermath of Financial Crises.” Economica 85: 
1–40.
Schanzenbach, Diane, Ryan Nunn, Lauren Bauer, and Audrey 
Breitwieser. 2017. “The Closing of the Jobs Gap: A Decade 
of Recession Recovery.” Brookings Institution, The Hamilton 
Project, Washington, DC.
Schwartz, Carl, and Nicholas Tan. 2016. “The Australian 
Government Guarantee Scheme: 2008–15.” Bulletin – March 
Quarter, Reserve Bank of Australia.
Shah, Neil. 2010. “Wait-and-See after Europe Stress Test.” 
The Wall Street Journal, July 26. http://blogs.wsj.com/
marketbeat/2010/07/26/wait-and-see-aftereurope-stress-test/.
Sobotka, Tomáš, Vegard Skirbekk, and Dimiter Philipov. 2011. 
“Economic Recession and Fertility in the Developed World.” 
Population and Development Review 37 (2): 267–306.
Solt, Frederick. 2016. “The Standardized World Income Inequal-
ity Database.” Social Science Quarterly 97 (5): 1267–281.
Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2009. Too Big to Fail: The Inside Story of 
How Wall Street and Washington Fought to Save the Financial 
System—and Themselves. New York, NY: Viking Penguin. 
Spargoli, Fabrizio. 2012. “Bank Recapitalization and the 
Information Value of a Stress Test in a Crisis.” Manuscript, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Summers, Lawrence H. 2016. “The Age of Secular Stagnation: 
What It Is and What to Do about It.” Foreign Affairs, March/
April.
Sun, Yangfang, and Hui Tong. 2015. “How Does Postcrisis  
Bank Capital Adequacy Affect Firm Investment?” IMF  
Working Paper 15/145, International Monetary Fund,  
Washington, DC.
Thévenon, Olivier. 2011. “Family Policies in OECD Countries: 
A Comparative Analysis.” Population and Development Review 
37 (1): 57–87.
Thomsen, Poul. 2017. “The Euro Zone: What’s Next.” Speech 
at the Financial Times Investment Management Summit, 
London, September 28.
Timmer, Marcel. P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert 
Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries. 2015. “An Illustrated User 
Guide to the World Input-Output Database: The Case of 
Global Automotive Production.” Review of International 
Economics 23 (3): 575–605. 
Toloui, Ramin. 2018. “Global Financial Crisis: Origins and 
Causes.” Lectures Series on Navigating Financial Crises  
in the Modern Global Economy, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA.
Tsangarides, Charalambos. 2012. “Crisis and Recovery: Role of 
the Exchange Rate Regime in Emerging Market Economies.” 
Journal of Macroeconomics 34: 470–88.
Zhou, Xiaochuan. 2010. International Monetary and Financial 
Committee, Statement by Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the 
People’s Bank of China and Governor of the IMF for China, 
October 9.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
101
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Inflation in emerging market and developing economies 
since the mid-2000s has, on average, been low and stable. 
This chapter investigates whether these recent gains in 
inflation performance are sustainable as global finan-
cial conditions normalize. The findings are as follows: 
first, despite the overall stability, sizable heterogeneity in 
inflation performance and in variability of longer-term 
inflation expectations remains among emerging markets. 
Second, changes in longer-term inflation expectations are 
the main determinant of inflation, while external condi-
tions play a more limited role, suggesting that domestic, 
not global, factors are the main contributor to the recent 
gains in inflation performance. Third, further improve-
ments in the extent of anchoring of inflation expectations 
can significantly improve economic resilience to adverse 
external shocks in emerging markets. Anchoring reduces 
inflation persistence and limits the pass-through of cur-
rency depreciations to domestic prices, allowing monetary 
policy to focus more on smoothing fluctuations in output.
Introduction
Inflation in emerging market and developing 
economies (hereafter, emerging markets) has, on 
average, been remarkably low and stable in recent years 
(Figure 3.1).1 Following large commodity price swings, 
inflation in most emerging markets has been quick 
to stabilize, and the short-lived effects of inflationary 
shocks have, in turn, allowed central banks in these 
countries to cut interest rates to fight off recessions.
As monetary policy gradually normalizes in 
advanced economies, the ability of emerging mar-
kets to fend off inflationary pressures is being tested 
The authors of this chapter are Rudolfs Bems (lead), Francesca 
Caselli, Francesco Grigoli, Bertrand Gruss, and Weicheng Lian, 
with contributions from Michal Andrle, Yan Carrière-Swallow, 
and Juan Yépez, and support from Ava Yeabin Hong, Jungjin Lee, 
Cynthia Nyakeri, and Jilun Xing. Comments from Rafael Portillo are 
gratefully acknowledged.
1The analysis of this chapter is largely based on 19 emerging markets: 
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Hungary, India, 
Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, 
Russia, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey. For details on the sample 
selection, see Online Annex 3.1. All annexes are available online at  
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.
again.2 This chapter examines whether the recent 
gains in inflation performance—quick stabilization 
after inflationary shocks—are sustainable, or represent 
an artifact of (potentially temporary) global factors 
that have put downward pressure on inflation. The 
answer is crucial as emerging markets craft their mon-
etary policies to navigate the future shift in global 
financial conditions.
Proponents on both sides of the question can find 
evidence for their positions (Figure 3.2). The optimists 
can point to substantial supportive changes in insti-
tutional and policy frameworks (Rogoff 2004; Chap-
ter 4 of the September 2005 World Economic Outlook 
[WEO]; Végh and Vuletin 2014; Chapter 2 of the 
April 2016 WEO). For example, after the Asian crisis 
of the late 1990s, which illustrated anew some limita-
tions of pegged exchange rate regimes, central banks 
in many emerging markets adopted inflation targeting. 
Furthermore, as noted, their price stability endured 
despite sharp swings in commodity prices, the global 
financial crisis, and periods of strong and sustained US 
dollar appreciation. The policy changes, combined with 
real-world success, indicate that the gains in inflation 
performance are well rooted. 
Pessimists can argue that China’s integration into 
world trade and the broader globalization of com-
merce created a disinflationary environment benefiting 
emerging markets (Carney 2017; Auer, Levchenko, 
and Sauré forthcoming; Chapter 2 of the May 2018 
Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific). They 
may further note that the period following the global 
financial crisis was characterized by historically benign 
external financial conditions—manifested in low US 
government bond yields and compressed spreads in 
emerging markets—that limited the number of crisis 
events and accompanying inflation surges in emerging 
markets (Chapter 2 of the April 2016 WEO).
To shed more light on these issues, this chapter 
first examines the above competing claims: Was the 
2As advanced economies endeavor to raise interest rates from 
abnormal lows, currencies in emerging markets will tend to depreci-
ate as global portfolio investments react to diminished yield differen-
tials. The depreciation will be passed on to domestic prices.
CHALLENGES FOR MONETARY POLICY IN EMERGING MARKETS AS 
GLOBAL FINANCIAL CONDITIONS NORMALIZE
3
CHAPTER
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
102
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
recent benign inflation behavior widespread among 
emerging markets? What was driving inflation during 
this episode? And have the gains in inflation been well 
rooted through better domestic policies, or can they be 
expected to wane as global conditions shift?
Analysis of these initial questions finds that, first, the 
improved inflation performance since the mid-2000s 
was indeed broad based. However, the gains have not 
been uniform, as some emerging markets continue to 
find it challenging to keep inflation low. Second, it 
concludes that longer-term inflation expectations have 
been the main factor determining inflation, compared 
with the considerably smaller role of external condi-
tions. This finding suggests that domestic, not global, 
factors were the main contributor to the recent gains 
in inflation performance.3
3Chapter 3 of the April 2006 WEO draws similar conclusions 
from an analysis of the role of global factors in the disinflation 
episode of the 1990s and early 2000s. Focusing on advanced econ-
omies, Ihrig and others (2010) find little support for an increasing 
role of global factors in the inflation process, although others (see 
Borio and Filardo 2007) argue that the role of global factors has 
increased since the 1990s.
EMs: median
EMs: weighted average
AEs: weighted average
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1995
2000
04
10
15
18
Figure 3.1.  Headline Consumer Price Index Inﬂation
(Percent)
Disinﬂation period
Following a period of disinﬂation during the 1990s and early 2000s, inﬂation in
emerging markets has remained low and stable since the mid-2000s. 
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets. See Online Annex 3.1 
for data sources and country coverage. Weighted average is constructed using 
weights of nominal GDP, expressed in US dollar terms, for 2010–12. The vertical 
dashed line distinguishes the disinﬂation period from the rest of the sample.
Inﬂation targeters
Financial openness
Trade openness (right scale)
Exchange value of US dollar
Commodity price index (right scale)
10-Year Treasury note yield
EMBIG spreads: median
EMBIG spreads: interquartile range
0
20
40
60
80
25
30
35
40
1995
2000
04
10
15
1. Inﬂation Targeting and Openness in Emerging Markets
(Percent)
2. Global Shocks
(Index)
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
100
200
300
400
500
1995
2000
04
10
15
18
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1995
2000
04
10
15
18
3. 10-Year Treasury Note Yield and EMBIG Spreads
(Basis points)
Sources: Haver Analytics; JPMorgan Emerging Market Bond Index; Lane and 
Milesi-Ferretti (2018); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMBIG = emerging market bond index global. See Online Annex 3.1 for data 
sources and country coverage. Inﬂation targeters are expressed as percent of 
countries in the sample. Trade openness is deﬁned as imports in percent of GDP 
(ﬁve-year moving average). Financial openness is deﬁned as the sum of foreign 
direct investment and portfolio equity liabilities in percent of GDP (ﬁve-year 
moving average). Exchange value of US dollar is the nominal broad trade-weighted 
exchange value of the US dollar (Jan-95=100). The commodity price index is 
based on prices in US dollars of a broad set of commodities (Jan-95=100). EMBIG 
spreads are spreads between sovereign bonds in emerging markets and 
comparable US Treasury bonds. The vertical dashed line distinguishes the 
disinﬂation period from the rest of the sample. 
The decline and subsequent stability of inﬂation in emerging markets coincided 
with substantial improvements in institutional and policy frameworks and endured 
despite sharp swings in commodity prices and other large global shocks. Yet, the 
period was also characterized by historically benign external ﬁnancial conditions.
Figure 3.2.  Institutional and Policy Changes, Global Shocks, 
and Financial Conditions
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
103
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Given the importance of changes in inflation expec-
tations in driving inflation in emerging markets, the 
second part of the chapter zooms in on the behavior of 
inflation expectations. It measures and summarizes the 
extent of anchoring of longer-term inflation expecta-
tions in emerging markets and studies its implications 
for inflation performance and the conduct of monetary 
policy. More specifically, the chapter addresses the 
following questions:
•• How has the extent of anchoring of inflation 
expectations evolved in recent decades? How much 
heterogeneity in the extent of anchoring is there 
among emerging markets, and how does it compare 
with conditions in advanced economies?
•• What are the implications of the extent of anchoring 
of inflation expectations for monetary policy cycli-
cality and macroeconomic resilience when facing 
adverse external shocks?
In examining those questions, the chapter reaches 
the following conclusions:
•• The anchoring of inflation expectations has 
improved significantly over the past two decades, 
with the bulk of the gains taking place in the 2000s. 
Nonetheless, there is considerable heterogeneity in 
the extent of anchoring across emerging markets, 
as longer-term inflation expectations in several coun-
tries remain relatively volatile.
•• Better-anchored inflation expectations reduce infla-
tion persistence and limit the pass-through of cur-
rency depreciations to domestic prices. Such stability 
allows monetary policy to focus more on smoothing 
output fluctuations and improving resilience to 
adverse external shocks.
The chapter concludes that, amid monetary policy 
normalization in advanced economies, it is important for 
policymakers in emerging markets to consolidate and, in 
some cases, further improve the extent of anchoring of 
inflation expectations. How can the volatility of domes-
tic inflation expectations be reduced? The empirical 
findings from the literature, confirmed by the evidence 
reported in this chapter, link the extent of anchoring to 
the performance of domestic fiscal and monetary policy 
frameworks. Fiscal sustainability is a necessary precondi-
tion for a credible nominal anchor. Similarly, a reduction 
in the variability of longer-term inflation expectations 
cannot be achieved without a credible and independent 
central bank that communicates its intentions in a 
transparent and timely manner. These recommenda-
tions remain relevant also for emerging markets with 
better-anchored expectations, as their commitment to 
inflation targets will likely be tested by the gradual mon-
etary policy normalization in advanced economies.
Extent of Improvements in Inflation Outcomes
How broad based are the gains in inflation perfor-
mance? To answer this question, this section first exam-
ines headline consumer price inflation statistics, which 
are available for a comprehensive set of 90 emerging 
market and developing economies, and then zooms in 
on a sample of 19 emerging markets for which more 
detailed inflation data are available.4 Box 3.1 shows 
that the 19 sample countries, which constitute 80 per-
cent of the GDP of all emerging market and develop-
ing economies, are broadly representative in terms of 
inflation trends of the comprehensive set of emerging 
market and developing economies.5
Headline consumer prices in the wider group of 
emerging market and developing economies, split into 
three broad geographical areas—Asia, Latin America, 
and the combination of Europe, the Middle East, and 
Africa—all exhibit the same pattern of convergence to 
lower inflation rates (Figure 3.3, panel 1). The sizable 
and persistent differences in inflation rates among 
these regions during the 1990s and early 2000s were 
gone by the mid-2000s. In addition, the dispersion of 
inflation rates across emerging market and developing 
economies—as measured by the distance between the 
10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution—had 
declined substantially by the mid-2000s and has 
remained relatively stable since then. 
The share of emerging market and developing econo-
mies with inflation rates exceeding 10 percent declined 
4Country coverage, data sources, and definitions of variables are 
reported in Online Annex 3.1.
5The sample includes relatively large emerging markets but, with 
regard to other basic macroeconomic characteristics (income per 
capita, GDP growth rates, the level of financial development, and 
trade openness), the sample economies are comparable to the rest of 
emerging market and developing economies. One notable difference 
is that the median degree of exchange rate flexibility among the 
sample economies is larger than among all emerging market and 
developing economies. The more limited exchange rate flexibility in 
the broader set of emerging market and developing economies can 
affect inflation through channels that are less prevalent in the sample 
economies (see Box 3.1). However, the broader concept of inflation 
expectations anchoring—as studied in this chapter—is equally rele-
vant in flexible, managed, or fixed exchange rate regimes. See Adrian, 
Laxton, and Obstfeld (2018) for a discussion of the challenges in 
managing inflation expectations under different monetary regimes.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
104
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
dramatically from the mid-1990s until the early 2000s 
and stayed relatively stable thereafter (Figure 3.3, panel 
2). Nonetheless, the gains in inflation behavior are not 
uniform—15 percent of emerging market and devel-
oping economies have had a headline inflation rate of 
10 percent or more, on average, from 2004 to the first 
quarter of 2018. Several other economies exhibited 
sustained surges of inflation to double-digit rates.
Turning to other measures of price inflation, the 
inflation rate for so-called core consumer prices, which 
exclude food and energy items with more volatile 
prices, also declined until the mid-2000s and has 
remained low and stable since then (Figure 3.4).6 The 
6For these more detailed inflation statistics, as well as the econo-
metric analysis that follows, the chapter focuses on the narrower 
sample of 19 emerging markets, defined in Online Annex 3.1.
inflation rate of producer prices fell drastically during 
the 1990s and has remained at relatively low levels ever 
since. Finally, the same pattern is exhibited by GDP 
deflators, which encompass the prices of all domesti-
cally produced final goods and services. 
Inflation variability has been stable or declining in 
emerging markets since 2004 (Figure 3.5). The decline 
in the variability of inflation rates is not driven by 
exchange rate behavior, as there is no clear evidence 
of a decline in the variability of exchange rate move-
ments since the late 1990s.7 Inflation persistence also 
declined gradually during the sample period.8 As with 
inflation rates—which are higher in emerging markets 
than in advanced economies—two factors suggest that 
emerging markets could be expected to exhibit a greater 
degree of inflation volatility and persistence. First, a 
higher share of consumption in emerging markets is 
devoted to food and other commodities, whose prices 
7See Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017) for a discussion of 
changes in de facto exchange rate volatility.
8Inflation persistence is defined as the tendency for price shocks to 
elevate inflation above its long-term level for a prolonged period (see  
Online Annex 3.1 for details).
Asia
Latin America
Europe, Middle East, and Africa
All EMDEs: interdecile range
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies. See Online Annex 3.1 
for data sources and country coverage.
The gains in inﬂation performance among emerging market and developing 
economies were broad based. But 15 percent of these economies still registered 
double-digit inﬂation rates over 2004–18. 
Figure 3.3.  Regional Differences and Dispersion in Headline 
Consumer Price Index Inﬂation in Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies
(Percent)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1995
2000
05
10
15
17
1. Weighted Average Inﬂation, by Region
–5
5
15
25
35
1995
2000
05
10
15
17
2. Share of Countries with Double-Digit Inﬂation
Core consumer price index
Producer price index
GDP deﬂator
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. Lines denote 
medians across sample emerging markets of each indicator.
Alternative price measures for emerging markets also indicate a sizable decline in 
inﬂation during the 1990s and early 2000s and relative price stability since the 
mid-2000s. 
Figure 3.4.  Other Measures of Price Inﬂation in Emerging 
Markets
(Percent)
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1995
2000
05
10
15
17
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
105
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
tend to be more volatile. And, especially regarding per-
sistence, monetary policy institutions and frameworks 
in emerging markets could be less developed and thus 
less effective.9 So, it is a notable commentary on the 
progress made in strengthening monetary policy 
frameworks in emerging markets that, since 2004, the 
volatility of inflation for a large share (but not all) of 
the country sample has been comparable to that in 
advanced economies. The persistence of inflation has 
also been reduced, even though it remains somewhat 
above the level in advanced economies. 
In sum, inflation performance in emerging mar-
kets has markedly improved since the mid-2000s. 
The improvement is not, however, uniform across the 
country sample, and inflation is still generally more 
volatile and persistent than in advanced economies.
Determinants of Inflation in Emerging Markets
What has been driving inflation in emerging mar-
kets during the period of stable and low inflation from 
2004 to the first quarter of 2018? Among other infla-
tion determinants, this section assesses the role played 
by two competing forces—external price pressures and 
changes in longer-term inflation expectations—and 
gauges the overall contributions from factors of global 
and domestic origin.10
The analysis decomposes inflation into contributions 
from conventional determinants of inflation—the degree 
of economic slack, inflation expectations, and external 
factors—and consists of two stages.11 The first stage 
estimates a Phillips curve.12 The specification includes 
domestic and foreign output gaps, three-year-ahead 
inflation forecasts, and a measure of external price devel-
opments as explanatory factors, and allows for inflation 
persistence and country fixed effects. The baseline 
specification is estimated for a panel of sample emerging 
9See Mishkin (2007) for a discussion of how better monetary 
policy can contribute to a decline in inflation persistence.
10In line with the existing literature, longer-term inflation expec-
tations are proxied by surveys covering professional forecasters. Some 
studies have documented significant differences between forecasts 
of households and firms and those of professional analysts (see, for 
instance, Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers 2004); unfortunately, surveys 
covering households and firms are rarely available.
11See Online Annexes 3.1 and 3.2 for details.
12Estimates are from a hybrid variant of a standard New Keynes-
ian Phillips curve framework. See Galí and Gertler (1999) and 
Galí, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido (2001, 2003) for the theoretical 
underpinnings. To account for the role of global factors, the analysis 
follows Borio and Filardo (2007); Ihrig and others (2010); and Auer, 
Levchenko, and Sauré (forthcoming).
markets using core inflation and quarterly data from the 
first quarter of 2004 to the first quarter of 2018.13 Esti-
mated parameters are broadly consistent with findings in 
the literature (Figure 3.6). 
The second stage of the analysis explores the role 
of explanatory factors in determining actual inflation 
during 2004–18. The exercise is constructed in terms 
13The chapter’s main findings are unchanged for specifications 
using headline consumer price inflation (Online Annex 3.2). The 
results are robust to excluding the period of the global financial crisis 
or focusing the analysis on the postcrisis period.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The volatility is 
computed as the standard deviation of detrended (Hodrick-Prescott) inﬂation. 
Persistence denotes the standard deviation of the permanent component of 
inﬂation based on Stock and Watson (2007). The horizontal line in each box 
represents the median across countries; the upper and lower edges of each box 
show the top and bottom quartiles; and the vertical lines denote the range 
between the top and bottom deciles. The dots denote the average for advanced 
economies. X-axis labels indicate the start of three-year windows.
Figure 3.5.  Inﬂation Dynamics
(Percent)
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
04
07
10
13
16
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
16
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
16
1. Headline Consumer Price Index Inﬂation
2. Core Consumer Price Index Inﬂation
1998 2001
04
07
10
13
1998 2001
04
07
10
13
16
1998 2001
04
07
10
13
1998 2001
Persistence
Volatility
Volatility
Persistence
The variability and persistence of consumer price inﬂation has declined 
signiﬁcantly in emerging markets, remaining relatively low since the mid-2000s. 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
106
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
of deviations in inflation from its target values.14 The 
contribution of each explanatory factor is computed 
in terms of (1) average contributions to inflation 
levels, and (2) contributions to inflation variability at 
quarterly frequency, in the spirit of a variance decom-
position exercise.15
Contributions to Inflation
The results indicate that changes in longer-term 
inflation expectations have been the key driver of 
the level of inflation in emerging markets, with an 
overall positive contribution to inflation in each of 
the four indicative subperiods explored (Figure 3.7, 
panel 1). That is, inflation expectations for the sample 
14When a country is not an inflation targeter, its implicit 
target is defined as the moving average of 10-year-ahead inflation 
expectations.
15The decomposition of inflation dynamics is conducted in a 
manner similar to that in Yellen (2015) and Chapter 3 of the Octo-
ber 2016 WEO, taking into account the estimated persistence of the 
inflation process. See Online Annex 3.2 for details.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The dots 
denote the estimated coefﬁcient from a hybrid Phillips curve model (see Online 
Annex 3.2) and the vertical lines denote the 90 percent conﬁdence interval.
Inﬂation expectations, domestic output gaps, and external price pressure 
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence consumer price inﬂation in emerging markets.
Figure 3.6.  Coefﬁcient Estimates from the Baseline Phillips 
Curve Speciﬁcation
(Percentage points)
Inﬂation
expectations
Past
inﬂation
Output gap
Foreign
output gap
External price
pressure
(right scale)
0.00
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
–0.01
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–0.2
Output gap
External price pressure
Foreign output gap
Expected inﬂation
Country ﬁxed effect
Residual
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The bars in 
panel 1 (panel 2) represent the simple average contribution of each factor 
averaged across countries (periods). The diamonds in panel 1 represent the overall 
deviation in inﬂation. Bars for contributions to inﬂation variability in panel 3 show 
the simple average of the absolute values of country-speciﬁc contributions across 
periods, expressed as percent of the overall deviation of core inﬂation from target. 
Data labels use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Changes in longer-term inﬂation expectations have been the key driver of the level 
and variability of inﬂation in emerging markets, although there is substantial 
cross-country heterogeneity.
Figure 3.7.  Contributions to Deviation of Core Inﬂation from
Target
(Percentage points, unless noted otherwise)
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2004:Q1–08:Q2
08:Q3–09:Q4
10:Q1–14:Q2
14:Q3–18:Q1
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
BGR
BRA
CHL
CHN
COL
HUN
IDN
IND
MEX
MYS
PER
PHL
POL
ROU
RUS
THA
TUR
ZAF
BGR
BRA
CHL
CHN
COL
HUN
IDN
IND
MEX
MYS
PER
PHL
POL
ROU
RUS
THA
TUR
ZAF
1. Average Contribution, by Subperiod
2. Average Contribution, by Country
0
20
40
60
80
100
3. Contribution to Inﬂation Variability, by Country
(Percent)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
107
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
emerging markets, on average, exceeded the inflation 
target.16 In comparison, external prices exerted a 
deflationary influence, but the magnitude of this effect 
(−0.05 percentage point annually, on average, over 
the sample period) was considerably smaller than that 
of longer-term inflation expectations (0.5 percentage 
point). The deflationary pressure from external prices 
was most pronounced during the boom that preceded 
the global financial crisis. 
The overall deviation of inflation from the target 
declined gradually during 2004–14, by 0.7 percentage 
point.17 This trend is partly explained by output gaps 
(domestic and foreign), which stimulated inflation 
during the boom of 2004–07 and depressed it during 
the bust of 2008–09, and partly by the remain-
ing residual.
Examining the same contributions at the country 
level reveals that, although changes in longer-term 
inflation expectations are the main overall contributor 
to the deviations of actual inflation from target, there 
is noticeable cross-country heterogeneity (Figure 3.7, 
panel 2). The average inflationary impact of expecta-
tions is sizable for only half of the economies in the 
sample. In contrast, external price developments have 
exerted downward pressure on domestic prices for 
three-fourths of the economies in the sample, even 
though the magnitude of this contribution is small. 
The impact of cyclical factors is, by construction, lim-
ited when averaged over 2004–18.
Analysis of contributions to the variability of 
inflation shows that the model, on average, explains 
55 percent of the deviations of inflation from target 
(Figure 3.7, panel 3). The results confirm the impor-
tance of fluctuations in longer-term inflation expecta-
tions around the inflation target. Inflation expectations 
are the largest contributing explanatory factor for 
four-fifths of the sample countries, explaining, on aver-
age, 20 percent of the variation in inflation. Similar to 
the evidence in Figure 3.7, panel 2, there is substantial 
heterogeneity across countries, with the share attribut-
able to inflation expectations ranging from 2 percent 
to 35 percent. The results also confirm that external 
price movements played a more limited role in the 
variability in inflation rates, on average explaining 
8 percent of inflation deviations. The contribution of 
16This could reflect the public’s doubts about the central bank’s 
commitment to the inflation target, or concerns about fiscal sustain-
ability, which may imply higher inflation in the future.
17This decline is consistent with the small downward trend in core 
consumer price inflation shown in Figure 3.4.
the foreign output gap is negligible in all decomposi-
tion results.18
Role of Domestic and Global Factors
The remaining task for the analysis is to assess 
domestic and global contributions to inflation in 
emerging markets. The two capture an important 
distinction in that only domestic factors can be influ-
enced by policies in emerging markets, making them 
potentially sustainable. In contrast, foreign factors, 
even when deflationary, are more temporary in nature 
and could dissipate or reverse.
To gauge the contribution of global factors to infla-
tion deviations from target, the analysis reinterprets 
results from the baseline contributions exercise in panel 
3 of Figure 3.7. Fluctuations in inflation expectations 
and domestic output gaps are considered domestic fac-
tors, whereas external price pressure and foreign output 
gaps are interpreted as global factors.19,20 Applying this 
definition of global factors, the contribution results for 
inflation variability suggest that inflation deviations 
from target during 2004–18 were largely determined 
by domestic factors, with foreign factors explaining 
5–15 percent of inflation variability.
18The analysis in this section is subject to several limitations. First, 
the Phillips curve estimates can be affected by endogeneity issues, 
although the robustness exercises in Online Annex 3.2 suggest that the 
economic magnitude of the potential biases are relatively small. Sec-
ond, the decomposition results are subject to sizable uncertainty given 
that 45 percent of the variability in inflation remains unexplained.
19The labeling of contributions as domestic and global factors 
warrants a cautionary note. On one hand, inflation expectations 
can be affected by both domestic and global factors, leading to an 
underestimation of the contribution of global factors. However, 
the baseline specification directly controls for foreign variables. 
Moreover, the results, when the inflation expectations variable is 
purged of external factors (by replacing it with the residual from a 
regression of inflation expectations on external price pressure, foreign 
output gap, and country and time fixed effects), are similar (Online 
Annex 3.2), indicating that inflation expectations are mostly driven 
by domestic factors. That said, foreign shocks that have an impact 
on the domestic output gap, but are not captured by changes in 
the foreign output gap and the external price pressure variable, can 
also lead to a downward bias in the estimated contribution of global 
factors. On the other hand, some of the fluctuations in the exchange 
rate embedded in the external price pressure variable can be due to 
domestic factors, potentially biasing the estimated contribution of 
foreign factors upward.
20Online Annex 3.2 reports results from alternative model spec-
ifications that include a broader set of foreign factors (for exam-
ple, global value chain participation, external price pressure from 
China). Also examined is an alternative decomposition exercise that 
decomposes inflation levels rather than deviations from target values. 
Baseline results concerning domestic versus global contributions are 
shown to be robust to all alternative specifications.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
108
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Could the decrease in the average decomposition 
residual during 2004–14 (Figure 3.7, panel 1) signify a 
common source of downward pressure on inflation? To 
address this question, the analysis estimates a common 
driver of inflation across emerging markets that cannot 
be explained by domestic factors.21 The approach is 
implemented by including time fixed effects in the 
model specification. Results show that the common 
component (that is, the time fixed effects) captures 
the commodity-induced inflation surge during 2008 
but, for other sample subperiods, its contribution to 
inflation deviations from target is small in economic 
terms (the black line in Figure 3.8). Furthermore, the 
estimated time fixed effects correlate with domestic 
explanatory factors. Beyond these factors, the residual 
21For details of this two-stage regression specification, see notes to 
Figure 3.8. See Chapter 3 of the October 2017 WEO for an earlier 
application of this approach.
provides a negligible average contribution to inflation 
during the post–global financial crisis period. These 
findings corroborate the earlier findings on the com-
paratively limited average impact of global factors in 
driving inflation in emerging markets.
Overall, the results of this section point to the cen-
trality of fluctuations in longer-term inflation expecta-
tions in driving inflation in emerging countries, which 
are interpreted to be of domestic origin. Motivated by 
these findings, the rest of the chapter zooms in on the 
behavior of inflation expectations.
Anchoring of Inflation Expectations
How anchored are expectations in emerging mar-
kets? After discussing how to define and measure the 
degree of anchoring, this section documents the evolu-
tion of anchoring over time, the extent of its variation 
across the sample economies, and the influence of 
policy frameworks on the extent of anchoring.
Measuring Anchoring
The concept of anchored inflation expectations 
has no widely agreed-upon definition. The literature 
has, however, developed an operational or practical 
definition—it is a set of predictions about the behavior 
of inflation forecasts in economies where expectations 
are “anchored.” Under those circumstances, expec-
tations for inflation over a sufficiently long horizon 
should be centered around the explicit or implicit 
target and hence not react to transitory fluctuations in 
actual inflation or in short-term inflation expectations 
(Demertzis, Marcellino, and Viegi 2012; Kumar and 
others 2015). In addition, if the monetary frame-
work is credible and inflation expectations are well 
anchored, the dispersion (range of values) of individual 
longer-term inflation forecasts would tend to be low 
(Capistrán and Ramos-Francia 2010; Dovern, Fritsche, 
and Slacalek 2012; Ehrmann 2015; Kumar and 
others 2015).
Building on these operational characteristics, the 
analysis uses survey-based longer-term inflation fore-
casts from professional forecasters to construct four 
complementary metrics aimed at capturing the extent 
of anchoring of inflation expectations:22
22Detailed definitions for each measure are provided in Online  
Annex 3.3.
Residuals
Predicted values
Time ﬁxed effects
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. Time ﬁxed 
effects are constructed as predicted values from the regression reported in 
column (1) of Online Annex Table 3.2.2. Residuals are from a regression of these 
time ﬁxed effects on averages of other explanatory factors included in the same 
ﬁrst-stage regression and a constant. Time ﬁxed effects and predicted values are 
subsequently normalized such that time ﬁxed effects in 2004–18 average to zero.
Apart from the commodity-induced inﬂation surge during 2008, common factors 
played a limited role as drivers of inﬂation dynamics in emerging markets over 
2004–18.
Figure 3.8.  Time Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, by 
Subperiod
(Percentage points)
2004:Q1–08:Q2
08:Q3–09:Q4
10:Q1–14:Q2
14:Q3–18:Q1
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
109
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
•• A summary measure of absolute deviations in infla-
tion forecasts from a target,
•• A summary measure of the variability of inflation 
forecasts over time,
•• The dispersion of inflation forecasts across individ-
ual forecasters, and
•• The sensitivity of inflation forecasts to surprises 
about current inflation.
In each case, a lower reading represents better 
anchoring of inflation expectations. Of course, each 
measure has advantages and shortcomings, including 
in terms of data coverage. Nonetheless, these four mea-
sures convey a consistent picture for each country.23
The Extent of Anchoring in Emerging Markets
These metrics suggest that inflation expectations have 
become increasingly anchored in emerging markets over 
the past two decades (Figure 3.9). The improvement 
in the extent of anchoring was particularly prominent 
in the early 2000s; subsequent gains have been more 
muted. Toward the end of the sample period, there is 
evidence that the extent of anchoring has worsened in a 
few countries. However, this recent trend is not consis-
tent across the four anchoring metrics.
At the same time, the metrics point to substantial 
variation in the degree of anchoring across emerging 
markets (Figure 3.10). At the high end, the average 
level of anchoring over 2004–17 in some emerging 
markets was even higher than the average for a sample 
of 11 inflation-targeting advanced economies. But 
for the emerging markets in the bottom quartile (the 
least anchored), the average reading for each measure 
is between three and seven times larger than that for 
emerging markets in the top quartile.24 On average, 
anchoring in emerging markets remains substantially 
weaker than in advanced economies. 
The heterogeneity in the extent of anchoring is 
reflected in the role of inflation expectations in deter-
mining deviations of inflation from targets (Figure 3.7, 
panels 1 and 2). If the sample economies are split 
into two even groups according to how well anchored 
expectations were during 2004–18, the contribution of 
23The rankings of economies, based on each metric of anchoring, 
correlate highly across measures, with the rank correlation between 
any two measures ranging from 0.56 to 0.87.
24The metrics also reveal that the position of economies in the 
ranking for anchoring has changed little over time, indicating that 
the extent of anchoring changes slowly (Online Annex Figure 3.3.1).
changes in longer-term inflation expectations to actual 
inflation is substantially larger for the economies with 
less-anchored inflation expectations (by 0.4 percent-
age point annually on average) than for those with 
more-anchored inflation expectations.25 The contri-
bution of other factors to actual inflation is broadly 
similar across the less- and more-anchored groups.
In sum, the extent of anchoring of inflation expec-
tations in emerging markets has improved significantly 
over the past few decades, but sizable differences 
25Similarly, changes in longer-term inflation expectations account 
for a relatively low fraction of inflation variability in those econo-
mies with better-anchored expectations, such as Chile and Poland 
(Figure 3.7, panel 3).
Figure 3.9.  Evolution of the Degree of Anchoring of Inﬂation 
Expectations, 2000–17
(Percent) 
Inﬂation expectations in emerging markets have become increasingly anchored 
over the past two decades, with most of the gains taking place prior to the 
mid-2000s.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
2. Variability of Long-
Term Forecasts
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2000–05
06–11
12–17
2000–05
06–11
12–17
2000–05
06–11
12–17
2000–05
06–11
12–17
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
3. Dispersion of Long-
Term Forecasts
1. Deviation of Long-Term
Forecasts from Target
4. Sensitivity of Long-
Term Forecasts to
Inﬂation Surprises
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgure 
shows the evolution of the degree of anchoring of inﬂation expectations over 
six-year rolling windows. The lines denote the median across countries. The 
shaded areas denote interquartile ranges. The measures on the degree of 
anchoring of inﬂation expectations are deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3. In all panels, 
lower values denote more-anchored inﬂation expectations.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
110
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
remain across emerging markets and relative to 
advanced economies.
Anchoring and Policy Frameworks
What explains the improvements in the anchoring 
of longer-term inflation expectations across emerging 
markets, as well as the still-sizable cross-country differ-
ences? A comprehensive study is beyond the scope of 
this chapter, but an exploration of the data confirms 
findings from the literature regarding the important 
role of sound monetary and fiscal frameworks in deter-
mining inflation expectations.
The literature suggests that the extent of anchoring 
is intimately related to the credibility of the monetary 
strategy (Cukierman and Meltzer 1986; King 1995).26 
A monetary policy plan will be credible if the public 
believes the monetary authority does not have incen-
tives to deviate from that plan or does not need to 
subordinate it to other considerations, such as restoring 
fiscal solvency. The formation of inflation expectations 
thus lies at the heart of any concept of credibility. 
Central banks may use monetary policy to pursue mul-
tiple goals, but the credibility of the policy is typically 
interpreted in terms of inflation performance.
Several studies have found that adopting an infla-
tion target and transparent public communication of 
monetary policy helps anchor inflation expectations in 
emerging and advanced economies alike.27 The data 
analyzed here confirm the importance of inflation 
targeting and transparency in the sample of emerg-
ing markets covered in this chapter (Figure 3.11, 
26Cukierman and Meltzer (1986) argue that the ability of the 
monetary authority to achieve its future objectives depends on the 
inflation expectations of the public, which in turn depend on the 
public’s evaluation of the credibility of the monetary authority.
27Gürkaynak, Levin, and Swanson (2010) analyze the behavior of 
long-term forward rates on nominal and inflation-indexed bonds in 
Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and conclude 
that announcing an explicit inflation target helps anchor long-term 
inflation expectations. Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004) reach a 
similar conclusion for a broader sample of advanced economies. 
Capistrán and Ramos-Francia (2010) find that the dispersion of 
inflation forecasts in emerging markets tended to fall after adopting 
an inflation target, while Brito, Carrière-Swallow, and Gruss (2018) 
argue that the reduction in disagreement among forecasts that 
follows the adoption of inflation targeting is largely due to increased 
central bank transparency. Chapter 3 of the May 2018 Regional 
Economic Outlook: Western Hemisphere finds that stronger transpar-
ency frameworks and communication strategies are associated with 
more-anchored inflation expectations.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = average of 11 advanced inﬂation targeting economies. See Online 
Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgures show the average 
value for each anchoring measure over 2004–17. Values marked with (*) have 
been truncated at 2. The measures on the degree of anchoring of inﬂation 
expectations are deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3. In all panels, lower values denote 
more-anchored inﬂation expectations. Data labels use International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
The extent of anchoring of inﬂation expectations varies markedly across emerging 
markets and remains substantially weaker than in advanced economies on average.
Figure 3.10.  Cross-Country Heterogeneity in Degree of 
Anchoring of Inﬂation Expectations, 2004–17
(Percent)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
AEs
CHL
POL
CHN
MYS
PHL
HUN
PER
BRA
MEX
COL
BGR
IDN
ZAF
IND
THA
ROU
TUR
RUS
ARG*
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
AEs
CHL
MEX
PER
POL
HUN
ZAF
MYS
COL
BRA
CHN
THA
PHL
IDN
IND
TUR
BGR
ROU
RUS
ARG*
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
AEs
CHL
COL
MYS
POL
IND
THA
MEX
BRA
HUN
PER
ZAF
IDN
ROU
RUS
CHN
ARG
BGR
PHL
TUR
1. Deviation of Long-Term Forecasts from Target
8.37
2. Variability of Long-Term Forecasts
5.99
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
AEs
CHL
POL
MEX
PER
COL
HUN
BRA
ROU
MYS
IND
PHL
THA
CHN
BGR
IDN
RUS
TUR
ARG*
3. Dispersion of Long-Term Forecasts
4.41
4. Sensitivity of Long-Term Forecasts to Inﬂation Surprises
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
111
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
panel 1).28 The cross-country variation in the degree 
of anchoring is related to both the maturity of an 
inflation targeting regime—more precisely, to the age 
of the regime—and to the transparency of central 
bank policy (as measured by Dincer and Eichengreen 
2014). More broadly, central bank communication 
plays a key role in anchoring expectations by improv-
ing the predictability of monetary policy (Box 3.2).29 
Regardless of the specific design of the monetary 
framework, sound and sustainable fiscal policy is 
essential for the credibility of monetary policy (see, 
for instance, Masson, Savastano, and Sharma 1997; 
Mishkin 2000; and Mishkin and Savastano 2001).30 
If public debt is perceived to be unsustainable, higher 
inflation will be expected. The mechanism for the 
expected price acceleration is the expectation of “fiscal 
dominance”—an eventual monetization of the debt 
or large devaluations of the currency. Some stud-
ies have indeed found an association between fiscal 
institutions and credibility on one hand and inflation 
performance and the anchoring of inflation expecta-
tions on the other (Combes and others 2017; Caldas 
Montes and Acar 2018) or a link between expected 
fiscal performance and inflation expectations (Celasun, 
Gelos, and Prati 2004). In line with these studies, the 
cross-country variation in the degree of anchoring in 
the sample covered in this chapter is positively related 
to the market perception about the sustainability of 
public debt (Figure 3.11, panel 2).31
Implications of Anchoring for Monetary Policy
Longer-term inflation expectations are a key driver of 
inflation in emerging markets, and the economies vary 
in the degree to which the expectations are anchored. 
When longer-term expectations are not well anchored, 
28The analysis on Figure 3.11 is based on the variability of infla-
tion forecasts, but a similar picture emerges when any of the other 
three anchoring metrics is used.
29See Al-Mashat and others (2018b) for a discussion of how 
central bank transparency and enhanced communication can rein-
force confidence in the long-term inflation target and improve the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy instrument.
30Other factors are also likely to matter for longer-term anchoring; 
for instance, Mishkin and Savastano (2001) point to the importance 
of stringent prudential regulations and strict supervision of financial 
institutions to ensure that the system is capable of withstanding 
exchange rate fluctuations.
31The analysis uses asset prices to capture the market perception 
about the sustainability of public debt. Importantly, these measures 
incorporate not only concerns about the current level of public 
debt for intertemporal fiscal solvency, but also the expected path of 
future deficits.
they tend to rise with price shocks that depress eco-
nomic activity and place central banks in a policy 
dilemma. Reacting to rising inflation expectations with 
tighter monetary conditions would worsen output 
effects, and loosening policy to boost activity would 
worsen inflation expectations. Hence, central banks in 
economies with less-anchored expectations would be less 
able to focus on smoothing output fluctuations.
Years in IT regime
CB transparency
EMBIG
CDS
Sources: Dicer and Eichengreen (2014); JP Morgan; Thomson Reuters 
Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: bps = basis points; CB = central bank; CDS = credit default swap; 
EMBIG = emerging market bond index global; IT = inﬂation targeting. See Online 
Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. EMBIG spreads and CDS 
spreads are the residuals from a regression on time ﬁxed effects. For the CB 
transparency index, higher values indicate higher degree of transparency. 
Argentina is excluded from the ﬁgures as an outlier; its inclusion would further 
strengthen the depicted relationships.
Sound monetary and ﬁscal frameworks are associated with better-anchored 
inﬂation expectations in emerging markets.
Variability of long-term forecasts
Variability of long-term forecasts
Years in IT and CB transparency index
Figure 3.11.  Anchoring of Inﬂation Expectations and Policy 
Frameworks, 2004–17
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
EMBIG and CDS spread (deviation from global, bps)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
5
10
15
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
–450
–400
–350
–300
–250
–200
–150
–100
2. EMBIG and CDS Spread 
y = 0.99 + 0.002x
R 2 = 0.10 (t-stat = 1.32)
y = 1.42 + 0.004x
R 2 = 0.25 (t-stat = 2.14)
1. Years in IT and CB Transparency Index 
y = 0.93 – 0.05x
R 2 = 0.36 (t-stat = –2.97) 
y = 0.94 – 0.04x
R 2 = 0.09 (t-stat = –1.23)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
112
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
A vast literature has explored how inflation perfor-
mance differs according to variations in the monetary 
framework (see, for instance, Rogoff and others 2004; 
Ball and Sheridan 2005; and Gonçalves and Salles 
2008). The approach in this section asks, instead, 
whether variations in the degree of anchoring of 
inflation expectations affect inflation performance and 
the trade-offs faced by monetary policy in emerg-
ing markets.32
In particular, the external shock represented by 
the ongoing normalization of monetary policy in the 
United States and other advanced economies may 
well depress activity in emerging markets while also 
triggering a temporary increase in inflation. This 
section addresses the following question: Will emerging 
markets with more-anchored inflation expectations be 
better able to fight the incipient downturn triggered by 
the external shock?
The approach takes the variation in the degree of 
anchoring among emerging markets as given, or as a 
characteristic that changes only slowly.33 The analysis 
first adapts a conventional New Keynesian monetary 
model to illustrate how the extent of anchoring may 
influence the domestic economic impact of an external 
shock. Second, an event analysis uses an earlier and 
comparable shock—the so-called taper tantrum during 
the summer of 2013—to explore differences in the 
responses of key variables between emerging markets 
with more- and less-anchored inflation expectations. 
Finally, the analysis explores whether the ability to 
conduct countercyclical monetary policy in emerging 
markets is related to the extent of anchoring of infla-
tion expectations.
Insights from a Monetary Model
A version of a New Keynesian monetary model 
is used to examine how the extent of central bank 
credibility can influence the impact of an external 
shock on domestic inflation dynamics and on the 
reaction of monetary policy. The shock considered is 
akin to a sudden stop in capital flows (Calvo 1998) 
32The approach pursued in this chapter is more closely related to 
Mishkin and Savastano (2001), who argue that policymakers can 
choose from among a wide set of monetary frameworks, but their 
ability to deliver price stability will ultimately be determined by 
their credibility, as captured in this chapter by the robustness of the 
public’s longer-term inflation expectations.
33This is consistent with the evolution of anchoring in the sample. 
The position of economies in the ranking for anchoring has changed 
little over time (Online Annex 3.3).
and is modeled as a temporary surge in the country 
risk premium.34
The degree of monetary policy credibility and the 
strength of inflation expectations anchoring signifi-
cantly affect how the model economy responds to the 
sudden-stop shock (Figure 3.12). Regardless of the 
degree of credibility, the external shock induces a sharp 
nominal currency depreciation (not shown in Fig-
ure 3.12), which boosts actual inflation. In the econ-
omy with a more credible central bank, longer-term 
inflation expectations are better anchored, and infla-
tion more quickly returns to its long-run level once 
the effect of the shock dissipates. The result implies a 
smaller exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices 
and lower inflation persistence. 
With a shorter-lived deviation of inflation from its 
target, the monetary policy rate need not increase by 
as much in response to the adverse shock, and can 
return to its neutral level sooner, leading to a smaller 
cumulative decline in output.35 In sum, the persistence 
of inflationary shocks is smaller, and monetary policy 
can focus more on fighting recessions when credi-
bility is higher and expectations are better anchored, 
thereby increasing the economy’s resilience to adverse 
external shocks.
The Taper Tantrum Episode
How did key macroeconomic variables in emerging 
markets react to the taper tantrum in the summer of 
2013? The episode was based on a sudden expectation 
of an imminent move toward monetary normaliza-
tion in the United States (via a tapering off of bond 
purchases by the Federal Reserve), which boosted risk 
premiums on debt instruments in emerging markets. 
Among the advantages of studying this shock are that 
it is related to an expectation of de facto monetary 
policy tightening in the advanced economies, it is well 
identified, and it is exogenous to emerging markets. 
Did the response during the taper tantrum episode 
differ across emerging markets according to how well 
anchored their inflation expectations were, as would be 
predicted by the model?36
34The framework follows Alichi and others (2009) and Al-Mashat 
and others (2018a), which extend a conventional monetary model to 
allow for imperfect credibility. See Online Annex 3.4 for details.
35The expected real interest rate also increases by less in the coun-
try with a more credible central bank.
36This analysis does not imply that anchoring is the ultimate 
driver of the differences in macroeconomic outcomes. As discussed 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
113
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
The empirical exercise estimates the responses of the 
variables of interest—the exchange rate, inflation, out-
put, and the policy rate—to the taper tantrum shock.37 
To tease out the differential effects arising from 
variations in the extent of anchoring, the economies 
in the sample are sorted into a more-anchored and a 
less-anchored group, as defined in Online Annex 3.3, 
and responses specific to each group are estimated.38
In each of the two country groups, the currency 
depreciates on impact, as predicted by the model 
(Figure 3.13, panel 1). The initial depreciation is some-
what smaller in the less-anchored group, which could 
be an indication of “fear of floating” (see Calvo and 
Reinhart 2002).39 However, after the first two months, 
the depreciation effect equalizes across the two groups.
The response of consumer prices suggests a very per-
sistent and statistically significant increase in the price 
level for the less-anchored economies and, broadly, no 
consumer price impact in the more-anchored group. 
The differences between the two groups are statistically 
significant at all horizons (Figure 3.13, panel 2).
A comparison of the responses of the exchange 
rate and consumer prices between the two groups of 
countries suggests that the exchange rate pass-through 
during the taper tantrum event was substantially larger 
in countries with less-anchored inflation expecta-
tions. A systematic exploration of the exchange rate 
and consumer price responses across the two groups 
of economies confirms that the pass-through of 
currency depreciations is lower in economies with 
better-anchored inflation expectations (Figure 3.14).40 
in the previous section, the varying extent of anchoring can be 
explained by fundamental macroeconomic factors, including the 
quality of fiscal and monetary policy frameworks.
37The estimates are produced with a local projection framework 
(Jordà 2005; Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor 2013). The methodol-
ogy is closely related to an event study approach (see, for example, 
de Carvalho Filho 2011; Obstfeld 2014; and Ahmed, Coulibaly, and 
Zlate 2017), but controls for lags of the dependent variable.
38Details of the estimation strategy and a discussion of robustness 
checks for the results of this section are in Online Annex 3.5.
39As discussed further below, fear of floating could help explain 
weak anchoring if the central bank compromises its inflation goals to 
achieve exchange rate stability.
40See Online Annex 3.5 for details. These results are obtained 
from a reduced-form estimation that does not distinguish between 
the underlying sources of movements in the exchange rate and, 
therefore, need to be interpreted with caution (Forbes, Hjortsoe, 
and Nenova 2015). Reassuringly, however, the magnitude of the 
pass-through for the less-anchored countries after six months (equal 
to 11 percent) is comparable to the estimates obtained from the 
taper tantrum event exercise (14 percent), where the underlying 
shock is well identified. For the more-anchored countries, the magni-
tudes of the pass-through are 1 percent and 5 percent, respectively.
High credibility
Low credibility
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgures show impulse responses to a “sudden-stop” shock, deﬁned as 
an increase in the country-speciﬁc risk premium, using a semistructural monetary 
model described in Online Annex 3.4. X-axis labels indicate time in quarters, with 
the shock occurring at time = 1.
Model simulations suggest that when monetary policy is credible and inﬂation 
expectations are better anchored, the economy is more resilient to adverse 
external shocks.
Figure 3.12.  Gains from Anchoring Inﬂation Expectations
(Percentage points)
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
–0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
–1.2
–1.0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
3. Policy Rate
2. Headline Consumer Price Index
1. Three-Year–ahead Inﬂation Expectations
4. Output (Cumulative Change)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
114
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
These findings are consistent with several earlier 
studies.41
In terms of the monetary policy dilemma and the 
response of the policy rate, the less-anchored country 
group faced a starker trade-off between fighting infla-
tion and countering falling growth prospects during 
the taper tantrum episode.42 Although, in contrast to 
the more-anchored group, these countries experienced 
a significant fall in expected output growth, they did 
41Taylor (2000) argues that improvements in monetary perfor-
mance, as reflected in price stability and better-anchored inflation 
expectations, result in an endogenous reduction of exchange rate 
pass-through. Several studies have found evidence in line with this 
hypothesis, including Gagnon and Ihrig (2001), Choudhri and Hak-
ura (2006), Edwards (2006), Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2007), 
Carrière-Swallow and others (2016), and Caselli and Roitman (2016).
42Given the monthly frequency of the estimation, the analysis 
proxies the response of output using one-year-ahead growth forecasts 
from Consensus Forecasts. An alternative exercise, using quarterly 
data and analyzing the reaction of actual output growth to the taper 
tantrum shock, shows similar results, confirming more a negative 
output response in less-anchored countries.
More-anchored
Less-anchored
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgures 
show the cumulative impulse response to the taper tantrum episode (see Online 
Annex 3.5 for details). An increase in the exchange rate denotes a depreciation. 
X-axis denotes time in months. The episode is deﬁned as equal to 1 in May 2013. 
The shaded areas correspond to 90 percent conﬁdence intervals computed with 
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Solid squares (unﬁlled circles) for responses 
denote that the difference between the two responses is statistically signiﬁcant 
(not statistically signiﬁcant) at a 90 percent conﬁdence level. The criterion to 
classify countries as more- and less-anchored is deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.
Economies with better-anchored inﬂation expectations were more resilient to the 
taper tantrum episode in the summer of 2013—they experienced a smaller increase 
in inﬂation and could keep monetary policy relatively more accommodative.
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
1. Exchange Rate
2. Consumer Prices
3. Growth Forecast
4. Monetary Policy Rate
Figure 3.13.  Response to the Taper Tantrum
(Percentage points)
More-anchored
Less-anchored
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The ﬁgure 
shows the cumulative impulse response of headline consumer prices to a 1 
percent change in the nominal effective exchange rate (see Online Annex 3.5 for 
details). X-axis denotes time in months. The shaded area corresponds to 90 
percent conﬁdence intervals computed with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors. Solid 
squares (unﬁlled circles) for responses denote that the difference between the two 
responses is statistically signiﬁcant (not statistically signiﬁcant) at a 90 percent 
conﬁdence level. The criterion to classify countries as more- and less-anchored is 
deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.
The exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices is lower in economies with 
better-anchored inﬂation expectations.
Figure 3.14.  Cumulative Exchange Rate Pass-Through
(Percentage points)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
115
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
not pursue looser monetary policies. Indeed, there is 
no significant difference in the response of the policy 
rate across the two groups at any horizon.
In sum, the analysis suggests that economies with 
better-anchored inflation expectations were more 
resilient to the taper tantrum episode and were able to 
keep monetary policy relatively more accommodative.
Countercyclical Monetary Policy
How general are the findings of the taper tan-
trum episode? When output enters a cyclical decline, 
could the monetary authorities in countries with 
more-anchored inflation expectations act more coun-
tercyclically than authorities in less-anchored countries, 
focusing more on reducing output fluctuations?
Following Végh and Vuletin (2014) and Végh and 
others (2017), an examination of a simple correlation 
between the detrended policy rate and the output gap 
reveals that monetary policy in both country groups, on 
average, reacted countercyclically to output gap develop-
ments over the first quarter of 2004 to the first quarter 
of 2018 (Figure 3.15). The countercyclical response 
was stronger in the more-anchored group. However, 
such correlation-based findings can be subject to several 
criticisms. First, they need not be informative of the 
monetary policy dilemma that policymakers in emerg-
ing markets face when hit by adverse external shocks, 
as monetary policy tradeoffs can vary depending on 
the nature of the underlying shock. Second, a simple 
correlation does not control for other factors important 
to policymakers. For example, if exchange rate stability 
is an additional policy objective and the exchange rate is 
correlated with the output gap, the estimated response 
of the policy rate to the output gap may be biased. 
To address these limitations, this section estimates 
a monetary policy reaction function for the emerg-
ing markets in the sample. Following Taylor (1993) 
and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012), the spec-
ification allows for inertia in monetary policy and 
includes the inflation rate, the output gap, and the 
change in the nominal effective exchange rate. The 
estimated coefficient on the output gap is interpreted 
as a measure of monetary policy countercyclicality. To 
assess whether the extent of anchoring influences the 
ability to conduct countercyclical policy, the estimation 
allows the coefficients in the monetary policy reaction 
function to differ between countries in the more- and 
less-anchored groups.43
43See Online Annex 3.6 for details.
To focus on adverse external shocks that can poten-
tially pose a dilemma between stabilizing output and 
inflation, such as the one examined in the event study 
of the taper tantrum, two complementary identifica-
tion strategies are used. First, the regression analysis is 
restricted to 2011–15, when emerging markets experi-
enced a substantial slowdown in net capital inflows.44 
Second, the domestic output gap is instrumented 
with shocks to the global risk premium, as captured 
by the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility 
Index (VIX).
The results show that the output gap coeffi-
cient is smaller for less-anchored countries than for 
more-anchored ones for all specifications and, in 
two of these, the difference between the two output 
44See Chapter 2 of the April 2016 WEO for a detailed examina-
tion of this slowdown episode and Online Annex Figure 3.6.1 for 
the evolution of net capital inflows to the countries in the sample.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. The dots 
denote the median correlation across countries and the vertical lines denote the 
interquartile range. Monetary policy rate series have been detrended by the 
Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter, following Végh and Vuletin (2014). The output gap is 
measured by the real-time output gap from the World Economic Outlook database if 
available, or by detrended real output using the Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter. The criterion 
to classify countries as more- and less-anchored is deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.
A simple correlation analysis suggests that over 2004–18 monetary authorities 
tended to react more to output gap ﬂuctuations in economies with better-anchored 
inﬂation expectations. 
Figure 3.15.  Correlation between Detrended Policy Rate and 
Output Gap, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1
(Percent)
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
More-anchored
Less-anchored
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
116
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
gap coefficients is statistically different from zero 
(Figure 3.16). The results also suggest that the coeffi-
cient on the nominal effective exchange rate is larger 
for less-anchored countries.45 Thus, monetary policy 
45The results could indicate that fear of floating leads to 
less-anchored inflation expectations. But there are other possible 
explanations, and more research is needed before drawing strong 
conclusions.
in less-anchored countries not only responds less to 
output gap fluctuations, but it also responds more to 
fluctuations in the nominal effective exchange rate. 
Overall, these findings suggest that the ability to 
conduct countercyclical monetary policy in emerging 
markets is positively linked to the extent of anchoring 
of inflation expectations.46
Taken together, the results in this section suggest 
that well-anchored expectations can attenuate the 
monetary policy dilemma faced by emerging markets 
when they are hit by adverse external shocks. The infla-
tionary impact of such shocks is smaller when inflation 
expectations are more anchored, allowing monetary 
policy to focus more on smoothing output fluctua-
tions, thus improving the resilience of the economy.
Summary and Policy Implications
Following a period of disinflation during the 1990s 
and early 2000s, inflation in emerging market and 
developing economies has remained low and stable. 
This chapter examines the low and stable inflation 
experience in 19 emerging markets during 2004–18 
to determine whether the recent gains in inflation 
performance are sustainable as global financial condi-
tions normalize.
The chapter finds that, for the average sample 
emerging market, the gains in inflation performance 
have been broad based—present across alternative 
price measures and geographic regions, as well as in 
terms of both inflation levels and inflation variability. 
At the same time, the gains are not uniform, as some 
emerging markets continue to find it challenging to 
keep inflation low and stable in the face of capital flow 
reversals and exchange rate pressures. Average inflation 
in several sample economies remained in double-digit 
territory during the period under study. The main 
driver of deviations of inflation from target is fluc-
tuations in longer-term inflation expectations, while 
the role of global factors is more limited. Zooming in 
on the behavior of inflation expectations reveals that 
the extent of expectations anchoring has improved 
but remains subpar in many emerging markets rel-
ative to the better-performing peers and relative to 
advanced economies.
46The findings are qualitatively robust to the exclusion of the 
global financial crisis period (third quarter of 2007 to the first 
quarter of 2009) and to alternative groupings of more-anchored and 
less-anchored economies.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IV = instrumental variables; NEER = nominal effective exchange rate; 
OLS = ordinary least squares. See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country 
coverage. The ﬁgure shows the effect on the output gap coefﬁcient (panel 1) and 
the exchange rate coefﬁcient (panel 2) of being a less-anchored country rather 
than a more-anchored country from estimated monetary policy reaction functions. 
Each panel summarizes results from three regression speciﬁcations. Starting from 
the left, the ﬁrst regression result refers to a full-sample OLS speciﬁcation, the 
second regression result refers to the OLS speciﬁcation in which the impact of 
more- or less-anchored inﬂation expectations is identiﬁed from the 
2011:Q1–15:Q4 period only, and the third regression result refers to a full-sample 
instrumental variable speciﬁcation (see Online Annex 3.6 for details). The criterion 
to classify countries as more- and less-anchored is deﬁned in Online Annex 3.3.
Model estimates suggest that monetary policy reacts more to output ﬂuctuations 
and less to exchange rate developments in countries with better-anchored 
inﬂation expectations—including in periods when adverse external shocks pose a 
dilemma between stabilizing output and inﬂation.
Figure 3.16.  Effects of Less-Anchored Inﬂation Expectations: 
Regression Results, 2004:Q1–2018:Q1
(Percentage points)
1. Effect on Countercyclicality of Monetary Policy
2. Effect on Response of Monetary Policy to Changes in the NEER
2004:Q1–18:Q1
OLS
11:Q1–15:Q4
OLS
04:Q1–18:Q1
IV (right scale)
2004:Q1–18:Q1
OLS
2011:Q1–15:Q4
OLS
2004:Q1–18:Q1
IV
–0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
–0.20
–0.15
–0.10
–0.05
0.00
0.05
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
117
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
What do these findings imply for inflation, and for 
economic outcomes more broadly, as global financial 
conditions normalize? To the extent that a tightening of 
global financial conditions leads to currency deprecia-
tions in emerging markets, some adjustment in relative 
prices and a temporary increase in their inflation rates 
is to be expected. But if expectations are well anchored, 
price stability would not be jeopardized. Indeed, the 
analysis shows that more-anchored inflation expectations 
reduce inflation persistence and limit the pass-through 
of currency depreciations to domestic prices, allowing 
monetary policy to focus more on reducing output 
fluctuations. Subpar levels of anchoring of longer-term 
inflation expectations can constrain central banks’ 
monetary policy responses and make emerging markets 
more vulnerable to adverse external shocks, such as the 
ongoing normalization of monetary policy in the United 
States and other advanced economies.
In terms of policy implications, the chapter argues 
that domestic fiscal and monetary policy frameworks 
can significantly affect the performance of output 
and inflation in response to adverse external shocks 
through their impact on the extent of anchoring of 
inflation expectations. One important implication is 
that emerging markets are not simply bystanders to 
the forces of globalization and financial conditions in 
advanced economies.47 By improving fiscal and mon-
etary policy frameworks over the past two decades, 
47Chapter 3 of the April 2017 Global Financial Stability Report 
draws similar conclusions regarding the domestic impact of global 
financial conditions.
emerging markets have succeeded in reducing inflation 
to low and sustainable levels. Whether these gains 
will be maintained largely depends on policymakers’ 
continued commitment to improving the long-term 
sustainability of fiscal frameworks, including by 
adopting fiscal rules, and preserving and rebuilding 
fiscal buffers where necessary. Equally important is 
their commitment to improving the credibility of 
central banks, which can be achieved by consolidating 
and enhancing their independence, as well as through 
improvements in timeliness, clarity, transparency, 
and openness in communications. In this context, it 
is notable that public debt has increased in emerg-
ing markets over the past decade and is projected to 
increase further in many of the largest economies over 
the next five years (see Chapter 1). Also, a number of 
less-anchored emerging markets have more recently 
come under considerable pressures from exchange 
rate depreciations and shorter-term inflation. These 
developments suggest that the past gains in inflation 
performance cannot be taken for granted and require 
continued improvements in fiscal and monetary pol-
icy frameworks.
The chapter also emphasizes that anchoring inflation 
expectations takes time, which suggests that policy-
makers in emerging markets should consolidate and 
further improve the extent of anchoring of inflation 
expectations, even when favorable economic conditions 
prevail. In countries where the credibility of monetary 
frameworks is relatively low, the emphasis should be on 
communicating clearly the reasons for policy actions 
taken in response to global developments.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
118
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
This box compares (1) basic macroeconomic char-
acteristics and (2) headline inflation dynamics for a 
wider group of 71 emerging market and developing 
economies with the 19 emerging markets covered in 
the chapter (termed here the “sample” economies).1 The 
wider set of 71 economies is separated into (1) 33 other 
emerging markets, and (2) 38 low-income developing 
countries, as defined in the World Economic Outlook 
classification, and referred to hereafter as the “other  
two country groups.”
The 19 emerging markets covered in the chapter 
are among the largest emerging markets (Figure 3.1.1, 
panel 1). This sample is representative of the broader 
set of emerging markets along several dimensions, 
including GDP per capita and financial development 
(Figure 3.1.1, panels 2 and 3). Also, countries in all 
three groups grow at a comparable pace (Figure 3.1.1, 
panel 4) and exhibit similar openness to international 
trade over the sample period (Figure 3.1.1, panel 
5). One difference is that the 19 sample economies 
have more flexible exchange rates, although several 
of them exhibit degrees of exchange rate flexibility 
that are comparable to those of economies in the 
other two country groups (Figure 3.1.1, panel 6). 
Greater exchange rate rigidity can contribute to higher 
inflation volatility for commodity exporters when 
facing large commodity price swings.2 Beyond this 
specific set of countries, the approach pursued in the 
chapter emphasizes the broader concept of credible 
monetary policy frameworks, as captured by the extent 
of anchoring of inflation expectations, in delivering 
The authors of this box are Francesca Caselli and Jilun Xing.
1The wider group includes all emerging markets and 
low-income developing countries not included in the core 
sample of 19 countries, except countries with (1) populations 
of fewer than 2 million people or (2) at least one episode 
of hyperinflation, defined as annual inflation of more than 
100 percent. The selection of the core sample of 19 economies is 
driven by data availability. The key data constraint for inclusion 
in the core sample of countries is the availability of longer-term 
(three-year-ahead and longer) forecasts for inflation.
2Several countries in the “other two country groups” exhibit 
limited exchange rate flexibility and are heavily dependent on 
commodities. Under a fixed exchange rate, when commodity 
export prices increase, both domestic and import prices rise 
(given higher domestic demand, which raises nontradables prices, 
including distribution margins for imports), with the adjustment 
to the income windfall taking place through relative prices rather 
than the exchange rate. Conversely, periods of weak commod-
ity export prices put downward pressure on domestic demand 
and prices. By contrast, under a flexible exchange rate part of 
the terms-of-trade movement is absorbed by the exchange rate, 
dampening the effect of this type of shock on inflation.
1. Nominal GDP
(Trillion PPP
international dollars)
Figure 3.1.1.  Comparison of Macro 
Characteristics across Country Groups
Sources: Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017); World Bank; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income 
developing countries; PPP = purchasing power parity. See 
Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. 
The horizontal line in each box represents the median across 
countries calculated over the period 2004–17; the upper and 
lower edges of each box show the top and bottom quartiles; 
and the vertical lines denote the range between the top and 
bottom deciles. A higher value of the exchange rate index 
means greater ﬂexibility.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
5. Trade Openness
(Percent of GDP)
3. Credit to GDP
(Percent)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Sample
EMs
Other
EMs
LIDCs
Sample
EMs
Other
EMs
LIDCs
Sample
EMs
Other
EMs
LIDCs
Sample
EMs
Other
EMs
LIDCs
Sample
EMs
Other
EMs
LIDCs
Sample
EMs
Other
EMs
LIDCs
0
3
6
9
12
15
0
25
50
75
100
125
2. Real GDP per Capita
(Thousand PPP
constant 2011
international dollars)
4. Real GDP Growth
(Percent)
6. Exchange Rate
Flexibility
(Index)
Box 3.1. Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
119
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
price stability over the narrower focus on the exchange 
rate regime. 
Inflation dynamics in the wider group of other 
emerging markets and low-income developing 
countries (the “other two country groups”) show 
broadly similar trends to that of the sample econo-
mies. Headline consumer price inflation in the other 
two country groups declined between the mid-1990s 
and the mid-2000s, and, on average, remained lower 
thereafter (Figure 3.1.2, panel 1). The number of 
countries with double-digit headline inflation also fell 
dramatically from the 1990s in all three groups. Less 
than 15 percent of the countries exhibited double-digit 
inflation at the end of the sample period, compared 
with 50–70 percent in 1995 (Figure 3.1.2, panel 2). 
Inflation volatility in the other two country groups 
also declined after 2004 (Figure 3.1.2, panel 3). 
However, a focus on the post-2004 period reveals 
some heterogeneity across the three groups. The 
average inflation rates for the other emerging market 
and low-income developing country groups, at 7 per-
cent and 8 percent, respectively, remain higher than 
those of the sample group, at 5 percent (Figure 3.1.2, 
panel 1). Similarly, volatility of inflation in the other 
two country groups remains higher than in the sample 
countries (Figure 3.1.2, panel 3).
What are the factors that could have contributed 
to higher inflation rates in the other two country 
groups? Compared with the sample, inflation in these 
two groups follows the evolution of commodity price 
inflation more closely (Figure 3.1.3, panel 1), pointing 
to stronger exposure of these economies to commodity 
price fluctuations. Indeed, the largest economies in the 
broader sample include several oil exporters, where the 
strength of domestic demand is heavily influenced by oil 
prices. The comovement of inflation with commodity 
prices is particularly evident in the period after 2004: 
headline inflation peaks along with the 2008 com-
modity price spike, declines during the global financial 
crisis, rebounds later, and finally drops again. Overall, 
this evidence suggests that economies in the other two 
country groups were not fully successful in smooth-
ing the repeated commodity shocks they faced in the 
postcrisis period. Moreover, in low-income developing 
countries food accounts for a larger share of consump-
tion expenditure, and higher food shares are linked to 
higher inflation (Figure 3.1.3, panel 2). 
The greater sensitivity of inflation in the other two 
country groups to commodity price swings could 
reflect differences in the quality of the institutional 
and policy frameworks. For instance, Choi and 
others (2018) find that, over time, a more credible 
monetary policy, together with reduced reliance on 
energy imports, lessens the impact of oil price shocks 
on inflation. Gelos and Ustyugova (2017) find that 
commodity price shocks have less persistent effects in 
countries with independent central banks, lower initial 
inflation, and better governance. Consistent with 
these results, central bank transparency—a proxy for 
Sample EMs
Other EMs
LIDCs
1995–2003
2004–18
Sample EMs
Other EMs
LIDCs
Figure 3.1.2.  Inﬂation Dynamics
(Percent)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Sample EMs
Other EMs
LIDCs
3. Volatility of Headline Consumer Price Index
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1995
2000
05
10
15
18
1. Headline Consumer Price Index Inﬂation
2. Share of Countries with Double-Digit Inﬂation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1995
2000
05
10
15
18
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income 
developing countries. See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources 
and country coverage. The lines in panel 1 denote averages 
weighted by nominal GDP. The weights are time invariant 
and computed between 2010 and 2012. The lines in panel 2 
denote the share of countries with headline consumer price 
index greater than or equal to 10 percent. Volatility is 
computed as the standard deviation of headline inﬂation. 
The dots (vertical lines) in panel 3 denote the medians 
(interquartile ranges).
Box 3.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
120
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
the quality of the monetary policy framework—in 
the other two country groups exhibits a slower pace 
of improvement and remains significantly below the 
levels of the sample group (Figure 3.1.4). Lack of 
a clear communication strategy about the inflation 
outlook and the presence of multiple inconsistent 
objectives contribute to lower transparency levels in 
low-income developing countries (IMF 2015). Fur-
thermore, because economies with less transparent and 
credible monetary policy frameworks tend to exhibit a 
higher degree of exchange rate pass-through, external 
shocks to such economies tend to be more inflationary 
than for economies with better monetary frameworks 
(Carrière-Swallow and others 2016). Finally, sound 
fiscal institutions are also a precondition for credi-
ble monetary policy. Combes and others (2017), for 
example, find that the interaction of inflation targeting 
and fiscal rules has a beneficial effect on both fiscal 
balances and inflation.
Figure 3.1.3.  Inﬂation, Food Shares, and
Commodity Prices
(Percent)
Sample EMs
LIDCs
Other EMs
Commodity price index change
(right scale)
Other EMs
LIDCs
0
5
10
15
20
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Average CPI inﬂation, 2004–16
Share of food in consumption basket
2. Inﬂation and Food Share in Consumption Basket
1. Inﬂation and Commodity Price Index Change
0
3
6
9
12
15
–40
–20
0
20
40
2004
10
15
18
Sources: International Labour Organization; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: CPI = consumer price index; EMs = emerging markets; 
LIDCs = low-income developing countries. See Online Annex 
3.1 for data sources and country coverage. In panel 1, the 
solid lines denote averages weighted by nominal GDP. The 
weights are time invariant and computed between 2010 and 
2012. The dashed line corresponds to the change in the 
commodity price index (2005 = 100) of a broad set of 
commodities. In panel 2, the solid lines denote the ﬁtted 
regression lines for each group. The slope coefﬁcient is 
signiﬁcant for LIDCs, but not for other EMs. 
1998–2003
2004–16
Sample EMs
Other EMs
LIDCs
0
2
4
6
8
10
Figure 3.1.4.  Central Bank Transparency
(Index)
Sources: Dincer and Eichengreen (2014); and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income 
developing countries. See Online Annex 3.1 for data 
sources and country coverage. The dots (vertical lines) 
denote the medians (interquartile ranges) of each group. 
The transparency index ranges from 0 to 15 and reﬂects 
the sum of the scores attributed to responses to various 
questions about political, economic, procedural, and 
operational transparency. An increase represents an 
improvement in the index.
Box 3.1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
121
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
“Successful central bank communication efforts should 
make policy more predictable and market expectations of 
future short rates more accurate” (Blinder and others 2008).
 Over the past two decades, central banks in an 
increasing number of emerging market and developing 
economies have adopted inflation targeting—a policy 
that sets an inflation goal and emphasizes transpar-
ency and clear communication with the public to help 
achieve it. The change coincided with improved anchor-
ing of longer-term inflation expectations in many of 
those economies, but substantial variations in the extent 
of anchoring still exist. This box shows that more trans-
parent and clear communication by the central bank 
can improve the anchoring of inflation expectations by 
reducing uncertainty about future policy actions.
One way in which the central bank can influence 
the anchoring of inflation expectations is by helping 
improve the ability of the public to anticipate its 
adjustments to the monetary policy rate. An empir-
ical glimpse into the clarity and consistency of the 
central bank’s policy rate decisions can be obtained 
by measuring the frequency with which central 
bank decisions differ from what the market expects 
just before the release of policy announcements. 
The evidence shows that achieving a high degree of 
monetary policy predictability has been challeng-
ing for emerging market and developing economies 
(Figure 3.2.1). Despite important steps taken to 
strengthen monetary policy frameworks during the 
past two decades, the predictability of policy rate 
actions by their central banks remains below that of 
more seasoned inflation-targeting central banks in 
advanced economies. Furthermore, the evidence shows 
uneven improvement over time for emerging market 
and developing economies. 
Can poor predictability of monetary policy rate 
actions affect the anchoring of inflation expectations? 
Poor predictability may reflect a lack of public under-
standing about the central bank’s policy strategy. Alter-
natively, it may indicate the public’s doubt about the 
central bank’s commitment to price stability. In either 
case, inflation expectations may not be anchored to 
the central bank’s target, which has important impli-
cations for policy. In this regard, a significant relation-
ship appears between the predictability of monetary 
The authors of this box are Yan Carrière-Swallow 
and Juan Yépez.
policy and the degree of anchoring of medium-term 
(two-years-ahead) inflation expectations (Figure 3.2.2). 
How can monetary policy be made more predict-
able? In general terms, predictability requires having 
a clear policy function that the public understands. 
Indeed, monetary policy is more predictable in econ-
omies where the central bank operates more transpar-
ently (Figure 3.2.3). Another characteristic of more 
predictable central banks is that their communication 
tends to be easier to understand because it uses plain 
language and clear sentence structures.
 What can central banks do to improve transpar-
ency and the quality of their communication? Ele-
ments of best practices for transparent central banking 
include the announcement of a clear objective and 
frequent and regular publication of statements, 
minutes, and reports that give an account of the 
factors behind policy decisions and an assessment of 
how those factors are likely to evolve over the policy 
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: ADV = average for eight advanced economies. See 
Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country coverage. 
Data labels use International Organization for Standardiza-
tion (ISO) country codes. Surprises are the difference 
between the decision regarding the monetary policy rate and 
the average forecast among analysts surveyed by 
Bloomberg the day of the policy announcement.
Figure 3.2.1.  Frequency of Monetary Policy 
Surprises, 2010–13 versus 2014–18
(Percent of total decisions)
0
10
20
30
BRA
IND
COL
ROU
CHL
PER
TUR
POL
HUN
THA
PHL
MEX
ADV
2010–13
2014–18
Box 3.2. Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation 
Expectations
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
122
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
horizon. Improvements along these lines over the 
past decade have brought the level of transparency in 
emerging market and developing economies much 
closer to the levels observed in advanced economies 
(Dincer and Eichengreen 2014). The Central Bank of 
Chile, for example, added information to the policy 
statements released after the meetings, such as the 
vote tally and the main arguments given by the mem-
bers of the board.
 Several countries, including Chile, Colombia, 
and Mexico, have also implemented reforms to their 
communication strategies to increase the clarity of the 
information made available to the public. For instance, 
they have streamlined communication events to focus 
on medium-term developments; reduced the frequency 
of monetary policy meetings, aligning them with the 
release of the monetary policy report; and revamped 
the content of their policy statements, giving a richer 
account of the macroeconomic context and explaining 
why certain policy actions were taken.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Consensus Economics; 
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: See Online Annex 3.1 for data sources and country 
coverage. For the deﬁnition of monetary policy surprises see 
notes to Figure 3.2.1. Solid line shows the best linear ﬁt 
between the variables. Data labels use International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Figure 3.2.2.  Monetary Policy Predictability 
and Anchoring of Inﬂation Expectations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Frequency of monetary policy surprises, 2010–18
(percent of total decisions)
Absolute deviation of two-year-ahead inﬂation
expectations from central bank target, 2010–17
USA
GBR
THA
RUS
ROU
POL
PHL
NOR
NZL
KOR
IDN
IND 
HUN
CZE
AUS
CAN
PER
MEX
COL
CHL
BRA
R 2 = 0.485
Transparency
Readability
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Dincer and Eichengreen 
(2014); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The Flesch reading ease (RE) index is used for central 
bank press releases in English, which is deﬁned as 
RE = 0.33[206.835 – (1.015 × ASL) – (84.6 × ASW)], in 
which ASL = average sentence length and ASW = average 
number of syllables per word. See Online Annex 3.1 for data 
sources and country coverage. Solid lines show the best 
linear ﬁt between the variables. The sample includes 21 
inﬂation-targeting economies.
Figure 3.2.3.  Central Bank Communication 
and Monetary Policy Predictability
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Frequency of monetary policy surprises, 2010–18
(percent of total decisions)
Central bank transparency index and
Flesch reading ease index
R 2 = 0.4935
R 2 = 0.2856
Box 3.2 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
123
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
References
Adrian, Tobias, Douglas Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. 2018. 
“A Robust and Adaptable Nominal Anchor.” In Advancing the 
Frontiers of Monetary Policy, edited by Tobias Adrian, Douglas 
Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. Washington, DC: Interna-
tional Monetary Fund.
Ahmed, Shaghil, Brahima Coulibaly, and Andrei Zlate. 2017. 
“International Financial Spillovers to Emerging Market 
Economies: How Important Are Economic Fundamentals?” 
Journal of International Money and Finance 76: 133–52.
Alichi, Ali, Huigang Chen, Kevin Clinton, Charles Freedman, 
Marianne Johnson, Ondra Kamenik, Turgut Kışınbay, and 
Douglas Laxton. 2009. “Inflation Targeting under Imperfect 
Policy Credibility.” IMF Working Paper 09/94, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Al-Mashat, Rania, Kevin Clinton, Douglas Laxton, and Hou 
Wang. 2018a. “India: Stabilizing Inflation.” In Advancing the 
Frontiers of Monetary Policy, edited by Tobias Adrian, Douglas 
Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. Washington, DC: Interna-
tional Monetary Fund.
———. 2018b. “Managing Expectations.” In Advancing the 
Frontiers of Monetary Policy, edited by Tobias Adrian, Douglas 
Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld. Washington, DC: Interna-
tional Monetary Fund.
Aslam, Aqib, Natalija Novta, and Fabiano Rodrigues-Bastos. 
2017. “Calculating Trade in Value Added.” IMF Work-
ing Paper 17/178, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Auer, Raphael, Claudio Borio, and Andrew Filardo. 2017. 
“The Globalisation of Inflation: The Growing Importance 
of Global Value Chains.” CEPR Discussion Paper 11905, 
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
Auer, Raphael, Andrei Levchenko, and Philip Sauré. Forth-
coming. “International Inflation Spillovers through Input 
Linkages.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Ball, Laurence M., and Niamh Sheridan. 2005. “Does Inflation 
Targeting Matter?” In The Inflation-Targeting Debate, edited 
by Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford. NBER Studies 
in Income and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blinder, Alan S., Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jacob de 
Haan, and David-Jan Jansen. 2008. “Central Bank Com-
munication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and 
Evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature 46 (4): 910–45.
Borio, Claudio, and Andrew Filardo. 2007. “Globalisation and 
Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Deter-
minants of Domestic Inflation.” BIS Working Paper 227, 
Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Brainard, William. 1967. “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of 
Policy.” American Economic Review 57: 411–25.
Brito, Steve, Yan Carrière-Swallow, and Bertrand Gruss. 2018. 
“Disagreement about Future Inflation: Understanding the 
Benefits of Inflation Targeting and Transparency.” IMF 
Working Paper 18/24, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Caldas Montes, Gabriel, and Tatiana Acar. 2018. “Fiscal Cred-
ibility and Disagreement in Expectations about Inflation: 
Evidence for Brazil.” Economics Bulletin 38 (2): 826–43.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market 
Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops.” Journal of 
Applied Economics 1 (November): 35–54.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of 
Floating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2): 379–408.
Capistrán, Carlos, and Manuel Ramos-Francia. 2010. “Does 
Inflation Targeting Affect the Dispersion of Inflation Expecta-
tions?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (1): 113–34.
Carney, Mark. 2017. “[De]Globalization and Inflation.” IMF 
Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, Washington, 
DC, September 18.
Carrière-Swallow, Yan, Bertrand Gruss, Nicolás E. Magud, and 
Fabián Valencia. 2016. “Monetary Policy Credibility and 
Exchange Rate Pass-Through.” IMF Working Paper 16/240, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Caselli, Francesca, and Agustin Roitman. 2016. “Non-Linear 
Exchange Rate Pass-Through in Emerging Markets.” 
IMF Working Paper 16/1, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Celasun, Oya, Gaston Gelos, and Alessandro Prati. 2004. 
“Obstacles to Disinflation: What Is the Role of Fiscal Expec-
tations?” Economic Policy 19 (40): 442–81.
Choi, Sangyup, Davide Furceri, Prakash Loungani, Saurabh 
Mishra, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2018. “Oil Prices 
and Inflation Dynamics: Evidence from Advanced and 
Developing Economies.” Journal of International Money and 
Finance 82: 71–96.
Choudhri, Ehsan, and Dalia Hakura. 2006. “Exchange Rate 
Pass-Through to Domestic Prices: Does the Inflationary Envi-
ronment Matter?” Journal of International Money and Finance 
25 (4): 614–39.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Why Are 
Target Interest Rate Changes So Persistent?” American Eco-
nomic Journal: Macroeconomics 4: 126–62.
Combes, Jean-Louis, Xavier Debrun, Alexandru Minea, and 
Rene Tapsoba. 2017. “Inflation Targeting, Fiscal Rules, and 
the Policy Mix: Cross-Effects and Interactions.” Economic 
Journal, published online July 18.
Cukierman, Alex, and Allan Meltzer. 1986. “A Theory of 
Ambiguity, Credibility and Inflation under Discretion 
and Asymmetric Information.” Econometrica 54 (Septem-
ber): 1099–128.
de Carvalho Filho, Irineu. 2011. “28 Months Later: How 
Inflation Targeters Outperformed Their Peers in the Great 
Recession.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 1 (1): 1–46.
Demertzis, Maria, Massimiliano Marcellino, and Nicola Viegi. 
2012. “A Credibility Proxy: Tracking US Monetary Develop-
ments.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 12 (1): 1–36.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
124
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Challenges to Steady Growth
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Dincer, N. Nergiz, and Barry Eichengreen. 2014. “Central Bank 
Transparency and Independence: Update and New Measures.” 
International Journal of Central Banking 10 (1): 189–259.
Dovern, Jonas, Ulrich Fritsche, and Jiri Slacalek. 2012. “Dis-
agreement among Forecasters in G7 Countries.” Review of 
Economics and Statistics 94 (4): 1081–96.
Driscoll, John, and Aart Kraay. 1998. “Consistent Covariance 
Matrix Estimation with Spatially Dependent Panel Data.” 
Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (4): 549–60.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2006. “The Relationship between Exchange 
Rates and Inflation Targeting Revisited.” NBER Working 
Paper 12163, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Ehrmann, Michael. 2015. “Targeting Inflation from below: How 
Do Inflation Expectations Behave?” International Journal of 
Central Banking 11 (4): 213–49.
Forbes, Kristin, Ida Hjortsoe, and Tsvetelina Nenova. 2015. 
“The Shocks Matter: Improving Our Estimates of Exchange 
Rate Pass-Through.” Discussion Papers from Monetary Policy 
Committee Unit 43, Bank of England, London.
Gagnon, Joseph, and Jane E. Ihrig. 2001. “Monetary Policy and 
Exchange Rate Pass-Through.” International Finance Discus-
sion Paper 704, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System of the United States, Washington, DC.
Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation Dynamics: A 
Structural Econometric Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics 44 (2): 195–222.
Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido. 2001. 
“European Inflation Dynamics.” European Economic Review 
45 (7): 1237–70.
Galí, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido, 2003. 
Erratum to “European Inflation Dynamics.” European Eco-
nomic Review 47 (4): 759–60.
Gelos, Gaston, and Yulia Ustyugova. 2017. “Inflation 
Responses to Commodity Price Shocks—How and Why 
Do Countries Differ?” Journal of International Money and 
Finance 72: 28–47.
Gonçalves, Carlos, and Joao M. Salles. 2008. “Inflation Target-
ing in Emerging Economies: What Do the Data Say?” Journal 
of Development Economics 85 (1–2): 312–18.
Goodhart, Charles A.E. 2005. “The Monetary Policy Commit-
tee’s Reaction Function: An Exercise in Estimation.” Topics in 
Macroeconomics 5 (1): Article 18.
Gopinath, Gita. 2015. “The International Price System.” NBER  
Working Paper 21646, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Andrew T. Levin, and Eric T. Swanson. 
2010. “Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation 
Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the 
US, UK, and Sweden.” Journal of the European Economic 
Association 8 (6): 1208–42
Ihrig, Jane, Steven B. Kamin, Deborah Lindner, and Jaimie 
Marquez. 2010. “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and 
Inflation Hypothesis.” International Finance 13 (3): 343–75.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 
2017. “Exchange Arrangements Entering the 21st Century: 
Which Anchor Will Hold?” NBER Working Paper 23134, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification 
and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects.” Econo-
metrica 62 (2): 467–75.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2015. “Evolving Monetary 
Policy Frameworks in Low-Income and Other Developing 
Countries—Background Paper: Country Experiences.” IMF 
Staff Report, Washington, DC.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse 
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review 
95 (1): 161–82.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. 
“When Credit Bites Back.” Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking 45: 3–28.
King, Mervyn. 1995. “Credibility and Monetary Policy: Theory 
and Evidence.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy 42: 1–19.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy 
Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Inflation Targeting Does Not Anchor 
Inflation Expectations: Evidence from Firms in New Zea-
land.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 46: 151–225.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2018. “The 
External Wealth of Nations Revisited: International Financial 
Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.” 
IMF Economic Review 66 (1): 189–222.
Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Jeremy M. Piger. 
2004. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting.” 
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, July: 51–80.
Mankiw, N.G., R. Reis, and J. Wolfers. 2004. “Disagreement 
about Inflation Expectations.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 
2003 18: 209–48.
Masson, Paul R., Miguel A. Savastano, and Sunil Sharma. 1997. 
“The Scope for Inflation Targeting in Developing Countries.” 
IMF Working Paper 97/130, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2000. “Inflation Targeting in Emerging 
Market Countries.” American Economic Review 90 (2): 105–9.
———. 2007. “Inflation Dynamics.” International Finance 10 
(3): 317–34.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Miguel A. Savastano. 2001. “Monetary 
Policy Strategies for Latin America.” Journal of Development 
Economics 66 (2): 415–44.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2007. “Does 
Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?” NBER Working 
Paper 12876, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Neely, Christopher J. 2014. “Lessons from the Taper Tantrum.” 
Economic Synopses 2, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2014. “Never Say Never: Commentary on a Pol-
icymaker’s Reflections.” IMF Economic Review 62 (4): 656–93.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 2004. “Globalization and Global Disinfla-
tion.” In “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
125
CHAPTER 3 
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Changing Economy,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Rogoff, Kenneth, Aasim M. Husain, Ashoka Mody, Robin 
Brooks, and Nienke Oomes. 2004. “Evolution and Per-
formance of Exchange Rate Regimes.” IMF Occasional 
Paper 229, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, 
Papa N’Diaye, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and an IMF 
Team. 2014. “Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the 
Taper Tantrum.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 14/09, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Why Has US 
Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?” Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking 39 (1): 3–33.
———. 2010. “Modeling Inflation after the Crisis.” Proceedings— 
Economic Policy Symposium—Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City: 173–220.
Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in 
Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Pol-
icy 39: 95–214.
———. 2000. “Low Inflation, Pass-Through, and the 
Pricing Power of Firms.” European Economic Review 44 
(7): 1389–408.
Végh, Carlos A., Luis Morano, Diego Friedheim, and Diego 
Rojas. 2017. “Between a Rock and a Hard Place: The Mon-
etary Policy Dilemma in Latin America and the Caribbean.” 
LAC Semiannual Report; October 2017. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. https://​openknowledge​.worldbank​.org/​handle/​
10986/​28443.
Végh, Carlos A., and Guillermo Vuletin. 2014. “Overcoming 
the Fear of Free Falling: Monetary Policy Graduation in 
Emerging Markets.” In the Role of Central Banks in Financial 
Stability: How Has It Changed? edited by Douglas Darrell 
Evanoff, Cornelia Holthausen, George G. Kaufman, and 
Manfred Kremer. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Optimal Interest Rate Smoothing.” 
Review of Economic Studies 70: 861–86.
Yellen, Janet L. 2015. “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary 
Policy.” The Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
This page intentionally left blank 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
127
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
T
he Statistical Appendix presents histori-
cal data as well as projections. It comprises 
seven sections: Assumptions, What’s New, 
Data and Conventions, Country Notes, 
Classification of Countries, Key Data Documentation, 
and Statistical Tables.
The assumptions underlying the estimates and pro-
jections for 2018–19 and the medium-term scenario 
for 2020–23 are summarized in the first section. The 
second section presents a brief description of the 
changes to the database and statistical tables since the 
April 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third 
section provides a general description of the data and 
the conventions used for calculating country group 
composites. The fourth section summarizes selected 
key information for each country. The fifth section 
summarizes the classification of countries in the vari-
ous groups presented in the WEO. The sixth section 
provides information on methods and reporting stan-
dards for the member countries’ national account and 
government finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical 
tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; Sta-
tistical Appendix B is available online.) Data in these 
tables have been compiled on the basis of information 
available through September 18, 2018. The figures 
for 2018 and beyond are shown with the same degree 
of precision as the historical figures solely for conve-
nience; because they are projections, the same degree 
of accuracy is not to be inferred.
Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econo-
mies are assumed to remain constant at their average 
levels measured during the period July 17 to August 
14, 2018. For 2018 and 2019, these assumptions 
imply average US dollar–special drawing right (SDR) 
conversion rates of 1.419 and 1.406, US dollar–euro 
conversion rates of 1.186 and 1.170, and yen–US dollar 
conversion rates of 109.8 and 109.3, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $69.38 a 
barrel in 2018 and $68.76 a barrel in 2019.
Established policies of national authorities are assumed 
to be maintained. The more specific policy assumptions 
underlying the projections for selected economies are 
described in Box A1.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the 
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month 
US dollar deposits will average 2.5 percent in 2018 and 
3.4 percent in 2019, that three-month euro deposits will 
average –0.3 percent in 2018 and –0.2 percent in 2019, 
and that six-month yen deposits will average 0.0 percent 
in 2018 and 0.1 percent in 2019.
As a reminder, in regard to the introduction of the 
euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the Euro-
pean Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999, the 
irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro and 
currencies of the member countries adopting the euro 
are as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO: 
See Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO for details on 
how the conversion rates were established.
1 euro	 =	
13.7603	
Austrian schillings
	
=	
40.3399	
Belgian francs
	
=	
0.585274	
Cyprus pound1
	
=	
1.95583	
Deutsche marks
	
=	
15.6466	
Estonian krooni2
	
=	
5.94573	
Finnish markkaa
	
=	
6.55957	
French francs
	
=	
340.750	
Greek drachmas3
	
=	
0.787564	
Irish pound
	
=	
1,936.27	
Italian lire
	
=	
0.702804	
Latvian lat4
	
=	
3.45280	
Lithuanian litas5
	
=	
40.3399	
Luxembourg francs
	
=	
0.42930	
Maltese lira1
	
=	
2.20371	
Netherlands guilders
	
=	
200.482	
Portuguese escudos
	
=	
30.1260	
Slovak koruna6
	
=	
239.640	
Slovenian tolars7
	
=	
166.386	
Spanish pesetas
1Established on January 1, 2008.
2Established on January 1, 2011.
3Established on January 1, 2001.
4Established on January 1, 2014.
5Established on January 1, 2015.
6Established on January 1, 2009.
7Established on January 1, 2007.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
128	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
What’s New
•• Argentina’s consumer prices, which were previously 
excluded from the group composites because of data con-
straints, are now included starting from 2017 onward.
•• Data for Aruba are included in the data aggregated for 
the emerging market and developing economies.
•• Egypt’s forecast data from which the nominal exchange 
rate assumptions are calculated that were previously 
excluded because the nominal exchange rate was a 
market-sensitive issue, are now made public.
•• Swaziland is now called Eswatini.
•• Venezuela redenominated its currency on August 20, 
2018, by replacing 100,000 bolívares Fuertes (VEF) 
with 1 bolívar Soberano (VES). Local currency 
data, including the historical data, for Venezuela are 
expressed in the new currency beginning with the 
October 2018 WEO database.
Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 194 economies form the statis-
tical basis of the WEO database. The data are maintained 
jointly by the IMF’s Research Department and regional 
departments, with the latter regularly updating country 
projections based on consistent global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the ultimate 
providers of historical data and definitions, international 
organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with 
the objective of harmonizing methodologies for the com-
pilation of national statistics, including analytical frame-
works, concepts, definitions, classifications, and valuation 
procedures used in the production of economic statistics. 
The WEO database reflects information from both 
national source agencies and international organizations. 
Most countries’ macroeconomic data presented in the 
WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version of the System 
of National Accounts (SNA). The IMF’s sector statistical 
standards—the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and 
International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), the Mon-
etary and Financial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide 
(MFSMCG), and the Government Finance Statistics Manual 
2014 (GFSM 2014)—have been or are being aligned with 
the SNA 2008. These standards reflect the IMF’s special 
interest in countries’ external positions, financial sector 
stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The process 
of adapting country data to the new standards begins in 
earnest when the manuals are released. However, full con-
cordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent on the 
provision by national statistical compilers of revised country 
data; hence, the WEO estimates are only partially adapted 
to these manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, the 
impact on major balances and aggregates of conversion to 
the updated standards will be small. Many other countries 
have partially adopted the latest standards and will continue 
implementation over a period of years.1  
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the WEO 
are drawn from official data sources and IMF staff estimates. 
While attempts are made to align gross and net debt data 
with the definitions in the GFSM, as a result of data limita-
tions or specific country circumstances, these data can some-
times deviate from the formal definitions. Although every 
effort is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant and 
internationally comparable, differences in both sectoral and 
instrument coverage mean that the data are not universally 
comparable. As more information becomes available, changes 
in either data sources or instrument coverage can give rise to 
data revisions that can sometimes be substantial. For clarifi-
cation on the deviations in sectoral or instrument coverage, 
please refer to the metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are either 
sums or weighted averages of data for individual coun-
tries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages of growth 
rates are expressed as compound annual rates of change.2 
Arithmetically weighted averages are used for all data for the 
emerging market and developing economies group—except 
data on inflation and money growth, for which geometric 
averages are used. The following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, inter-
est rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are 
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market 
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three years) 
as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic 
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted by 
GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share of total 
world or group GDP.3 Annual inflation rates are simple 
percentage changes from the previous years, except in the 
case of emerging market and developing economies, for 
which the rates are based on logarithmic differences. 
Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing power 
parity terms are sums of individual country data after con-
version to the international dollar in the years indicated.
1 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European System 
of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few countries use 
versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar adoption pat-
tern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer to Table G, 
which lists the statistical standards adhered to by each country.
2 Averages for real GDP and its components, employment, inflation, 
factor productivity, GDP per capita, trade, and commodity prices are 
calculated based on the compound annual rate of change, except in the case 
of the unemployment rate, which is based on the simple arithmetic average.
3 See “Revised Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 
WEO Update for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based 
weights, as well as Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO and Annex IV of the 
May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne Schulze-
Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the World Economic 
Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, December 1993), 106–23.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
129
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors for 
the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepancies in 
intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual GDP data are 
used for the euro area and for the majority of individual 
countries, except for Cyprus, Germany, Ireland, and 
Portugal, which report calendar adjusted data. For data 
prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 1995 European 
currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver-
age market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment growth 
are weighted by labor force as a share of group labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are 
sums of individual country data after conversion to US 
dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years 
indicated for balance of payments data and at end-of-
year market exchange rates for debt denominated in 
currencies other than US dollars. 
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and 
prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent changes 
for individual countries weighted by the US dollar value 
of exports or imports as a share of total world or group 
exports or imports (in the preceding year).
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are 
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group 
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a 
few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the econ-
omies with exceptional reporting periods for national 
accounts and government finance data for each country. 
For some countries, the figures for 2017 and earlier 
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns; Table 
G lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and bal-
ance of payments indicators for each country.
Country Notes
The consumer price data for Argentina before December 
2013 reflect the consumer price index (CPI) for the Greater 
Buenos Aires Area (CPI-GBA), while from December 2013 
to October 2015 the data reflect the national CPI (IPCNu). 
The government that took office in December 2015 discon-
tinued the IPCNu, stating that it was flawed, and released 
a new CPI for the Greater Buenos Aires Area on June 15, 
2016 (a new national CPI has been disseminated starting 
in June 2017). At its November 9, 2016, meeting, the IMF 
Executive Board considered the new CPI series to be in line 
with international standards and lifted the declaration of 
censure issued in 2013. Given the differences in geographi-
cal coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology of these 
series, the average CPI inflation for 2014, 2015, and 2016, 
and end-of-period inflation for 2015 and 2016 are not 
reported in the October 2018 WEO. 
Argentina’s authorities discontinued the publication of 
labor market data in December 2015 and released new 
series starting in the second quarter of 2016. 
Greece’s primary balance estimates for 2017 are based 
on preliminary excessive deficit procedure data on an 
accrual basis (ESA 2010) provided by the National 
Statistical Service as of April 23, 2018. Historical data 
since 2010 reflect adjustments in line with the primary 
balance definition under the enhanced surveillance pro-
cedure for Greece.
India’s real GDP growth rates are calculated as per 
national accounts: for 1998 to 2011, with base year 
2004/05; thereafter, with base year 2011/12.
Against the background of a civil war and weak 
capacities, the reliability of Libya’s data, especially 
medium-term projections, is low.
Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward 
because of the uncertain political situation.
Data and projections for Turkey represent information 
available as of September 11, 2018.
Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, includ-
ing assessing past and current economic developments as 
the basis for the projections, is complicated by the lack 
of discussions with the authorities (the last Article IV 
consultation took place in 2004), long intervals in receiv-
ing data with information gaps, incomplete provision of 
information, and difficulties in interpreting certain reported 
economic indicators given economic developments. The fis-
cal accounts include the budgetary central government and 
Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA), and data for 2016–
23 are IMF staff estimates. Revenue includes the IMF 
staff’s estimate of foreign exchange profits transferred from 
the central bank to the government (buying US dollars at 
the most appreciated rate and selling at more depreciated 
rates in a multitier exchange rate system) and excludes IMF 
staff’s estimate of revenue from PDVSA’s sale of PetroCa-
ribe assets to the central bank. The effects of hyperinflation 
and the noted data gaps mean that IMF staff’s projected 
macroeconomic indicators need to be interpreted with 
caution. For example, nominal GDP is estimated assuming 
the GDP deflator rises in line with IMF staff’s projection 
of average inflation. Public external debt in relation to 
GDP is projected using IMF staff’s estimate of the average 
exchange rate for the year. Fiscal accounts for 2010–23 cor-
respond to the budgetary central government and PDVSA. 
Fiscal accounts before 2010 correspond to the budgetary 
central government, public enterprises (including PDVSA), 
Instituto Venezolano de los Seguros Sociales (IVSS - social 
security), and Fondo de Garantía de Depósitos y Protección 
Bancaria (FOGADE - deposit insurance).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
130	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Venezuela’s consumer prices (CPI) are excluded from 
all WEO group composites. 
Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the 
world into two major groups: advanced economies 
and emerging market and developing economies.4 This 
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic 
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objec-
tive is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably 
meaningful method of organizing data. Table A pro-
vides an overview of the country classification, showing 
the number of countries in each group by region and 
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size 
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports 
of goods and services, and population). 
Some countries remain outside the country classifica-
tion and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba 
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are 
examples of countries that are not IMF members, and 
their economies therefore are not monitored by the IMF.
General Features and Composition of Groups in 
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
The 39 advanced economies are listed in Table B. 
The seven largest in terms of GDP based on market 
exchange rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, 
France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—con-
stitute the subgroup of major advanced economies; 
often referred to as the Group of Seven (G7). The 
members of the euro area are also distinguished as a 
subgroup. Composite data shown in the tables for the 
euro area cover the current members for all years, even 
though the membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European 
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced 
economies in the WEO.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing econo-
mies (155) includes all those that are not classified as 
advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and 
developing economies are Commonwealth of Independent 
4 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always refer 
to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and 
practice. Some territorial entities included here are not states, although 
their statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
States (CIS); emerging and developing Asia; emerging and 
developing Europe (sometimes also referred to as “central 
and eastern Europe”); Latin America and the Caribbean 
(LAC); the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan (MENAP); and sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
Emerging market and developing economies are also 
classified according to analytical criteria. The analytical 
criteria reflect the composition of export earnings and a 
distinction between net creditor and net debtor econo-
mies. The detailed composition of emerging market 
and developing economies in the regional and analytical 
groups is shown in Tables D and E. 
The analytical criterion source of export earnings distin-
guishes between the categories fuel (Standard International 
Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and nonfuel and then 
focuses on nonfuel primary products (SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 
68). Economies are categorized into one of these groups 
when their main source of export earnings exceeded 50 per-
cent of total exports on average between 2013 and 2017.5
The financial criteria focus on net creditor economies, 
net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries 
(HIPCs), and low-income developing countries (LIDCs). 
Economies are categorized as net debtors when their latest 
net international investment position, where available, was 
less than zero or their current account balance accumula-
tions from 1972 (or earliest available data) to 2017 were 
negative. Net debtor economies are further differentiated 
on the basis of experience with debt servicing.  
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are or 
have been considered by the IMF and the World Bank 
for participation in their debt initiative known as the 
HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external debt 
burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustainable” level 
in a reasonably short period of time.6 Many of these 
countries have already benefited from debt relief and 
have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita income 
levels below a certain threshold (set at $2,700 in 2016 as 
measured by the World Bank’s Atlas method), structural 
features consistent with limited development and structural 
transformation, and insufficiently close external financial 
linkages to be widely seen as emerging market economies.
5 During 2013–17, 26 economies incurred external payments 
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling 
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or 
rescheduling during 2013–17.
6 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and 
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The 
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
131
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods
and Services, and Population, 20171
(Percent of total for group or world)
GDP
Exports of Goods 
and Services
Population
Number of
Economies
Advanced
Economies
World
Advanced
Economies
World
Advanced
Economies
World
Advanced Economies
39
100.0
41.3
100.0
63.6
100.0
14.4
United States
37.0
15.3
16.3
10.4
30.6
4.4
Euro Area
19
28.1
11.6
41.4
26.3
31.8
4.6
Germany
8.0
3.3
12.1
7.7
7.8
1.1
France
5.4
2.2
5.7
3.7
6.1
0.9
Italy
4.4
1.8
4.2
2.7
5.7
0.8
Spain
3.4
1.4
3.1
2.0
4.4
0.6
Japan
10.3
4.3
6.1
3.9
11.9
1.7
United Kingdom
5.5
2.3
5.5
3.5
6.2
0.9
Canada
3.4
1.4
3.5
2.2
3.4
0.5
Other Advanced Economies
16
15.7
6.5
27.2
17.3
16.0
2.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
7
74.0
30.6
53.4
33.9
71.7
10.3
Emerging  
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging  
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging 
Market and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
155
100.0
58.7
100.0
36.4
100.0
85.6
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
12
7.6
4.5
7.5
2.7
4.5
3.9
Russia
5.4
3.2
5.0
1.8
2.3
2.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
30
55.2
32.4
49.5
18.0
56.6
48.4
China 
31.0
18.2
29.3
10.7
22.0
18.8
India 
12.7
7.4
6.1
2.2
20.9
17.8
Excluding China and India
28
11.5
6.7
14.1
5.1
13.7
11.8
Emerging and Developing Europe
12
6.1
3.6
9.9
3.6
2.8
2.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
33
13.1
7.7
14.1
5.1
9.8
8.4
Brazil
4.3
2.5
3.0
1.1
3.3
2.8
Mexico
3.3
1.9
5.3
1.9
2.0
1.7
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
23
12.8
7.5
14.6
5.3
10.9
9.3
Middle East and North Africa
21
11.3
6.6
14.3
5.2
7.2
6.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
45
5.1
3.0
4.4
1.6
15.3
13.1
Excluding Nigeria and South Africa
43
2.6
1.5
2.6
0.9
11.5
9.8
Analytical Groups3
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
28
17.9
10.5
20.9
7.6
11.7
10.1
Nonfuel
126
82.1
48.2
79.1
28.8
88.3
75.5
Of Which, Primary Products
32
5.0
3.0
5.3
1.9
8.4
7.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies 
123
49.7
29.1
45.9
16.7
66.9
57.3
Net Debtor Economies by Debt-
Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling 
during 2012–16
26
3.5
2.1
2.4
0.9
6.4
5.5
Other Groups
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
39
2.5
1.4
2.0
0.7
11.5
9.8
Low-Income Developing Countries
59
7.2
4.2
6.8
2.5
22.7
19.4
1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those 
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geogra-
phy and similarity in economic structure.
3Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of 
insufficient data.  
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
132	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Greece
Netherlands
Belgium
Ireland
Portugal
Cyprus
Italy
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Finland
Lithuania
Spain 
France
Luxembourg
Germany 
Malta 
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
United States
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Australia
Korea
Singapore
Czech Republic
Macao SAR2
Sweden
Denmark
New Zealand
Switzerland
Hong Kong SAR1
Norway
Taiwan Province of China
Iceland
Puerto Rico
Israel
San Marino
1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a 
Special Administrative Region of China.
Table C. European Union
Austria
Germany
Poland
Belgium
Greece
Portugal
Bulgaria
Hungary
Romania
Croatia
Ireland
Slovak Republic
Cyprus
Italy
Slovenia
Czech Republic
Latvia
Spain
Denmark
Lithuania
Sweden
Estonia
Luxembourg
United Kingdom
Finland
Malta
France
Netherlands 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
133
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel Primary Products
Commonwealth of Independent States
Azerbaijan
Uzbekistan 
Kazakhstan
Russia
Turkmenistan1
Emerging and Developing Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Kiribati
Timor-Leste
Lao P.D.R.
Marshall Islands
Mongolia 
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
Latin America and the Caribbean
Bolivia
Argentina
Ecuador 
Chile
Trinidad and Tobago 
Guyana
Venezuela
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Algeria
Afghanistan
Bahrain
Mauritania
Iran
Sudan
Iraq
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Burkina Faso
Chad
Burundi
Republic of Congo
Central African Republic
Equatorial Guinea
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Gabon
Côte d’Ivoire 
Nigeria
Eritrea
South Sudan
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia
1Turkmenistan, which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, is included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in 
economic structure.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
134	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Commonwealth of Independent States
Armenia
*
Azerbaijan
•
Belarus
*
Georgia3
*
Kazakhstan
*
Kyrgyz Republic
*
*
Moldova
*
*
Russia
•
Tajikistan
*
*
Turkmenistan3
*
Ukraine3
*
Uzbekistan
•
*
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
*
Bhutan
*
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
Cambodia
*
*
China
•
Fiji
*
India
*
Indonesia
*
Kiribati
•
*
Lao P.D.R.
*
*
Malaysia
*
Maldives
*
Marshall Islands
*
Micronesia
•
Mongolia
*
Myanmar
*
*
Nauru
*
Nepal
•
*
Palau
•
Papua New Guinea
*
*
Philippines
*
Samoa
*
Solomon Islands
*
*
Sri Lanka
*
Thailand
•
Timor-Leste
•
*
Tonga
*
Tuvalu
*
Vanuatu
*
Vietnam
*
*
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
Bulgaria
*
Croatia
*
Hungary
*
Kosovo
*
FYR Macedonia
*
Montenegro
*
Poland
*
Romania
*
Serbia
*
Turkey
*
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
Argentina
•
Aruba
*
The Bahamas
*
Barbados
*
Belize
*
Bolivia
*
•
Brazil
*
Chile
*
Colombia
*
Costa Rica
*
Dominica
*
Dominican Republic
*
Ecuador
*
El Salvador
*
Grenada
*
Guatemala
*
Guyana
*
•
Haiti
*
•
*
Honduras
*
•
*
Jamaica
*
Mexico
*
Nicaragua
*
•
*
Panama
*
Paraguay
*
Peru
*
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
St. Lucia
*
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
*
Suriname
*
Trinidad and Tobago
•
Uruguay
*
Venezuela
•
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
and Low-Income Developing Countries
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
135
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Afghanistan
•
•
*
Algeria
•
Bahrain
•
Djibouti
*
*
Egypt
*
Iran
•
Iraq
•
Jordan
*
Kuwait
•
Lebanon
*
Libya
•
Mauritania
*
•
*
Morocco
*
Oman
•
Pakistan
*
Qatar
•
Saudi Arabia
•
Somalia
*
*
*
Sudan
*
*
*
Syria4
. . .
Tunisia
*
United Arab Emirates
•
Yemen
*
*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
*
Benin
*
•
*
Botswana
•
Burkina Faso
*
•
*
Burundi
*
•
*
Cabo Verde
*
Cameroon
*
•
*
Central African Republic
*
•
*
Chad
*
•
*
Comoros
*
•
*
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Low-Income 
Developing 
Countries
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
*
•
*
Republic of Congo
*
•
*
Côte d’Ivoire
*
•
*
Equatorial Guinea
*
Eritrea
*
*
*
Eswatini
•
Ethiopia
*
•
*
Gabon
•
The Gambia
•
Ghana
*
•
*
Guinea
*
•
*
Guinea-Bissau
*
•
*
Kenya
*
•
*
Lesotho
*
*
Liberia
*
*
Madagascar
*
•
*
Malawi
*
•
*
Mali
*
•
*
Mauritius
*
•
*
Mozambique
•
Namibia
*
•
*
Niger
*
Nigeria
*
•
*
Rwanda
*
*
São Tomé and Príncipe
*
•
*
Senegal
*
•
*
Seychelles
*
•
*
Sierra Leone
*
South Africa
*
•
*
South Sudan4
. . . 
*
Tanzania
*
•
*
Togo
*
•
*
Uganda
*
•
*
Zambia
*
•
*
Zimbabwe
*
*
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
and Low-Income Developing Countries (continued)
1Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor). 
2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in 
economic structure.
4South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
136	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
   Government Finance
The Bahamas
Jul/Jun
Barbados
Apr/Mar
Belize
Apr/Mar
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Apr/Mar
Dominica
Jul/Jun
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Apr/Mar
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
Apr/Mar
India
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Apr/Mar
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Malawi
Jul/Jun
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Jul/Jun
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
St. Lucia
Apr/Mar
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Apr/Mar
Thailand
Oct/Sep
Trinidad and Tobago
Oct/Sep
1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
137
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
NSO
2016
2002/03
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Albania
Albanian lek
IMF staff
2016
1996
SNA 1993
From 1996
NSO
2017
Algeria
Algerian dinar
NSO
2017
2001
SNA 1993
From 2005
NSO
2017
Angola
Angolan kwanza
NSO and MEP
2015
2002
ESA 1995
NSO
2015
Antigua and 
Barbuda
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
CB
2016
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Argentina
Argentine peso
NSO
2017
2004
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Armenia
Armenian dram
NSO
2016
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2016
Aruba
Aruban florin
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2017
Australia
Australian dollar
NSO 
2017
2015/16
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2017
Austria
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan manat
NSO
2016
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2017
The Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
NSO
2016
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Bahrain
Bahrain dinar
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Bangladesh
Bangladesh taka
NSO
2017
2005/06
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Barbados
Barbados dollar
NSO and CB
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
NSO
2017
2014
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2017
Belgium
Euro
CB
2017
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
CB
2017
Belize
Belize dollar
NSO
2016
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Benin
CFA franc
NSO
2015
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Bhutan
Bhutanese 
ngultrum
NSO
2015/16
2000/016
SNA 1993
CB
2016/17
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
NSO
2016
1990
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bosnia convertible 
marka
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2017
Botswana
Botswana pula
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Brazil
Brazilian real
NSO
2017
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Brunei Darussalam
Brunei dollar
NSO and GAD
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and GAD
2017
Bulgaria
Bulgarian lev
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2017
Burkina Faso
CFA franc
NSO and MEP
2016
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Burundi
Burundi franc
NSO
2015
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verdean 
escudo
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 2008
From 2011
NSO
2017
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Cameroon
CFA franc
NSO
2016
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Canada
Canadian dollar
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2017
Central African 
Republic
CFA franc
NSO
2012
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2015
Chad
CFA franc
CB
2017
2005
…
NSO
2017
Chile
Chilean peso
CB
2017
20136
SNA 2008
From 2003
NSO
2017
China
Chinese yuan
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Colombia
Colombian peso
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2017
Comoros
Comorian franc
MEP
2017
2000
…
NSO
2017
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
Congolese franc
NSO
2016
2005
SNA 1993
CB
2016
Republic of Congo
CFA franc
NSO
2016
1990
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colón
CB
2016
2012
SNA 2008
CB
2016
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
138	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Afghanistan
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
NSO, MoF, and CB
2017
BPM 5
Albania
IMF staff
2016
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
…
CB
2016
BPM 6
Algeria
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Angola
MoF
2016
2001
CG,LG
…
CB
2016
BPM 6
Antigua and 
Barbuda
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Argentina
MEP
2017
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Armenia
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Aruba
MoF
2017
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 5
Australia
MoF
2016
2014
CG,SG,LG,TG
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Austria
NSO
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Azerbaijan
MoF
2015
…
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
The Bahamas
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Bahrain
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Bangladesh
MoF
2017
…
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Barbados
MoF
2016/17
1986
BCG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Belarus
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Belgium
CB
2017
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Belize
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG,MPC
Mixed
CB
2016
BPM 6
Benin
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Bhutan
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG
C
CB
2015/16
BPM 6
Bolivia
MoF
2016
2001
CG,LG,SS,NMPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Botswana
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Brazil
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS, 
MPC,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Brunei Darussalam
MoF
2017
…
CG, BCG
C
NSO, MEP, and GAD
2017
BPM 6
Bulgaria
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Burkina Faso
MoF
2017
2001
CG
CB
CB
2016
BPM 6
Burundi
MoF
2015
2001
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 6
Cabo Verde
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Cambodia
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG
A
CB
2017
BPM 5
Cameroon
MoF
2016
2001
CG,NFPC
C
MoF
2016
BPM 5
Canada
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,Other
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Central African 
Republic
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2015
BPM 5
Chad
MoF
2017
1986
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2015
BPM 6
Chile
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
China
MoF
2017
…
CG,LG
C
GAD
2017
BPM 6
Colombia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
…
CB and NSO
2017
BPM 6
Comoros
MoF
2017
1986
CG
Mixed
CB and IMF staff
2017
BPM 5
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
MoF
2016
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2016
BPM 5
Republic of Congo
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 6
Costa Rica
MoF and CB
2016
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
139
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Côte d'Ivoire
CFA franc
NSO
2015
2009
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Croatia
Croatian kuna
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
NSO
2017
Cyprus
Euro
NSO
2017
2005
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Denmark
Danish krone
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
Djibouti
Djibouti franc
NSO
2017
1990
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Dominica
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2016
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
CB
2017
2007
SNA 2008
From 2007
CB
2017
Ecuador
US dollar
CB
2016
2007
SNA 1993
NSO and CB
2017
Egypt
Egyptian pound
MEP
2016/17
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2017/18
El Salvador
US dollar
CB
2017
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Equatorial Guinea
CFA franc
MEP and CB
2016
2006
SNA 1993
MEP
2017
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
IMF staff
2006
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2009
Estonia
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2017
Eswatini
Swazi lilangeni
NSO
2016
2011
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
NSO
2016/17
2015/16
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Fiji
Fijian dollar
NSO
2016
20116
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Finland
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
France
Euro
NSO
2017
2014
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
Gabon
CFA franc
MoF
2016
2001
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
The Gambia
Gambian dalasi
NSO
2017
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Georgia
Georgian lari
NSO
2016
2000
SNA 1993
From 1996
NSO
2017
Germany
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1991
NSO
2017
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Greece
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Grenada
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Guatemala
Guatemalan 
quetzal
CB
2017
2001
SNA 1993
From 2001
NSO
2017
Guinea
Guinean franc
NSO
2016
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Guinea-Bissau
CFA franc
NSO
2016
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
NSO
2017
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Haiti
Haitian gourde
NSO
2016/17
1986/87
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
Honduras
Honduran lempira
CB
2016
2000
SNA 1993
CB
2016
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong dollar
NSO
2017
2016
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2017
Hungary
Hungarian forint
NSO
2017
2005
ESA 2010
From 2005
IEO
2017
Iceland
Icelandic króna
NSO
2017
2005
ESA 2010
From 1990
NSO
2017
India
Indian rupee
NSO
2017/18
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2017/18
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Iran
Iranian rial
CB
2016/17
2011/12
SNA 1993
CB
2016/17
Iraq
Iraqi dinar 
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1968/93
NSO
2017
Ireland
Euro
NSO
2017
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Israel
New Israeli shekel
NSO
2017
2015
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2017
Italy
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
NSO
2016
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
140	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Côte d'Ivoire
MoF
2017
1986
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 6
Croatia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Cyprus
NSO
2017
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Czech Republic
MoF
2016
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Denmark
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Djibouti
MoF
2016
2001
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 5
Dominica
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Dominican Republic
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS, NMPC
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ecuador
CB and MoF
2016
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Egypt
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 5
El Salvador
MoF and CB
2017
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Equatorial Guinea
MoF
2016
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Eritrea
MoF
2008
2001
CG
C
CB
2008
BPM 5
Estonia
MoF
2017
1986/2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Eswatini
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ethiopia
MoF
2015/16
1986
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 5
Fiji
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Finland
MoF
2016
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
France
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Gabon
IMF staff
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 5
The Gambia
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2017
BPM 5
Georgia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
C
NSO and CB
2016
BPM 6
Germany
NSO
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ghana
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Greece
NSO
2017
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Grenada
MoF
2017
2001
CG
CB
CB
2016
BPM 6
Guatemala
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Guinea
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB and MEP
2017
BPM 6
Guinea-Bissau
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2016
BPM 6
Guyana
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Haiti
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 5
Honduras
CB and MoF
2017
2014
CG,LG,SS,Other
Mixed
CB
2015
BPM 5
Hong Kong SAR
NSO
2017/18
2001
CG
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Hungary
MEP and NSO
2017
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Iceland
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
India
MoF and IMF staff
2017/18
1986
CG,SG
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 6
Indonesia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Iran
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 5
Iraq
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Ireland
MoF and NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Israel
MoF and NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
…
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Italy
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Jamaica
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
141
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Japan
Japanese yen
GAD
2017
2011
SNA 2008
From 1980
GAD
2017
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
NSO
2017
1994
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1993
From 1994
CB
2017
Kenya
Kenya shilling
NSO
2016
2009
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Kiribati
Australian dollar
NSO
2016
2006
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Korea
South Korean won
CB
2017
2010
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2017
Kosovo
Euro
NSO
2017
2016
ESA 2010
NSO
2017
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
MEP and NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2017
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz som
NSO
2016
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Lao P.D.R.
Lao kip
NSO
2016
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Latvia
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Lebanon
Lebanese pound
NSO
2016
2010
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2016/17
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
NSO
2015/16
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Liberia
US dollar
CB
2017
1992
SNA 1993
CB
2017
Libya
Libyan dinar
MEP
2016
2003
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Lithuania
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2005
NSO
2017
Luxembourg
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Macao SAR
Macanese pataca
NSO
2017
2016
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2017
FYR Macedonia
Macedonian denar
NSO
2017
2005
ESA 2010
NSO
2017
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
NSO
2016
2000
SNA 1968
NSO
2017
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
NSO
2011
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MoF and NSO
2017
2014
SNA 1993
CB
2017
Mali
CFA franc
NSO
2016
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Malta
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2017
Marshall Islands
US dollar
NSO
2016/17
2003/04
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
Mauritania
Mauritanian 
ouguiya
NSO
2014
2004
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
From 1999
NSO
2017
Mexico
Mexican peso
NSO
2017
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Micronesia
US dollar
NSO
2014/15
2004
SNA 1993
NSO
2014/15
Moldova
Moldovan leu
NSO
2017
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Mongolia
Mongolian tögrög  
NSO
2016
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
Montenegro
Euro
NSO
2016
2006
ESA 2010
NSO
2016
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
NSO
2016
2007
SNA 1993
From 1998
NSO
2017
Mozambique
Mozambican 
metical
NSO
2017
2009
SNA 1993/ 
2008
NSO
2017
Myanmar
Myanmar kyat
MEP
2016/17
2010/11
…
NSO
2017/18
Namibia
Namibia dollar
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Nauru
Australian dollar
…
2015/16
2006/07
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NSO
2017/18
2000/01
SNA 1993
CB
2017/18
Netherlands
Euro
NSO
2017
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NSO
2017
2009/10
SNA 2008
From 1987
NSO
2017
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan 
córdoba
CB
2017
2006
SNA 1993
From 1994
CB
2017
Niger
CFA franc
NSO
2016
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Norway
Norwegian krone
NSO
2017
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
142	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Japan
GAD
2016
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
MoF
2017
BPM 6
Jordan
MoF
2017
2001
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Kazakhstan
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kenya
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kiribati
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO
2016
BPM 6
Korea
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kosovo
MoF
2017
…
CG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kuwait
MoF
2016
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Kyrgyz Republic
MoF
2017
…
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Lao P.D.R.
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Latvia
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Lebanon
MoF
2017
2001
CG
Mixed
CB and IMF staff
2015
BPM 5
Lesotho
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 5
Liberia
MoF
2017
2001
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 5
Libya
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Lithuania
MoF
2017
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Luxembourg
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Macao SAR
MoF
2016
2014
CG,SS
C
NSO
2016
BPM 6
FYR Macedonia
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Madagascar
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Malawi
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
NSO and GAD
2017
BPM 6
Malaysia
MoF
2016
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Maldives
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Mali
MoF
2016
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2016
BPM 6
Malta
NSO
2017
2001
CG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Marshall Islands
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2016/17
BPM 6
Mauritania
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Mauritius
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Mexico
MoF
2017
2014
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Micronesia
MoF
2014/15
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
…
NSO
2014/15
BPM 5
Moldova
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Mongolia
MoF
2016
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Montenegro
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Morocco
MEP
2017
2001
CG
A
GAD
2017
BPM 6
Mozambique
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Myanmar
MoF
2016/17
…
CG,NFPC
C
IMF staff
2016/17
BPM 5
Namibia
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Nauru
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2014/15
BPM 6
Nepal
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG
C
CB
2017/18
BPM 6
Netherlands
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
New Zealand
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Nicaragua
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
IMF staff
2017
BPM 6
Niger
MoF
2017
1986
CG
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Nigeria
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Norway
NSO and MoF
2016
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
143
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Oman
Omani rial
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Pakistan
Pakistan rupee
NSO
2016/17
2005/066
…
NSO
2016/17
Palau
US dollar
MoF
2016/17
2014/15
SNA 1993
MoF
2016/17
Panama
US dollar
NSO
2017
2007
SNA 1993
From 2007
NSO
2017
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea 
kina
NSO and MoF
2015
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2015
Paraguay
Paraguayan 
guaraní
CB
2017
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2017
Peru
Peruvian nuevo sol
CB
2017
2007
SNA 1993
CB
2017
Philippines
Philippine peso
NSO
2017
2000
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Poland
Polish zloty
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Portugal
Euro
NSO
2017
2011
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
Puerto Rico
US dollar
NSO
2016/17
1954
SNA1968
NSO
2016/17
Qatar
Qatari riyal
NSO and MEP
2016
2013
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2017
Romania
Romanian leu
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2017
Russia
Russian ruble
NSO
2017
2016
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2017
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
NSO
2017
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Samoa
Samoa tala
NSO
2016/17
2009/10
SNA 1993
NSO
2016/17
San Marino
Euro
NSO
2016
2007
…
NSO
2017
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
São Tomé and 
Príncipe dobra
NSO
2016
2008
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
NSO and MEP
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2017
Senegal
CFA franc
NSO
2017
2014
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Serbia
Serbian dinar
NSO
2016
2010
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2016
Seychelles
Seychellois rupee
NSO
2016
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2016
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean 
leone
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
From 2010
NSO
2017
Singapore
Singapore dollar
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Slovak Republic
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1997
NSO
2017
Slovenia
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2017
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands 
dollar
CB
2016
2004
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Somalia
US dollar
CB
2016
2012
SNA 1993
CB
2014
South Africa
South African rand
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
South Sudan
South Sudanese 
pound
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Spain
Euro
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2017
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
St. Kitts and Nevis
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
St. Lucia
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2017
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Sudan
Sudanese pound
NSO
2014
1982
SNA 1968
NSO
2017
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
NSO
2016
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
144	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Oman
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Pakistan
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2016/17
BPM 6
Palau
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
…
MoF
2016/17
BPM 6
Panama
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS, NFPC
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Papua New Guinea
MoF
2015
1986
CG
C
CB
2015
BPM 5
Paraguay
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Peru
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Philippines
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Poland
MoF and NSO
2016
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2016
BPM 6
Portugal
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Puerto Rico
MEP
2015/16
2001
…
A
…
…
…
Qatar
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2017
BPM 5
Romania
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Russia
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Rwanda
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Samoa
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
A
CB
2016/17
BPM 6
San Marino
MoF
2016
…
CG
…
…
…
…
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
MoF and Customs
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Saudi Arabia
MoF
2017
2014
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Senegal
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2017
BPM 6
Serbia
MoF
2016
1986/2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Seychelles
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Sierra Leone
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Singapore
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Slovak Republic
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Slovenia
MoF
2017
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Solomon Islands
MoF
2016
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Somalia
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
South Africa
MoF
2017
2001
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
South Sudan
MoF and MEP
2017
…
CG
C
MoF, NSO, and MEP
2017
BPM 6
Spain
MoF and NSO
2017
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Sri Lanka
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
St. Kitts and Nevis
MoF
2017
1986
CG, SG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
St. Lucia
MoF
2017/18
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
MoF
2016
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Sudan
MoF
2017
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 6
Suriname
MoF
2017
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2017
BPM 5
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
145
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
 
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest 
Actual 
Annual Data
Sweden
Swedish krona
NSO
2017
2017
ESA 2010
From 1993
NSO
2017
Switzerland
Swiss franc
NSO
2017
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
Syria
Syrian pound
NSO
2010
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2011
Taiwan Province of 
China
New Taiwan dollar
NSO
2017
2011
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Tajikistan
Tajik somoni
NSO
2017
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Tanzania
Tanzania shilling
NSO
2016
2007
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Thailand
Thai baht
MEP
2017
2002
SNA 1993
From 1993
MEP
2017
Timor-Leste
US dollar
MoF
2016
20156
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Togo
CFA franc
NSO
2015
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Tonga
Tongan pa’anga
CB
2017
2010
SNA 1993
CB
2017
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and 
Tobago dollar
NSO
2017
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
From 2009
NSO
2016
Turkey
Turkish lira
NSO
2017
2009
ESA 2010
From 2009
NSO
2017
Turkmenistan
New Turkmen 
manat
NSO
2017
2008
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2017
Tuvalu
Australian dollar
PFTAC advisors
2015
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
NSO
2016
2010
SNA 1993
CB
2016/17
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2017
United Arab 
Emirates
U.A.E. dirham
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
United Kingdom
Pound sterling
NSO
2017
2016
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2017
United States
US dollar
NSO
2017
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2017
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
CB
2017
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Uzbekistan
Uzbek sum
NSO
2017
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
NSO
2016
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolívar 
fuerte
CB
2016
1997
SNA 2008
CB
2016
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2017
Yemen
Yemeni rial
IMF staff
2008
1990
SNA 1993
NSO,CB, and 
IMF staff
2009
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
NSO
2017
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2017
Zimbabwe
US dollar
NSO
2015
2009
…
NSO
2016
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
146	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data  
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual 
in Use at 
Source
Sweden
MoF
2016
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
Switzerland
MoF
2016
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Syria
MoF
2009
1986
CG
C
CB
2009
BPM 5
Taiwan Province of 
China
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Tajikistan
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Tanzania
MoF
2016
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Thailand
MoF
2016/17
2001
CG,BCG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Timor-Leste
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Togo
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Tonga
MoF
2017
2014
CG
C
CB and NSO
2017
BPM 6
Trinidad and Tobago
MoF
2016/17
1986
CG
C
CB and NSO
2017
BPM 6
Tunisia
MoF
2016
1986
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Turkey
MoF
2017
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2017
BPM 6
Turkmenistan
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO and IMF staff
2015
BPM 6
Tuvalu
MoF
2017
…
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2012
BPM 6
Uganda
MoF
2016
2001
CG
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
Ukraine
MoF
2016
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2016
BPM 6
United Arab 
Emirates
MoF
2017
2001
CG,BCG,SG,SS
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
United Kingdom
NSO
2017
2001
CG,LG
A
NSO
2017
BPM 6
United States
MEP
2017
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2016
BPM 6
Uruguay
MoF
2017
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Uzbekistan
MoF
2016
…
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
MEP
2017
BPM 6
Vanuatu
MoF
2017
2001
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Venezuela
MoF
2013
2001
BCG,NFPC
C
CB
2016
BPM 5
Vietnam
MoF
2015
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Yemen
MoF
2013
2001
CG,LG
C
IMF staff
2009
BPM 5
Zambia
MoF
2017
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 6
Zimbabwe
MoF
2015
1986
CG
C
CB and MoF
2016
BPM 6
Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, Com-
merce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to 
calculate the index. 
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers 
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; EUA = extrabudgetary units/accounts; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central 
bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; NMPC  = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.  
6Base year is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | April 2018	
147
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in 
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally 
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for 
differences between the national authorities and the 
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions and 
projected fiscal outturns. When no official budget has 
been announced, projections incorporate policy mea-
sures that are judged likely to be implemented. The 
medium-term fiscal projections are similarly based on 
a judgment about the most likely path of policies. For 
cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient informa-
tion to assess the authorities’ budget intentions and 
prospects for policy implementation, an unchanged 
structural primary balance is assumed unless indicated 
otherwise. Specific assumptions used in regard to some 
of the advanced economies follow. (See also Tables B5 
to B9 in the online section of the Statistical Appendix 
for data on fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural 
balances.)1 
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the avail-
able information regarding budget outturn and budget 
plans for the federal and provincial governments, fiscal 
measures announced by the authorities, and the IMF 
staff’s macroeconomic projections. 
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on Australian 
Bureau of Statistics data, the fiscal year 2018/19 bud-
gets of the commonwealth and states and territories, 
2017/18 mid-year fiscal and economic reviews by 
states and territories, and the IMF staff’s estimates. 
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on data from 
Statistics Austria, the authorities’ projections, and the 
IMF staff’s estimates and projections.
Belgium: Projections are based on the 2018–21 
Stability Programme and other available information 
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a 
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed 
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the 
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output 
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, 
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition 
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include 
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations 
in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical 
fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of 
structural balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of 
potential GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See 
Annex I of the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated as 
gross debt minus financial assets corresponding to debt instru-
ments. Estimates of the output gap and of the structural balance 
are subject to significant margins of uncertainty.
on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for 
the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections for the end of 2018 
account for budget performance through May 2018, 
and the deficit target approved in the budget law.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts in the 
2018 federal budget and the latest provincial budget 
updates as available. The IMF staff makes some adjust-
ments to these forecasts, including for differences in 
macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff’s forecast 
also incorporates the most recent data releases from Sta-
tistics Canada’s Canadian System of National Economic 
Accounts, including federal, provincial, and territorial 
budgetary outturns through the first quarter of 2018.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’ 
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s 
projections for GDP and copper prices. 
China: Projections assume that the pace of fiscal 
consolidation is likely to be more gradual, reflect-
ing reforms to strengthen social safety nets and the 
social security system announced as part of the Third 
Plenum reform agenda.
Denmark: Estimates for 2017 are aligned with the 
latest official budget numbers, adjusted where appro-
priate for the IMF staff’s macroeconomic assumptions. 
For 2018, the projections incorporate key features 
of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the 
authorities’ Convergence Programme 2017 submitted 
to the European Union.
France: Projections for 2018 reflect the 2018 budget 
law. For 2018–23, they are based on the measures in the 
multiyear budget and the 2018 budget laws and addi-
tional measures expected in the 2019 budget law adjusted 
for differences in assumptions on macro and financial 
variables, and revenue projections. Historical fiscal data 
reflect the May 2018 revisions and update of the histori-
cal fiscal accounts, debt data, and national accounts.
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2018 and 
beyond are based on the 2018 Stability Programme, 
revised 2018 federal budget, and data updates from 
the national statistical agency, adjusted for the differ-
ences in the IMF staff’s macroeconomic framework 
and assumptions concerning revenue elasticities. The 
estimate of gross debt includes portfolios of impaired 
assets and noncore business transferred to institutions 
that are winding up, as well as other financial sector 
and EU support operations.
Greece: Fiscal projections reflect adjustments in line 
with the primary balance definition under the enhanced 
surveillance procedure for Greece.
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
148	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections 
are based on the authorities’ medium-term fiscal projec-
tions on expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF staff’s 
projections of the macroeconomic framework and of 
the impact of recent legislative measures, as well as fiscal 
policy plans announced in the 2018 budget.
India: Historical data are based on budgetary execu-
tion data. Projections are based on available information 
on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the 
IMF staff’s assumptions. Subnational data are incorpo-
rated with a lag of up to one year; general government 
data are thus finalized well after central government data. 
IMF and Indian presentations differ, particularly regard-
ing divestment and license auction proceeds, net versus 
gross recording of revenues in certain minor categories, 
and some public sector lending.
Indonesia: IMF projections are based on moderate tax 
policy and administration reforms, fuel subsidy pricing 
reforms introduced since January 2015, and a gradual 
increase in social and capital spending over the medium 
term in line with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country’s 
Budget 2018. 
Israel: Historical data are based on Government 
Finance Statistics data prepared by the Central Bureau 
of Statistics. The central government deficit is assumed 
to remain at the current ceiling of 2.9 percent of GDP 
throughout the projection period, rather than declining 
in line with medium-term fiscal targets, consistent with 
long experience of revisions to those targets.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections are 
informed by the fiscal plans included in the govern-
ment’s 2018 budget and April 2018 Economic and 
Financial Document. IMF staff assumes that the 
automatic value-added tax hikes for next year will be 
canceled.
Japan: The projections include fiscal measures already 
announced by the government, including the consump-
tion tax hike in October 2019. 
Korea: The medium-term forecast incorporates the 
medium-term path for public spending announced by 
the government.
Mexico: Fiscal projections for 2018 are broadly in line 
with the approved budget; projections for 2019 onward 
assume compliance with rules established in the Fiscal 
Responsibility Law.
Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2017–23 are based 
on the authorities’ Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
budget projections, after differences in macroeconomic 
assumptions are adjusted for. Historical data were revised 
following the June 2014 Central Bureau of Statistics 
release of revised macro data because of the adoption of 
ESA 2010 and the revisions of data sources.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the fiscal 
year 2018/19 budget and 2017 Half-Year Economic and 
Fiscal Update, and the IMF staff’s estimates. 
Portugal: The projections for the current year are 
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted 
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast. 
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption of 
unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the Puerto 
Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plans (FEGPs), 
which were prepared in April and updated in August 
of 2018, and is pending certification by the Oversight 
Board. In line with assumptions of this plan, IMF pro-
jections assume federal aid for rebuilding after Hurricane 
Maria devastated the island in September 2017. The 
projections also assume revenue losses from the follow-
ing: elimination of federal funding for the Affordable 
Care Act starting in 2018 for Puerto Rico; elimination 
of federal tax incentives starting in 2018 that had neu-
tralized the effects of Puerto Rico’s Act 154 on foreign 
firms; and the effects of the Tax Cuts and Job Act, which 
reduce tax advantages of US firms producing in Puerto 
Rico. Given sizable policy uncertainty, some FEGP and 
IMF assumptions may differ, in particular those relating 
to the effects of the corporate tax reform, tax compli-
ance, and tax adjustments (fees and rates); reduction of 
subsidies and expenses, freezing of payroll operational 
costs, and improvement of mobility; and increasing 
health care efficiency. On the expenditure side, measures 
include extension of Act 66, which freezes much govern-
ment spending, through 2020; reduction of operating 
costs; decreases in government subsidies; and spending 
cuts in education. Although IMF policy assumptions are 
similar to those in the FEGP scenario with full mea-
sures, the IMF’s projections of fiscal revenues, expendi-
tures, and balance are different from FEGP’s. This stems 
from two main differences in methodologies: first, while 
IMF projections are on an accrual basis, FEGP’s are on 
a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGP make very 
different macroeconomic assumptions. Third, the IMF’s 
projections are on a calendar year basis while FEGP’s are 
on a fiscal year basis.
Russia: Projections for 2018–21 are the IMF staff’s 
estimates, based on the authorities’ budget. Projections 
Box A1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
149
for 2022–23 are based on the new oil price rule, with 
adjustments by the IMF staff.
Saudi Arabia: Staff baseline projections of total 
government revenues reflect the impact of announced 
policies in the 2018 Budget. Oil revenues are based on 
WEO baseline oil prices and the assumption that Saudi 
Arabia continues to meet its commitments under the 
OPEC+ agreement. Expenditure projections take the 
2018 budget as a starting point and reflect staff esti-
mates of the effects of the latest changes in policies and 
economic developments. Expenditures in 2018 include 
allowances and other measures announced in the Royal 
Decree for one year in January 2018.
Singapore: For fiscal year 2018/19, projections are 
based on budget numbers. For the rest of the projection 
period, the IMF staff assumes unchanged policies.
South Africa: Fiscal projections are based on the 
2018 Budget. Nontax revenue excludes transactions in 
financial assets and liabilities, as they involve primarily 
revenues associated with realized exchange rate valuation 
gains from the holding of foreign currency deposits, sale 
of assets, and conceptually similar items.
Spain: For 2018 and beyond, fiscal projections are 
based on the information specified in the government’s 
2018 Stability Programme and on the IMF staff’s mac-
roeconomic projections.
Sweden: Fiscal projections account for the authori-
ties’ projections based on the 2018 Spring Budget. The 
impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal accounts 
is calculated using the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development’s 2005 elasticity to take 
into account output and employment gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal policy 
is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in line 
with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal rules.
Turkey: The fiscal projections for 2018 are based on 
the authorities’ Medium Term Programme 2018–20, 
with adjustments for additionally announced fiscal 
measures and the IMF staff’s higher inflation forecast. 
For the medium term, the fiscal projections assume a 
more gradual fiscal consolidation than envisaged in the 
Medium Term Programme.
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on the 
country’s November 2017 Budget and the March 2018 
update, with expenditure projections based on the 
budgeted nominal values and with revenue projections 
adjusted for differences between the IMF staff’s forecasts 
of macroeconomic variables (such as GDP growth and 
inflation) and the forecasts of these variables assumed in 
the authorities’ fiscal projections. The IMF staff’s data 
exclude public sector banks and the effect of transferring 
assets from the Royal Mail Pension Plan to the public 
sector in April 2012. Real government consumption 
and investment are part of the real GDP path, which, 
according to the IMF staff, may or may not be the same 
as projected by the UK Office for Budget Responsibility. 
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the 
August update to the April 2018 Congressional Budget 
Office baseline, adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and 
macroeconomic assumptions. Projections incorpo-
rate the effects of tax reform (Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, 
signed into law end of 2017) as well as the Bipartisan 
Budget Act of 2018 passed in February 2018. Finally, 
fiscal projections are adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s 
forecasts for key macroeconomic and financial variables 
and different accounting treatment of financial sector 
support and defined-benefit pension plans, and are con-
verted to a general government basis. Data are compiled 
using SNA 2008, and when translated into government 
finance statistics, this is in accordance with the Govern-
ment Finance Statistics Manual 2014. Because of data 
limitations, most series begin in 2001.
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the 
established policy framework in each country. In 
most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance 
over the business cycle: official interest rates will 
increase when economic indicators suggest that infla-
tion will rise above its acceptable rate or range; they 
will decrease when indicators suggest inflation will 
not exceed the acceptable rate or range, that output 
growth is below its potential rate, and that the margin 
of slack in the economy is significant. On this basis, 
the London interbank offered rate on six-month US 
dollar deposits is assumed to average 2.5 percent in 
2018 and 3.4 percent in 2019 (see Table 1.1). The 
rate on three-month euro deposits is assumed to aver-
age –0.3 percent in 2018 and –0.2 percent in 2019. 
The interest rate on six-month Japanese yen deposits 
is assumed to average 0.0 percent in 2018 and 0.1 
percent in 2019.
Argentina: Monetary policy assumptions are con-
sistent with gradual disinflation of the economy to a 
single digit.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with market expectations.
Box A1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
150	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent 
with gradual convergence of inflation toward the 
middle of the target range.
Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with market expectations.
China: Monetary policy is expected to tighten with 
a gradual rise in the interest rate.
Denmark: The monetary policy is to maintain the 
peg to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro 
area member countries are in line with market 
expectations.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The IMF 
staff assumes that the currency board system remains 
intact.
India: The policy (interest) rate assumption is con-
sistent with an inflation rate within the Reserve Bank 
of India’s targeted band. Consistent with IMF staff’s 
estimates of natural rate of inflation and an inflation-
forecast targeting policy rule, an additional increase of 
policy rate (25–50 basis points) is needed.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with the maintenance of inflation within the central 
bank’s targeted band.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with 
market expectations.
Korea: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with 
market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent 
with attaining the inflation target.
Russia: Monetary projections assume that the 
Central Bank of Russia will complete the transition to 
a neutral stance at a slower pace given upside risks to 
the inflation outlook.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based 
on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the 
US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line 
with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy will remain neutral.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with Riks-
bank projections.
Switzerland: The projections assume no change in 
the policy rate in 2018–19.
Turkey: The outlook for monetary and financial con-
ditions assumes no changes to the current policy stance.
United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate path is 
based on market interest rate expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects continued 
gradual normalization of the federal funds target rate 
over the medium term, in line with the broader mac-
roeconomic outlook.
Box A1 (continued)
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
151
List of Tables
Output
A1.	 Summary of World Output	
A2.	 Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3.	 Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP	
A4.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP	
Inflation
A5.	 Summary of Inflation	
A6.	 Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices	
A7.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices	
Financial Policies
A8.	 Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt	
Foreign Trade
A9.	 Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices	
Current Account Transactions
A10.	 Summary of Current Account Balances	
A11.	 Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account	
A12.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account	
Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13.	 Summary of Financial Account Balances	
Flow of Funds
A14.	 Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing 	
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15.	 Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario	
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
152	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
World
3.9
5.4
4.3
3.5
3.5
3.6
3.5
3.3
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.6
Advanced Economies
1.8
3.1
1.7
1.2
1.4
2.1
2.3
1.7
2.3
2.4
2.1
1.5
United States
1.9
2.6
1.6
2.2
1.8
2.5
2.9
1.6
2.2
2.9
2.5
1.4
Euro Area
1.4
2.1
1.6
–0.9
–0.2
1.4
2.1
1.9
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.4
Japan
0.5
4.2
–0.1
1.5
2.0
0.4
1.4
1.0
1.7
1.1
0.9
0.5
Other Advanced Economies2
2.8
4.6
3.0
1.9
2.4
2.9
2.1
2.1
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.1
7.4
6.4
5.3
5.1
4.7
4.3
4.4
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.8
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
5.9
4.6
5.3
3.7
2.5
1.1
–1.9
0.4
2.1
2.3
2.4
2.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.1
9.6
7.9
7.0
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.3
6.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.0
4.3
6.6
2.5
4.9
3.9
4.7
3.3
6.0
3.8
2.0
2.7
Latin America and the Caribbean
3.0
6.1
4.6
2.9
2.9
1.3
0.3
–0.6
1.3
1.2
2.2
2.9
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
5.2
4.6
4.4
4.8
2.6
2.9
2.5
5.1
2.2
2.4
2.7
3.0
Middle East and North Africa
5.2
4.8
4.5
4.9
2.4
2.7
2.4
5.2
1.8
2.0
2.5
3.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.6
7.1
5.1
4.6
5.2
5.1
3.3
1.4
2.7
3.1
3.8
4.1
Memorandum
European Union
1.7
2.0
1.8
–0.3
0.3
1.9
2.4
2.0
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
6.3
7.4
5.1
4.6
6.1
6.1
4.7
3.6
4.7
4.7
5.2
5.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.7
5.1
5.2
5.0
2.6
2.2
0.3
1.9
0.9
1.2
1.9
2.0
Nonfuel
6.2
8.0
6.7
5.4
5.7
5.3
5.2
4.9
5.6
5.4
5.2
5.3
Of Which, Primary Products
3.8
6.8
4.9
2.3
4.2
2.1
2.8
1.7
2.8
1.6
2.1
3.6
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
4.9
6.9
5.4
4.2
4.8
4.6
4.2
3.8
4.7
4.8
4.8
5.2
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
4.7
4.2
2.7
1.5
3.2
1.9
1.0
2.8
3.2
3.9
4.4
5.0
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
2.4
2.3
1.9
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
2.2
2.9
2.8
2.5
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.2
4.3
3.8
3.3
3.2
3.4
3.5
3.7
3.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.0
6.4
6.1
5.1
5.3
4.8
3.9
4.2
4.5
4.0
4.8
5.0
Output per Capita4
Advanced Economies
1.1
2.5
1.1
0.7
0.9
1.6
1.7
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
5.9
4.9
3.6
3.6
3.2
2.8
2.9
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.7
5.0
3.5
1.6
3.7
3.8
2.3
1.2
2.4
2.4
3.0
3.2
World Growth Rate Based on Market 
Exchange Rates
2.6
4.1
3.1
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.8
2.5
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.8
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
46,626
66,011
73,230
74,619
76,750
78,832
74,602
 75,653
 80,051
 84,835
 88,081  108,712
At Purchasing Power Parities
66,722
89,402
95,018
99,891
 105,088 110,805  115,729  120,693  127,489  135,236  143,089  177,424
1Real GDP.
2Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
4Output per capita is in international currency at purchasing power parity.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
153
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Fourth Quarter2
Average
Projections
Projections 
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
2017:Q4
2018:Q4 2019:Q4
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
1.8
3.1
1.7
1.2
1.4
2.1
2.3
1.7
2.3
2.4
2.1
1.5
2.5
2.3
1.9
United States
1.9
2.6
1.6
2.2
1.8
2.5
2.9
1.6
2.2
2.9
2.5
1.4
2.5
3.1
2.3
Euro Area
1.4
2.1
1.6
–0.9
–0.2
1.4
2.1
1.9
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.4
2.7
1.7
1.9
Germany
0.8
3.9
3.7
0.7
0.6
2.2
1.5
2.2
2.5
1.9
1.9
1.2
2.8
1.9
1.6
France
1.4
1.9
2.2
0.3
0.6
1.0
1.0
1.1
2.3
1.6
1.6
1.6
2.8
1.3
1.7
Italy
0.5
1.7
0.6
–2.8
–1.7
0.1
1.0
0.9
1.5
1.2
1.0
0.7
1.6
0.8
1.3
Spain
2.7
0.0
–1.0
–2.9
–1.7
1.4
3.6
3.2
3.0
2.7
2.2
1.7
3.0
2.5
2.1
Netherlands
1.6
1.3
1.5
–1.0
–0.1
1.4
2.0
2.2
2.9
2.8
2.6
1.8
3.1
2.4
2.6
Belgium
1.7
2.7
1.8
0.2
0.2
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.7
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.9
1.6
1.3
Austria
1.7
1.8
2.9
0.7
0.0
0.8
1.1
1.5
3.0
2.8
2.2
1.4
3.5
1.8
2.6
Greece
2.7
–5.5
–9.1
–7.3
–3.2
0.7
–0.3
–0.2
1.4
2.0
2.4
1.2
2.0
2.2
2.5
Portugal
0.9
1.9
–1.8
–4.0
–1.1
0.9
1.8
1.6
2.7
2.3
1.8
1.4
2.4
2.4
1.2
Ireland
3.6
1.9
3.7
0.2
1.3
8.7
25.0
4.9
7.2
4.7
4.0
2.8
5.4
0.3
6.3
Finland
2.0
3.0
2.6
–1.4
–0.8
–0.6
0.1
2.5
2.8
2.6
1.8
1.2
2.6
2.7
1.4
Slovak Republic
4.5
5.0
2.8
1.7
1.5
2.8
3.9
3.3
3.4
3.9
4.1
3.4
3.6
4.2
4.2
Lithuania
4.6
1.6
6.0
3.8
3.5
3.5
2.0
2.3
3.9
3.5
2.9
2.0
3.8
3.1
3.0
Slovenia
2.9
1.2
0.6
–2.7
–1.1
3.0
2.3
3.1
5.0
4.5
3.4
2.1
6.0
3.6
3.3
Luxembourg
3.0
4.9
2.5
–0.4
3.7
5.8
2.9
3.1
2.3
4.0
3.5
3.0
1.8
3.5
4.5
Latvia
4.7
–3.9
6.4
4.0
2.4
1.9
3.0
2.2
4.5
3.7
3.3
3.0
4.8
2.5
4.3
Estonia
4.1
2.3
7.6
4.3
1.9
2.9
1.7
2.1
4.9
3.7
3.2
2.9
5.1
3.5
2.3
Cyprus 
3.5
1.3
0.3
–3.1
–5.9
–1.4
2.0
3.4
3.9
4.0
4.2
2.4
4.0
4.2
3.9
Malta
1.6
3.5
1.3
2.7
4.6
8.2
9.5
5.2
6.7
5.7
4.6
3.2
5.6
6.7
3.6
Japan
0.5
4.2
–0.1
1.5
2.0
0.4
1.4
1.0
1.7
1.1
0.9
0.5
2.0
1.0
–0.3
United Kingdom
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.4
2.0
2.9
2.3
1.8
1.7
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.3
1.5
1.4
Korea
4.7
6.5
3.7
2.3
2.9
3.3
2.8
2.9
3.1
2.8
2.6
2.6
2.8
3.2
2.3
Canada
2.1
3.1
3.1
1.7
2.5
2.9
1.0
1.4
3.0
2.1
2.0
1.6
3.0
2.1
1.9
Australia
3.1
2.4
2.7
3.9
2.2
2.6
2.5
2.6
2.2
3.2
2.8
2.6
2.4
3.2
2.8
Taiwan Province of China
3.8
10.6
3.8
2.1
2.2
4.0
0.8
1.4
2.9
2.7
2.4
1.9
3.4
1.9
2.1
Switzerland
1.9
2.9
1.8
1.0
1.9
2.5
1.3
1.6
1.7
3.0
1.8
1.7
2.6
2.6
1.7
Sweden
2.0
6.0
2.7
–0.3
1.2
2.6
4.5
2.7
2.1
2.4
2.2
1.9
2.7
1.9
2.6
Singapore
5.2
15.2
6.4
4.1
5.1
3.9
2.2
2.4
3.6
2.9
2.5
2.6
3.6
1.9
2.6
Hong Kong SAR
4.2
6.8
4.8
1.7
3.1
2.8
2.4
2.2
3.8
3.8
2.9
3.1
3.3
3.4
3.3
Norway
1.8
0.7
1.0
2.7
1.0
2.0
2.0
1.1
1.9
2.1
2.1
1.8
1.6
2.7
1.6
Czech Republic
3.4
2.3
1.8
–0.8
–0.5
2.7
5.3
2.5
4.3
3.1
3.0
2.5
5.0
3.2
2.5
Israel
3.5
5.5
5.2
2.2
4.2
3.5
2.6
4.0
3.3
3.6
3.5
3.0
3.1
3.4
3.5
Denmark
1.0
1.9
1.3
0.2
0.9
1.6
1.6
2.0
2.3
2.0
1.9
1.7
1.3
3.2
2.2
New Zealand
2.9
2.0
1.9
2.5
2.2
3.2
4.2
4.1
3.0
3.1
3.0
2.5
3.2
3.1
3.0
Puerto Rico
1.0
–0.4
–0.4
0.0
–0.3
–1.2
–1.0
–1.3
–2.4
–2.3
–1.1
–0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
. . .
25.3
21.7
9.2
11.2
–1.2
–21.6
–0.9
9.1
6.3
6.3
4.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iceland
3.5
–3.4
1.9
1.3
4.1
2.1
4.5
7.4
4.0
3.7
2.9
2.5
1.9
2.9
4.7
San Marino
. . .
–4.8
–9.3
–7.6
–3.2
–0.9
0.6
2.2
1.9
1.4
1.0
0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.4
2.8
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.1
1.5
2.1
2.2
2.0
1.2
2.3
2.2
1.7
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.7
2.9
1.4
0.8
1.1
2.1
2.6
1.9
2.3
2.4
2.4
1.5
2.3
2.6
2.1
United States
1.9
3.0
1.5
2.2
1.6
2.6
3.6
1.8
2.5
3.1
3.2
1.2
2.6
3.5
2.8
Euro Area
1.3
1.5
0.7
–2.4
–0.6
1.3
2.4
2.3
1.7
2.0
1.9
1.5
1.3
2.4
1.6
Germany
0.3
2.9
3.0
–0.8
1.0
1.6
1.4
3.0
2.2
2.0
2.1
1.4
1.9
2.3
1.8
France
1.7
2.1
2.1
–0.4
0.7
1.5
1.5
1.6
2.2
1.3
1.6
1.6
2.1
1.8
1.3
Italy
0.7
2.0
–0.6
–5.6
–2.6
0.2
1.5
1.1
1.4
1.4
1.2
0.7
1.2
1.1
1.7
Spain
2.9
–0.5
–3.1
–5.1
–3.2
2.0
4.0
2.6
2.9
2.8
2.0
1.5
3.3
2.7
1.7
Japan
0.2
2.4
0.7
2.3
2.4
0.4
1.0
0.4
1.2
0.9
1.1
0.5
1.8
0.9
–0.4
United Kingdom
2.0
2.0
–0.2
1.8
2.1
3.2
2.3
2.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.6
0.6
1.6
1.4
Canada
2.8
5.1
3.4
2.0
2.1
1.7
0.1
0.9
3.8
2.4
1.3
1.5
4.9
1.4
1.2
Other Advanced Economies3
2.9
6.1
3.1
2.0
1.5
2.7
2.4
2.2
3.3
2.9
2.6
2.5
3.7
2.6
3.2
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.4
2.8
1.4
1.2
1.4
2.0
2.4
1.7
2.1
2.3
2.3
1.2
2.3
2.5
1.9
1In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
154	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP 
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2000–09
2010–19
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
2.1
1.8
1.8
1.1
0.9
1.2
1.8
2.5
2.2
2.2
2.1
2.0
United States
2.4
2.4
1.7
1.9
1.5
1.5
2.9
3.7
2.7
2.5
2.8
2.4
Euro Area
1.4
0.8
0.8
0.0
–1.2
–0.6
0.9
1.8
2.0
1.6
1.5
1.6
Germany
0.7
1.3
0.3
1.4
1.4
0.8
1.1
1.6
1.9
2.0
1.6
1.6
France
2.0
1.0
1.9
0.6
–0.4
0.5
0.8
1.5
2.1
1.0
0.9
1.4
Italy
0.6
0.2
1.2
0.0
–4.0
–2.4
0.2
1.9
1.4
1.4
1.0
1.2
Spain
2.5
0.5
0.3
–2.4
–3.5
–3.1
1.5
3.0
2.8
2.5
2.2
1.8
Japan
0.8
0.8
2.4
–0.4
2.0
2.4
–0.9
0.0
0.1
1.0
0.6
0.8
United Kingdom
2.2
1.5
0.7
–0.7
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.6
3.1
1.8
1.1
1.2
Canada
3.2
2.3
3.6
2.3
1.9
2.6
2.6
2.2
2.3
3.4
1.7
0.7
Other Advanced Economies1
3.1
2.7
3.8
3.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.7
2.5
2.7
2.8
2.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.8
1.7
1.7
1.1
1.1
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.8
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
2.3
0.8
0.9
–0.6
–0.1
–0.1
0.5
1.7
1.9
0.8
1.6
2.0
United States
2.2
0.0
0.1
–3.0
–1.5
–1.9
–0.8
1.7
1.5
–0.1
1.1
2.7
Euro Area
2.0
0.8
0.8
–0.1
–0.3
0.3
0.7
1.3
1.9
1.1
1.2
1.2
Germany
1.2
1.8
1.3
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.6
2.9
4.0
1.6
1.4
2.0
France
1.7
1.2
1.3
1.1
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.0
1.4
1.3
1.0
0.3
Italy
1.3
–0.2
0.6
–1.8
–1.4
–0.3
–0.7
–0.6
0.6
0.1
0.4
0.8
Spain
5.1
0.1
1.5
–0.3
–4.7
–2.1
–0.3
2.1
1.0
1.9
1.5
1.0
Japan
1.7
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.7
1.5
0.5
1.5
1.3
0.4
0.5
1.1
United Kingdom
2.9
0.8
0.3
0.1
1.2
–0.2
2.2
1.4
0.8
–0.1
1.3
0.9
Canada
2.6
1.4
2.3
1.3
0.7
–0.7
0.5
1.6
2.2
2.3
2.4
1.5
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.6
2.7
1.6
1.9
2.3
2.4
2.6
3.4
2.2
3.9
2.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
2.0
0.6
0.7
–1.1
–0.2
–0.5
0.1
1.6
1.6
0.4
1.1
1.9
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
0.8
3.0
2.0
3.2
2.6
1.7
3.4
3.1
2.1
3.6
4.1
4.1
United States
0.4
4.3
2.2
4.6
6.9
3.6
4.9
3.3
1.7
4.0
5.6
6.0
Euro Area
0.9
1.5
–0.4
1.5
–3.4
–2.3
1.6
4.8
3.9
2.5
4.1
3.5
Germany
–0.4
3.0
5.0
7.4
–0.1
–1.2
3.9
1.1
3.3
3.6
3.3
3.5
France
1.6
1.8
2.1
2.0
0.2
–0.8
0.0
1.0
2.8
4.5
2.9
3.2
Italy
0.8
–0.8
–0.5
–1.9
–9.3
–6.6
–2.3
2.1
3.2
3.8
3.6
1.1
Spain
2.4
0.3
–4.9
–6.9
–8.6
–3.4
4.7
6.7
2.9
4.8
5.6
3.6
Japan
–2.0
2.0
–1.6
1.7
3.5
4.9
3.1
1.7
1.1
2.5
1.9
1.2
United Kingdom
0.2
3.2
4.1
2.6
2.1
3.4
7.2
3.4
2.3
3.4
0.9
2.5
Canada
3.1
2.5
11.4
4.6
4.9
1.3
2.4
–5.2
–2.9
2.8
3.7
2.6
Other Advanced Economies1
2.8
3.2
5.9
4.1
3.0
2.5
2.5
1.9
2.3
3.8
2.8
3.0
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.2
3.2
2.3
3.7
3.7
2.2
3.8
2.2
1.8
3.7
4.1
4.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
155
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)	
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2000–09
2010–19
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.8
1.9
1.7
1.3
1.1
1.1
2.0
2.5
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.4
United States
2.0
2.4
1.6
1.6
2.0
1.3
2.8
3.3
2.3
2.5
3.2
3.2
Euro Area
1.4
1.0
0.5
0.3
–1.5
–0.8
1.0
2.3
2.4
1.7
2.0
2.0
Germany
0.5
1.8
1.4
2.5
1.0
0.5
1.8
1.8
2.6
2.3
1.9
2.1
France
1.8
1.2
1.8
1.0
0.2
0.5
0.8
1.3
2.1
1.8
1.4
1.5
Italy
0.8
–0.1
0.7
–0.8
–4.5
–2.8
–0.4
1.4
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.1
Spain
2.9
0.4
–0.7
–3.0
–4.8
–3.0
1.8
3.5
2.6
2.8
2.8
2.0
Japan
0.3
1.2
1.4
0.5
2.3
2.8
0.2
0.7
0.6
1.2
1.0
1.1
United Kingdom
2.0
1.6
1.1
0.0
1.6
1.7
2.9
2.5
2.5
1.7
1.1
1.4
Canada
3.0
2.2
5.0
2.6
2.4
1.6
2.1
0.3
1.1
3.0
2.3
1.3
Other Advanced Economies1
3.0
2.8
4.1
3.0
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.5
2.6
2.9
2.9
2.7
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.5
1.8
1.6
1.3
1.4
1.2
1.9
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.3
2.3
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.1
1.2
0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
United States
–0.2
0.1
1.4
–0.1
0.2
0.2
–0.1
0.3
–0.5
0.0
–0.1
0.0
Euro Area
–0.1
0.1
0.9
0.5
–0.9
0.2
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Germany
–0.2
0.1
1.4
0.5
–1.7
0.5
–0.2
–0.3
0.3
–0.1
0.1
0.0
France
–0.1
0.2
0.3
1.1
–0.6
0.2
0.8
0.2
–0.5
0.4
0.0
0.0
Italy
–0.1
0.1
1.3
0.2
–1.1
0.2
0.6
0.1
–0.4
–0.1
0.0
0.0
Spain
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
Japan
0.0
0.1
1.0
0.2
0.0
–0.4
0.1
0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
0.0
United Kingdom
–0.1
0.1
1.0
–0.2
0.2
0.2
0.7
–0.2
–0.1
–0.5
0.1
–0.1
Canada
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.7
–0.3
0.5
–0.4
–0.2
–0.2
0.8
0.1
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
–0.1
0.1
1.9
0.2
–0.3
–0.8
0.2
0.0
–0.3
0.2
0.0
–0.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
–0.1
0.1
1.2
0.2
–0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
–0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.0
–0.3
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
United States
–0.1
–0.3
–0.5
0.0
0.0
0.2
–0.3
–0.8
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
–0.8
Euro Area
0.1
0.4
0.6
0.9
1.5
0.3
0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.8
0.1
0.0
Germany
0.5
0.4
1.1
0.9
1.4
–0.3
0.7
0.2
–0.6
0.3
0.0
–0.1
France
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.7
–0.1
–0.5
–0.4
–0.5
0.1
0.2
0.0
Italy
–0.2
0.3
–0.3
1.2
2.8
0.8
–0.1
–0.5
–0.3
0.1
–0.2
–0.1
Spain
–0.2
0.6
0.5
2.1
2.2
1.5
–0.5
–0.3
0.8
0.1
–0.1
0.2
Japan
0.1
0.1
1.6
–0.9
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.5
0.1
0.0
United Kingdom
–0.1
–0.1
–0.7
1.5
–0.4
–0.5
–0.4
–0.3
–0.7
0.6
0.1
0.1
Canada
–0.8
–0.1
–2.1
–0.3
–0.4
0.3
1.1
0.9
0.7
–0.9
–0.4
0.7
Other Advanced Economies1
0.6
0.2
0.0
0.5
0.5
0.9
0.4
–0.2
0.0
–0.5
0.1
0.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
156	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Commonwealth of Independent States1,2
5.9
4.6
5.3
3.7
2.5
1.1
–1.9
0.4
2.1
2.3
2.4
2.1
Russia
5.4
4.5
5.1
3.7
1.8
0.7
–2.5
–0.2
1.5
1.7
1.8
1.2
Excluding Russia
7.5
5.0
6.0
3.6
4.2
1.9
–0.6
2.0
3.6
3.9
3.6
4.1
Armenia
8.5
2.2
4.7
7.1
3.3
3.6
3.3
0.3
7.5
6.0
4.8
4.5
Azerbaijan
14.6
4.6
–1.6
2.1
5.9
2.7
0.6
–3.1
0.1
1.3
3.6
2.0
Belarus
7.2
7.8
5.5
1.7
1.0
1.7
–3.8
–2.5
2.4
4.0
3.1
2.0
Georgia
5.9
6.2
7.2
6.4
3.4
4.6
2.9
2.8
5.0
5.5
4.8
5.2
Kazakhstan
8.5
7.3
7.5
5.0
6.0
4.3
1.2
1.1
4.0
3.7
3.1
4.6
Kyrgyz Republic
4.6
–0.5
6.0
–0.1
10.9
4.0
3.9
4.3
4.6
2.8
4.5
2.4
Moldova 
4.6
7.1
6.8
–0.7
9.4
4.8
–0.4
4.3
4.5
3.8
3.8
3.8
Tajikistan
8.2
6.5
7.4
7.5
7.4
6.7
6.0
6.9
7.1
5.0
5.0
4.0
Turkmenistan
14.2
9.2
14.7
11.1
10.2
10.3
6.5
6.2
6.5
6.2
5.6
5.7
Ukraine3
4.5
0.3
5.5
0.2
0.0
–6.6
–9.8
2.4
2.5
3.5
2.7
3.4
Uzbekistan
6.4
8.5
8.3
8.2
8.0
8.0
7.9
7.8
5.3
5.0
5.0
6.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.1
9.6
7.9
7.0
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.3
6.1
Bangladesh
5.8
6.0
6.5
6.3
6.0
6.3
6.8
7.2
7.4
7.3
7.1
7.0
Bhutan
8.2
9.3
9.7
6.4
3.6
4.0
6.2
7.3
7.4
5.8
4.8
7.5
Brunei Darussalam
1.4
2.7
3.7
0.9
–2.1
–2.5
–0.4
–2.5
1.3
2.3
5.1
3.9
Cambodia
8.4
6.0
7.1
7.3
7.4
7.1
7.0
7.0
6.9
6.9
6.8
6.0
China
10.3
10.6
9.5
7.9
7.8
7.3
6.9
6.7
6.9
6.6
6.2
5.6
Fiji
0.9
3.0
2.7
1.4
4.7
5.6
3.8
0.7
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.2
India4
6.9
10.3
6.6
5.5
6.4
7.4
8.2
7.1
6.7
7.3
7.4
7.7
Indonesia
5.3
6.4
6.2
6.0
5.6
5.0
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.1
5.1
5.4
Kiribati
1.4
–0.9
1.6
4.6
4.3
–0.6
10.3
1.1
3.1
2.3
2.4
1.8
Lao P.D.R.
7.0
8.0
8.0
7.8
8.0
7.6
7.3
7.0
6.9
6.8
7.0
6.8
Malaysia
4.7
7.5
5.3
5.5
4.7
6.0
5.1
4.2
5.9
4.7
4.6
4.8
Maldives
6.3
7.1
8.4
2.3
7.1
7.6
2.2
4.5
4.8
4.7
5.0
5.4
Marshall Islands
2.0
0.5
3.0
2.8
–0.5
–0.6
2.0
3.6
2.5
2.3
2.2
1.2
Micronesia
0.5
3.3
1.0
–1.7
–3.0
–2.5
3.9
2.9
2.0
1.4
0.9
0.6
Mongolia
5.6
7.3
17.3
12.3
11.6
7.9
2.4
1.2
5.1
6.2
6.3
5.7
Myanmar
11.1
5.3
5.6
7.3
8.4
8.0
7.0
5.9
6.8
6.4
6.8
7.2
Nauru
. . .
13.6
11.7
10.1
34.2
36.5
2.8
10.4
4.0
–2.4
–1.0
1.7
Nepal
4.1
4.8
3.4
4.8
4.1
6.0
3.3
0.6
7.9
6.3
5.0
4.3
Palau
. . .
–0.9
6.3
3.9
–1.6
2.7
10.1
0.0
–3.7
0.8
2.2
2.0
Papua New Guinea
2.8
10.1
1.1
4.6
3.8
15.4
5.3
1.6
2.5
–1.1
3.8
3.8
Philippines
4.4
7.6
3.7
6.7
7.1
6.1
6.1
6.9
6.7
6.5
6.6
6.9
Samoa
3.2
–2.0
5.6
0.4
–1.9
1.2
1.6
7.1
2.5
1.8
3.2
2.2
Solomon Islands
1.2
6.8
13.2
4.6
3.0
2.3
2.5
3.5
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.8
Sri Lanka
5.1
8.0
8.4
9.1
3.4
5.0
5.0
4.5
3.3
3.7
4.3
5.0
Thailand
4.3
7.5
0.8
7.2
2.7
1.0
3.0
3.3
3.9
4.6
3.9
3.6
Timor-Leste5
. . .
8.5
7.7
5.5
2.5
4.1
4.0
5.3
–4.6
0.8
5.0
4.8
Tonga
1.1
3.2
1.8
–1.1
–0.6
2.9
3.5
4.2
2.5
2.9
5.5
1.8
Tuvalu
. . .
–3.1
7.9
–3.8
4.6
1.3
9.1
3.0
3.2
4.3
4.1
3.9
Vanuatu
3.3
1.6
1.2
1.8
2.0
2.3
0.2
3.5
4.2
3.8
3.5
3.0
Vietnam
6.9
6.4
6.2
5.2
5.4
6.0
6.7
6.2
6.8
6.6
6.5
6.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.0
4.3
6.6
2.5
4.9
3.9
4.7
3.3
6.0
3.8
2.0
2.7
Albania
5.9
3.7
2.5
1.4
1.0
1.8
2.2
3.4
3.8
4.0
3.7
4.0
Bosnia and Herzegovina
4.2
0.8
0.9
–0.7
2.4
1.1
3.1
3.2
3.0
3.2
3.5
4.0
Bulgaria
5.0
1.3
1.9
0.0
0.9
1.3
3.6
3.9
3.6
3.6
3.1
2.8
Croatia
3.0
–1.5
–0.3
–2.3
–0.5
–0.1
2.4
3.5
2.8
2.8
2.6
2.1
Hungary
2.4
0.7
1.7
–1.6
2.1
4.2
3.4
2.2
4.0
4.0
3.3
2.2
Kosovo
. . .
3.3
4.4
2.8
3.4
1.2
4.1
4.1
3.7
4.0
4.0
4.0
FYR Macedonia
3.1
3.4
2.3
–0.5
2.9
3.6
3.9
2.9
0.0
1.6
2.6
3.4
Montenegro
. . .
2.7
3.2
–2.7
3.5
1.8
3.4
2.9
4.3
3.7
2.5
3.0
Poland
3.9
3.6
5.0
1.6
1.4
3.3
3.8
3.0
4.6
4.4
3.5
2.8
Romania
4.8
–2.8
2.0
1.2
3.5
3.4
3.9
4.8
6.9
4.0
3.4
3.1
Serbia
5.1
0.6
1.4
–1.0
2.6
–1.8
0.8
2.8
1.9
4.0
3.5
4.0
Turkey
3.8
8.5
11.1
4.8
8.5
5.2
6.1
3.2
7.4
3.5
0.4
2.6
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
157
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Latin America and the Caribbean
3.0
6.1
4.6
2.9
2.9
1.3
0.3
–0.6
1.3
1.2
2.2
2.9
Antigua and Barbuda
2.8
–7.2
–2.1
3.5
–0.1
5.1
4.1
5.3
2.8
3.5
3.0
2.0
Argentina
2.3
10.1
6.0
–1.0
2.4
–2.5
2.7
–1.8
2.9
–2.6
–1.6
3.2
Aruba
0.3
–3.3
3.5
–1.4
4.2
0.9
–0.4
–0.1
1.2
1.1
1.0
1.2
The Bahamas
1.0
1.5
0.6
3.1
–0.4
–0.1
1.0
–1.7
1.4
2.3
2.1
1.5
Barbados
1.4
–2.2
–0.8
–0.1
–1.4
–0.2
2.2
2.3
–0.2
–0.5
–0.1
1.8
Belize
4.9
3.3
2.1
3.7
0.7
4.0
3.8
–0.5
0.8
1.8
2.0
1.7
Bolivia
3.7
4.1
5.2
5.1
6.8
5.5
4.9
4.3
4.2
4.3
4.2
3.7
Brazil
3.4
7.5
4.0
1.9
3.0
0.5
–3.5
–3.5
1.0
1.4
2.4
2.2
Chile
4.2
5.8
6.1
5.3
4.1
1.8
2.3
1.3
1.5
4.0
3.4
3.0
Colombia
3.9
4.3
7.4
3.9
4.6
4.7
3.0
2.0
1.8
2.8
3.6
3.5
Costa Rica
4.2
5.0
4.3
4.8
2.3
3.5
3.6
4.2
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.4
Dominica
2.6
0.7
–0.2
–1.1
0.8
4.2
–3.7
2.6
–4.7
–14.1
9.4
1.5
Dominican Republic
4.2
8.3
3.1
2.7
4.9
7.6
7.0
6.6
4.6
6.4
5.0
5.1
Ecuador
3.9
3.5
7.9
5.6
4.9
3.8
0.1
–1.2
2.4
1.1
0.7
1.8
El Salvador
1.5
2.1
3.8
2.8
2.4
2.0
2.4
2.6
2.3
2.5
2.3
2.2
Grenada
2.3
–0.5
0.8
–1.2
2.4
7.3
6.4
3.7
5.1
3.6
3.6
2.7
Guatemala
3.3
2.9
4.2
3.0
3.7
4.2
4.1
3.1
2.8
2.8
3.4
3.5
Guyana
1.8
4.4
5.4
5.0
5.0
3.9
3.1
3.4
2.1
3.4
4.8
27.9
Haiti
0.8
–5.5
5.5
2.9
4.2
2.8
1.2
1.5
1.2
2.0
2.5
3.0
Honduras
4.5
3.7
3.8
4.1
2.8
3.1
3.8
3.8
4.8
3.5
3.6
3.7
Jamaica
0.9
–1.4
1.4
–0.5
0.2
0.6
0.9
1.5
0.7
1.2
1.5
2.2
Mexico
1.4
5.1
3.7
3.6
1.4
2.8
3.3
2.9
2.0
2.2
2.5
3.0
Nicaragua
2.9
4.4
6.3
6.5
4.9
4.8
4.8
4.7
4.9
–4.0
–1.0
4.2
Panama
5.5
5.8
11.8
9.2
6.6
6.0
5.8
5.0
5.4
4.6
6.8
5.5
Paraguay
2.3
11.1
4.2
–0.5
8.4
4.9
3.1
4.3
4.8
4.4
4.2
4.1
Peru
5.0
8.5
6.5
6.0
5.8
2.4
3.3
4.0
2.5
4.1
4.1
4.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.2
–2.9
–0.8
–0.8
6.6
9.5
2.7
2.9
2.1
2.7
3.5
2.7
St. Lucia
2.2
–1.6
0.6
0.2
0.3
3.6
–0.9
3.4
3.0
3.4
3.6
1.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
3.1
–2.3
0.2
1.3
2.5
0.2
0.8
0.8
0.7
2.0
2.3
2.5
Suriname
4.5
5.2
5.8
2.7
2.9
0.3
–2.6
–5.1
1.9
2.0
2.2
3.0
Trinidad and Tobago
6.0
3.5
–0.2
–1.8
2.7
–1.2
1.7
–6.1
–2.6
1.0
0.9
2.2
Uruguay
2.2
7.8
5.2
3.5
4.6
3.2
0.4
1.7
2.7
2.0
3.2
3.0
Venezuela
3.7
–1.5
4.2
5.6
1.3
–3.9
–6.2
–16.5
–14.0
–18.0
–5.0
–1.5
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
5.2
4.6
4.4
4.8
2.6
2.9
2.5
5.1
2.2
2.4
2.7
3.0
Afghanistan
. . .
8.4
6.5
14.0
5.7
2.7
1.0
2.2
2.7
2.3
3.0
5.0
Algeria
3.9
3.6
2.8
3.4
2.8
3.8
3.7
3.2
1.4
2.5
2.7
0.5
Bahrain
5.6
4.3
2.0
3.7
5.4
4.4
2.9
3.5
3.8
3.2
2.6
2.6
Djibouti
3.2
4.1
7.3
4.8
5.0
6.0
6.5
6.5
6.7
6.7
6.7
6.0
Egypt
5.0
5.1
1.8
2.2
3.3
2.9
4.4
4.3
4.2
5.3
5.5
6.0
Iran
4.8
5.7
3.1
–7.7
–0.3
3.2
–1.6
12.5
3.7
–1.5
–3.6
2.3
Iraq
10.9
6.4
7.5
13.9
7.6
0.7
2.5
13.1
–2.1
1.5
6.5
2.2
Jordan
6.5
2.3
2.6
2.7
2.8
3.1
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.5
3.0
Kuwait
5.3
–2.4
10.9
7.9
0.4
0.6
–1.0
2.2
–3.3
2.3
4.1
2.9
Lebanon
5.0
8.0
0.9
2.8
2.7
2.0
0.2
1.7
1.5
1.0
1.4
2.9
Libya4
4.2
3.2
–66.7
124.7
–36.8
–53.0
–13.0
–7.4
64.0
10.9
10.8
1.5
Mauritania
4.3
4.8
4.7
5.8
6.1
5.6
0.4
1.8
3.5
2.5
5.2
5.3
Morocco
4.8
3.8
5.2
3.0
4.5
2.7
4.5
1.1
4.1
3.2
3.2
4.5
Oman
3.5
2.0
2.6
9.1
5.1
1.4
4.7
5.0
–0.9
1.9
5.0
1.5
Pakistan
4.7
2.6
3.6
3.8
3.7
4.1
4.1
4.6
5.4
5.8
4.0
3.0
Qatar
12.1
18.1
13.4
4.7
4.4
4.0
3.7
2.1
1.6
2.7
2.8
2.7
Saudi Arabia
3.4
5.0
10.0
5.4
2.7
3.7
4.1
1.7
–0.9
2.2
2.4
2.3
Somalia
. . .
. . .
. . .
1.2
1.4
0.4
3.9
4.4
2.3
3.1
3.5
3.5
Sudan6
5.7
1.4
–2.4
–17.9
3.7
4.8
1.3
3.0
1.4
–2.3
–1.9
0.4
Syria7
4.4
3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tunisia
4.3
3.5
–1.9
4.0
2.9
3.0
1.2
1.1
2.0
2.4
2.9
4.2
United Arab Emirates
4.9
1.6
6.9
4.5
5.1
4.4
5.1
3.0
0.8
2.9
3.7
2.9
Yemen
4.1
7.7
–12.7
2.4
4.8
–0.2
–16.7
–13.6
–5.9
–2.6
14.7
6.6
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
158	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.6
7.1
5.1
4.6
5.2
5.1
3.3
1.4
2.7
3.1
3.8
4.1
Angola
8.6
4.9
3.5
8.5
5.0
4.8
0.9
–2.6
–2.5
–0.1
3.1
3.8
Benin
4.2
2.1
3.0
4.8
7.2
6.4
2.1
4.0
5.6
6.0
6.3
6.1
Botswana
3.4
8.6
6.0
4.5
11.3
4.1
–1.7
4.3
2.4
4.6
3.6
5.5
Burkina Faso
5.3
8.4
6.6
6.5
5.8
4.3
3.9
5.9
6.4
5.9
6.0
5.3
Burundi
3.4
5.1
4.0
4.4
5.9
4.5
–4.0
–1.0
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.5
Cabo Verde
6.0
1.5
4.0
1.1
0.8
0.6
1.0
4.7
4.0
4.3
4.0
4.0
Cameroon 
3.9
3.4
4.1
4.5
5.4
5.9
5.7
4.6
3.5
3.8
4.4
5.4
Central African Republic
1.0
3.0
3.3
4.1
–36.7
1.0
4.8
4.5
4.3
4.3
5.0
5.0
Chad
8.3
13.6
0.1
8.8
5.8
6.9
1.8
–6.4
–3.1
3.5
3.6
4.2
Comoros
2.0
2.1
2.2
3.0
3.5
2.0
1.0
2.2
2.7
2.8
2.8
3.3
Democratic Republic of the Congo
3.1
7.1
6.9
7.1
8.5
9.5
6.9
2.4
3.4
3.8
4.1
4.7
Republic of Congo
4.6
8.7
3.4
3.8
3.3
6.8
2.6
–2.8
–3.1
2.0
3.7
0.4
Côte d’Ivoire
0.7
2.0
–4.2
10.1
9.3
8.8
8.8
8.3
7.8
7.4
7.0
6.5
Equatorial Guinea
25.3
–8.9
6.5
8.3
–4.1
0.4
–9.1
–8.6
–3.2
–7.7
–2.6
3.4
Eritrea
–0.7
2.2
8.7
7.0
4.6
2.9
2.6
1.9
5.0
4.2
3.8
4.3
Eswatini
3.3
3.8
2.2
4.7
6.4
1.9
0.4
1.4
1.6
1.3
0.4
2.0
Ethiopia
8.4
10.6
11.4
8.7
9.9
10.3
10.4
8.0
10.9
7.5
8.5
7.5
Gabon
0.6
6.3
7.1
5.3
5.5
4.4
3.9
2.1
0.5
2.0
3.4
4.5
The Gambia
3.7
6.5
–4.3
5.6
4.8
–0.9
5.9
0.4
4.6
5.4
5.4
4.8
Ghana
5.4
7.9
14.0
9.3
7.3
4.0
3.8
3.7
8.4
6.3
7.6
5.1
Guinea
2.9
4.2
5.6
5.9
3.9
3.7
3.8
10.5
8.2
5.8
5.9
5.0
Guinea-Bissau
2.0
4.6
8.1
–1.7
3.3
1.0
6.1
6.3
5.9
4.5
5.0
5.0
Kenya
3.4
8.4
6.1
4.6
5.9
5.4
5.7
5.9
4.9
6.0
6.1
6.0
Lesotho
3.7
6.3
6.7
4.9
2.2
3.0
2.5
3.1
–1.6
0.8
1.2
1.3
Liberia
. . .
6.4
7.7
8.4
8.8
0.7
0.0
–1.6
2.5
3.0
4.5
5.3
Madagascar
3.0
0.3
1.5
3.0
2.3
3.3
3.1
4.2
4.2
5.0
5.4
4.9
Malawi
4.2
6.9
4.9
1.9
5.2
5.7
2.9
2.3
4.0
3.3
4.7
6.5
Mali
5.2
5.4
3.2
–0.8
2.3
7.1
6.2
5.8
5.4
5.1
4.8
4.8
Mauritius
4.4
4.4
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.7
3.6
3.8
3.8
3.9
4.0
4.0
Mozambique
7.6
6.7
7.1
7.2
7.1
7.4
6.6
3.8
3.7
3.5
4.0
11.1
Namibia
3.8
6.0
5.1
5.1
5.6
6.4
6.1
0.7
–0.8
1.1
3.1
3.4
Niger
4.3
8.4
2.2
11.8
5.3
7.5
4.3
4.9
4.9
5.3
5.4
6.0
Nigeria
8.3
11.3
4.9
4.3
5.4
6.3
2.7
–1.6
0.8
1.9
2.3
2.4
Rwanda
8.3
7.3
7.8
8.8
4.7
7.6
8.9
6.0
6.1
7.2
7.8
7.5
São Tomé and Príncipe
4.5
6.7
4.4
3.1
4.8
6.5
3.8
4.2
3.9
4.0
4.5
5.0
Senegal
4.0
3.6
1.5
5.1
2.8
6.6
6.4
6.2
7.2
7.0
6.7
6.4
Seychelles
1.9
5.9
5.4
3.7
6.0
4.5
4.9
4.5
5.3
3.6
3.3
3.3
Sierra Leone
8.7
5.3
6.3
15.2
20.7
4.6
–20.5
6.3
3.7
3.7
5.5
4.6
South Africa
3.6
3.0
3.3
2.2
2.5
1.8
1.3
0.6
1.3
0.8
1.4
1.8
South Sudan
. . .
. . .
. . .
–52.4
29.3
2.9
–0.2
–13.9
–5.1
–3.2
–4.6
–5.8
Tanzania
6.2
6.4
7.9
5.1
7.3
7.0
7.0
7.0
6.0
5.8
6.6
6.4
Togo
1.5
6.1
6.4
6.5
6.1
5.9
5.7
5.1
4.4
4.7
5.0
5.4
Uganda
7.5
7.7
6.8
2.2
4.7
4.6
5.7
2.3
4.8
5.9
6.1
6.5
Zambia
6.8
10.3
5.6
7.6
5.1
4.7
2.9
3.8
3.4
3.8
4.5
4.5
Zimbabwe8
–6.1
15.4
16.3
13.6
5.3
2.8
1.4
0.7
3.7
3.6
4.2
5.0
1Data for some countries refer to real net material product (NMP) or are estimates based on NMP. The figures should be interpreted only as indicative of broad orders of magnitude because 
reliable, comparable data are not generally available. In particular, the growth of output of new private enterprises of the informal economy is not fully reflected in the recent figures. 
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
3Data are based on the 2008 System of National Accounts. The revised national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
4See country-specific notes for India and Libya in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5In this table only, the data for Timor-Leste are based on non-oil GDP.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
8The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values 
may differ from authorities’ estimates. Real GDP is in constant 2009 prices.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
159
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)
Average
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
1.8
0.9
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.3
0.9
1.4
1.8
1.8
1.9
United States
2.2
1.2
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.9
1.1
1.1
1.9
2.3
2.1
1.9
Euro Area
2.0
0.7
1.0
1.3
1.2
0.9
1.4
0.7
1.1
1.5
1.6
2.0
Japan
–1.1
–1.9
–1.7
–0.8
–0.3
1.7
2.1
0.3
–0.2
0.8
1.5
1.0
Other Advanced Economies1
2.1
2.0
2.0
1.2
1.4
1.3
1.0
1.2
1.9
1.7
1.7
1.9
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.5
2.7
2.0
1.4
1.4
0.3
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.9
2.0
United States
2.6
1.6
3.1
2.1
1.5
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
2.1
2.2
Euro Area2
2.1
1.6
2.7
2.5
1.3
0.4
0.0
0.2
1.5
1.7
1.7
2.1
Japan
–0.3
–0.7
–0.3
–0.1
0.3
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.2
1.3
1.3
Other Advanced Economies1
2.1
2.4
3.3
2.1
1.7
1.5
0.5
0.9
1.8
2.0
1.9
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
6.8
5.6
7.1
5.8
5.5
4.7
4.7
4.2
4.3
5.0
5.2
4.1
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States4
13.7
7.2
9.8
6.2
6.5
8.1
15.5
8.3
5.5
4.5
5.7
4.5
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.0
5.1
6.5
4.6
4.6
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.4
3.0
3.2
3.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
12.7
5.7
5.4
6.1
4.5
4.1
3.2
3.2
6.2
8.3
9.0
7.2
Latin America and the Caribbean
6.2
4.2
5.2
4.6
4.6
4.9
5.5
5.6
6.0
6.1
5.9
3.5
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
6.7
6.6
9.3
9.8
9.2
6.7
5.4
4.7
6.4
10.8
10.2
6.0
Middle East and North Africa
6.6
6.3
8.8
9.7
9.4
6.5
5.5
4.9
6.7
11.8
10.6
6.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
10.7
8.1
9.3
9.2
6.5
6.3
6.9
11.2
11.0
8.6
8.5
7.6
Memorandum
European Union
2.5
2.0
3.1
2.6
1.5
0.5
0.0
0.2
1.7
1.9
1.9
2.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
9.7
9.2
11.7
9.9
8.0
7.1
6.9
8.6
9.6
9.5
8.8
7.8
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
10.3
6.7
8.6
8.0
8.1
6.4
8.6
6.9
5.4
7.5
8.3
5.7
Nonfuel
5.9
5.3
6.7
5.3
4.9
4.2
3.8
3.7
4.0
4.6
4.6
3.9
Of Which, Primary Products5
6.8
4.7
6.2
6.5
6.2
6.5
4.9
6.0
11.4
13.3
12.5
6.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
8.0
6.8
7.7
7.0
6.3
5.8
5.6
5.3
5.7
5.9
5.8
4.7
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
8.9
9.5
10.3
7.9
6.7
10.1
13.8
8.5
16.8
16.7
11.9
7.8
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
2.3
1.9
3.2
2.6
1.4
0.7
0.1
0.6
1.6
1.8
1.8
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
5.2
4.1
5.4
4.5
3.8
3.1
2.7
2.7
3.3
3.6
3.7
3.0
1Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
5Includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward. See country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
160	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average 
Projections
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
2017
2018
2019
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.5
2.7
2.0
1.4
1.4
0.3
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.9
2.0
1.7
1.9
2.0
United States
2.6
1.6
3.1
2.1
1.5
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.1
2.3
Euro Area3
2.1
1.6
2.7
2.5
1.3
0.4
0.0
0.2
1.5
1.7
1.7
2.1
1.4
1.9
1.7
Germany
1.6
1.2
2.5
2.1
1.6
0.8
0.1
0.4
1.7
1.8
1.8
2.6
1.6
1.8
1.9
France
1.9
1.7
2.3
2.2
1.0
0.6
0.1
0.3
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.9
1.3
1.6
2.2
Italy
2.3
1.6
2.9
3.3
1.2
0.2
0.1
–0.1
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.7
1.0
1.9
1.4
Spain
3.0
1.8
3.2
2.4
1.4
–0.1
–0.5
–0.2
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.1
2.2
1.7
Netherlands
2.3
0.9
2.5
2.8
2.6
0.3
0.2
0.1
1.3
1.4
1.6
2.1
1.2
1.5
1.7
Belgium
2.1
2.3
3.4
2.6
1.2
0.5
0.6
1.8
2.2
2.2
1.8
2.0
2.1
1.9
1.6
Austria
1.9
1.7
3.5
2.6
2.1
1.5
0.8
1.0
2.2
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.3
1.9
2.1
Greece
3.2
4.7
3.1
1.0
–0.9
–1.4
–1.1
0.0
1.1
0.7
1.2
1.8
1.0
0.9
1.3
Portugal
2.6
1.4
3.6
2.8
0.4
–0.2
0.5
0.6
1.6
1.7
1.6
2.1
1.6
4.7
–2.5
Ireland
2.9
–1.6
1.2
1.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
–0.2
0.3
0.7
1.2
2.0
–0.1
1.8
1.3
Finland
1.8
1.7
3.3
3.2
2.2
1.2
–0.2
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.7
2.0
0.5
1.6
1.7
Slovak Republic
5.2
0.7
4.1
3.7
1.5
–0.1
–0.3
–0.5
1.3
2.6
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.0
Lithuania
3.0
1.2
4.1
3.2
1.2
0.2
–0.7
0.7
3.7
2.5
2.2
2.5
3.8
2.2
2.2
Slovenia
4.9
1.8
1.8
2.6
1.8
0.2
–0.5
–0.1
1.4
2.1
2.0
2.0
1.7
2.1
2.0
Luxembourg
2.7
2.8
3.7
2.9
1.7
0.7
0.1
0.0
2.1
1.5
1.8
2.0
1.5
0.7
3.7
Latvia
5.8
–1.2
4.2
2.3
0.0
0.7
0.2
0.1
2.9
2.7
2.4
2.3
2.2
2.7
2.4
Estonia
4.3
2.7
5.1
4.2
3.2
0.5
0.1
0.8
3.7
3.0
2.5
2.1
3.8
3.0
2.5
Cyprus
2.6
2.6
3.5
3.1
0.4
–0.3
–1.5
–1.2
0.7
0.8
1.8
2.0
–0.4
2.4
2.0
Malta
2.5
2.0
2.5
3.2
1.0
0.8
1.2
0.9
1.3
1.8
2.1
2.0
1.3
2.1
2.1
Japan
–0.3
–0.7
–0.3
–0.1
0.3
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.2
1.3
1.3
0.6
1.4
1.7
United Kingdom
1.8
3.3
4.5
2.8
2.6
1.5
0.0
0.7
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.0
3.0
2.3
2.1
Korea
3.1
2.9
4.0
2.2
1.3
1.3
0.7
1.0
1.9
1.5
1.8
2.0
1.5
1.6
1.9
Canada
2.1
1.8
2.9
1.5
0.9
1.9
1.1
1.4
1.6
2.6
2.2
2.0
1.8
2.7
2.1
Australia
3.2
2.9
3.3
1.7
2.5
2.5
1.5
1.3
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.5
2.0
2.2
2.4
Taiwan Province of China
0.9
1.1
1.4
1.6
1.0
1.3
–0.6
1.0
1.1
1.5
1.3
2.0
1.2
1.5
1.3
Switzerland
1.0
0.7
0.2
–0.7
–0.2
0.0
–1.1
–0.4
0.5
1.1
1.4
1.0
0.9
1.4
1.1
Sweden
1.9
1.9
1.4
0.9
0.4
0.2
0.7
1.1
1.9
1.9
1.7
2.0
1.8
2.0
1.6
Singapore
1.5
2.8
5.2
4.6
2.4
1.0
–0.5
–0.5
0.6
1.0
1.4
1.3
0.4
2.0
1.3
Hong Kong SAR
–0.2
2.3
5.3
4.1
4.3
4.4
3.0
2.4
1.5
2.3
2.1
2.5
1.5
2.3
2.1
Norway
2.1
2.4
1.3
0.7
2.1
2.0
2.2
3.6
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.0
1.6
1.8
2.0
Czech Republic
2.8
1.5
1.9
3.3
1.4
0.3
0.3
0.7
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.0
2.4
2.6
2.1
Israel
2.0
2.7
3.5
1.7
1.5
0.5
–0.6
–0.5
0.2
0.9
1.3
2.0
0.4
1.2
1.5
Denmark
2.1
2.3
2.8
2.4
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.3
1.1
1.4
1.7
2.0
1.0
1.6
1.8
New Zealand
2.7
2.3
4.1
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.3
0.6
1.9
1.4
1.7
2.0
1.6
1.6
1.9
Puerto Rico
2.8
2.5
2.9
1.3
1.1
0.6
–0.8
–0.3
1.8
2.7
1.2
1.2
1.2
2.7
1.2
Macao SAR
. . .
2.8
5.8
6.1
5.5
6.0
4.6
2.4
1.2
2.2
2.4
2.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
Iceland
6.2
5.4
4.0
5.2
3.9
2.0
1.6
1.7
1.8
2.5
2.6
2.5
1.9
2.6
2.6
San Marino
. . .
2.6
2.0
2.8
1.6
1.1
0.1
0.6
1.0
1.5
1.6
1.8
1.0
1.5
1.6
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Major Advanced Economies
1.9
1.4
2.6
1.9
1.3
1.5
0.3
0.8
1.8
2.1
1.9
2.0
1.8
2.0
2.1
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
161
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
2017
2018
2019
Commonwealth of Independent  
States3,4
13.7
7.2
9.8
6.2
6.5
8.1
15.5
8.3
5.5
4.5
5.7
4.5
4.7
4.8
6.0
Russia
13.9
6.9
8.4
5.1
6.8
7.8
15.5
7.1
3.7
2.8
5.1
4.6
2.5
3.6
5.7
Excluding Russia
13.3
8.1
13.3
9.2
5.7
8.8
15.5
11.3
9.9
8.6
7.0
4.4
10.1
7.9
6.4
Armenia
3.6
7.3
7.7
2.5
5.8
3.0
3.7
–1.4
0.9
3.0
4.4
4.0
2.7
4.7
4.2
Azerbaijan
7.0
5.7
7.8
1.1
2.5
1.5
4.1
12.6
13.0
3.5
3.3
3.0
10.0
3.5
3.3
Belarus
31.6
7.7
53.2
59.2
18.3
18.1
13.5
11.8
6.0
5.5
5.5
5.0
4.6
5.5
5.5
Georgia
7.3
7.1
8.5
–0.9
–0.5
3.1
4.0
2.1
6.0
2.8
2.7
3.0
6.7
2.5
3.0
Kazakhstan
9.2
7.1
8.3
5.1
5.8
6.7
6.7
14.6
7.4
6.4
5.6
2.1
7.1
6.0
5.2
Kyrgyz Republic
8.5
8.0
16.6
2.8
6.6
7.5
6.5
0.4
3.2
2.9
4.6
5.0
3.7
4.1
5.0
Moldova
11.7
7.4
7.6
4.6
4.6
5.1
9.6
6.4
6.6
3.6
4.9
5.0
7.3
3.0
5.7
Tajikistan
16.0
6.5
12.4
5.8
5.0
6.1
5.8
5.9
7.3
5.8
5.5
6.0
6.7
5.0
6.0
Turkmenistan
7.6
4.4
5.3
5.3
6.8
6.0
7.4
3.6
8.0
9.4
8.2
6.0
10.4
9.4
8.2
Ukraine5
12.9
9.4
8.0
0.6
–0.3
12.1
48.7
13.9
14.4
10.9
7.3
5.2
13.7
9.0
6.2
Uzbekistan
15.8
12.3
12.4
11.9
11.7
9.1
8.5
8.0
12.5
19.2
14.9
7.6
18.9
17.5
13.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
4.0
5.1
6.5
4.6
4.6
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.4
3.0
3.2
3.3
2.8
3.4
3.0
Bangladesh
5.6
9.4
11.5
6.2
7.5
7.0
6.2
5.7
5.6
6.0
6.1
5.5
5.7
5.8
6.1
Bhutan
4.8
5.7
7.3
9.3
11.3
9.5
7.6
7.6
5.8
4.6
4.9
4.7
3.0
4.5
4.6
Brunei Darussalam
0.6
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.4
–0.2
–0.4
–0.7
–0.2
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.5
0.5
Cambodia
4.6
4.0
5.5
2.9
3.0
3.9
1.2
3.0
2.9
3.3
3.3
3.0
2.2
3.5
3.2
China
1.8
3.3
5.4
2.6
2.6
2.0
1.4
2.0
1.6
2.2
2.4
3.0
1.8
2.5
2.3
Fiji
3.4
3.7
7.3
3.4
2.9
0.5
1.4
3.9
3.4
3.9
3.2
3.0
2.8
4.5
3.0
India
5.8
9.5
9.5
10.0
9.4
5.8
4.9
4.5
3.6
4.7
4.9
4.0
4.6
5.1
3.9
Indonesia
8.5
5.1
5.3
4.0
6.4
6.4
6.4
3.5
3.8
3.4
3.8
3.0
3.6
3.6
4.0
Kiribati
3.5
–3.9
1.5
–3.0
–1.5
2.1
0.6
1.9
0.4
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
Lao P.D.R.
7.8
6.0
7.6
4.3
6.4
4.1
1.3
1.6
0.8
0.9
4.5
3.1
0.1
2.6
2.9
Malaysia
2.2
1.7
3.2
1.7
2.1
3.1
2.1
2.1
3.8
1.0
2.3
2.3
3.5
3.0
2.5
Maldives
3.2
6.2
11.3
10.9
3.8
2.1
1.9
0.8
2.3
1.7
2.7
2.3
2.2
2.0
2.1
Marshall Islands
. . .
1.8
5.4
4.3
1.9
1.1
–2.2
–1.5
0.0
1.4
1.5
2.0
0.0
1.4
1.5
Micronesia
3.1
3.7
4.1
6.3
2.2
0.7
–0.2
0.5
0.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
0.5
2.0
2.0
Mongolia
8.9
10.3
7.7
15.0
8.6
12.9
5.9
0.5
4.6
7.6
8.0
6.8
7.2
8.0
8.1
Myanmar
18.9
8.2
2.8
2.8
5.7
5.1
10.0
6.8
4.0
6.0
5.8
5.4
5.4
6.3
5.9
Nauru
. . .
–2.0
–3.4
0.3
–1.1
0.3
9.8
8.2
5.1
3.8
2.5
2.0
1.6
3.0
2.8
Nepal
5.5
9.6
9.6
8.3
9.9
9.0
7.2
9.9
4.5
4.2
5.0
5.5
2.7
4.6
5.6
Palau
. . .
1.4
4.7
3.6
3.4
4.1
0.9
–1.0
0.9
2.5
2.3
2.0
0.5
2.5
2.3
Papua New Guinea
7.5
5.1
4.4
4.5
5.0
5.2
6.0
6.7
5.4
4.2
3.8
3.8
4.7
4.2
3.8
Philippines
5.2
4.1
4.8
3.0
2.6
3.6
0.7
1.3
2.9
4.9
4.0
3.0
2.9
5.2
3.7
Samoa
5.7
–0.2
2.9
6.2
–0.2
–1.2
1.9
0.1
1.3
3.4
3.0
3.0
1.0
3.0
2.9
Solomon Islands
9.1
1.0
7.4
5.9
5.4
5.2
–0.6
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.6
4.2
2.1
3.4
3.3
Sri Lanka
9.7
6.2
6.7
7.5
6.9
2.8
2.2
4.0
6.5
4.8
4.8
4.9
7.1
4.7
4.8
Thailand
2.4
3.3
3.8
3.0
2.2
1.9
–0.9
0.2
0.7
0.9
0.9
2.0
0.8
0.5
1.1
Timor-Leste
. . .
5.2
13.2
10.9
9.5
0.7
0.6
–1.3
0.6
1.8
2.7
4.0
0.8
2.5
2.8
Tonga
8.0
3.5
6.3
1.1
2.1
1.2
–1.1
2.6
7.4
5.2
5.3
2.5
5.6
9.4
1.5
Tuvalu
. . .
–1.9
0.5
1.4
2.0
1.1
3.1
3.5
4.1
4.2
3.7
2.9
4.4
4.0
3.4
Vanuatu
2.9
2.8
0.9
1.3
1.5
0.8
2.5
0.8
3.1
4.8
3.4
3.0
3.3
4.6
3.4
Vietnam
6.5
9.2
18.7
9.1
6.6
4.1
0.6
2.7
3.5
3.8
4.0
4.0
2.6
4.0
4.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
12.7
5.7
5.4
6.1
4.5
4.1
3.2
3.2
6.2
8.3
9.0
7.2
6.8
10.5
8.5
Albania
2.7
3.6
3.4
2.0
1.9
1.6
1.9
1.3
2.0
2.3
2.8
3.0
1.8
2.5
2.9
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2.4
2.2
3.7
2.1
–0.1
–0.9
–1.0
–1.1
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.0
1.6
1.7
1.8
Bulgaria6
6.7
3.0
3.4
2.4
0.4
–1.6
–1.1
–1.3
1.2
2.6
2.3
2.3
1.8
3.0
2.3
Croatia
3.2
1.0
2.3
3.4
2.2
–0.2
–0.5
–1.1
1.1
1.6
1.5
1.8
1.2
1.3
1.5
Hungary
6.1
4.9
3.9
5.7
1.7
–0.2
–0.1
0.4
2.4
2.8
3.3
3.0
2.1
3.1
3.1
Kosovo
. . .
3.5
7.3
2.5
1.8
0.4
–0.5
0.3
1.5
0.8
2.1
2.2
0.5
2.4
2.0
FYR Macedonia
2.6
1.5
3.9
3.3
2.8
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
1.4
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.0
2.0
Montenegro
10.1
0.4
3.5
4.1
2.2
–0.7
1.5
–0.3
2.4
2.8
2.0
2.0
1.9
2.9
1.9
Poland
3.5
2.6
4.3
3.7
0.9
0.0
–0.9
–0.6
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.5
2.1
2.3
2.9
Romania
15.7
6.1
5.8
3.3
4.0
1.1
–0.6
–1.6
1.3
4.7
2.7
2.5
3.3
3.5
2.8
Serbia
20.2
6.1
11.1
7.3
7.7
2.1
1.4
1.1
3.1
2.1
2.3
3.0
3.0
2.4
2.5
Turkey
21.7
8.6
6.5
8.9
7.5
8.9
7.7
7.8
11.1
15.0
16.7
13.0
11.9
20.0
15.5
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
162	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
2017
2018
2019
Latin America and the 
Caribbean7
6.2
4.2
5.2
4.6
4.6
4.9
5.5
5.6
6.0
6.1
5.9
3.5
5.9
6.8
4.9
Antigua and Barbuda
1.8
3.4
3.5
3.4
1.1
1.1
1.0
–0.5
2.5
1.4
2.0
2.0
2.8
2.0
2.0
Argentina8
8.4
10.5
9.8
10.0
10.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
25.7
31.8
31.7
4.9
24.8
40.5
20.2
Aruba
3.6
2.1
4.4
0.6
–2.4
0.4
0.5
–0.9
–0.5
1.0
1.5
2.1
–0.3
0.5
1.6
The Bahamas
2.3
1.6
3.1
1.9
0.4
1.2
1.9
–0.3
1.4
2.5
2.9
2.1
2.0
3.0
2.8
Barbados
3.7
5.8
9.4
4.5
1.8
1.8
–1.1
1.5
4.4
4.2
0.8
2.3
6.6
0.0
1.4
Belize
2.5
0.9
1.7
1.2
0.5
1.2
–0.9
0.7
1.1
1.3
1.9
1.7
1.1
1.6
2.1
Bolivia
4.8
2.5
9.9
4.5
5.7
5.8
4.1
3.6
2.8
3.2
4.2
4.5
2.7
3.7
4.5
Brazil
6.9
5.0
6.6
5.4
6.2
6.3
9.0
8.7
3.4
3.7
4.2
4.0
2.9
4.2
4.2
Chile
3.5
1.4
3.3
3.0
1.9
4.4
4.3
3.8
2.2
2.4
3.0
3.0
2.3
2.9
3.0
Colombia
6.3
2.3
3.4
3.2
2.0
2.9
5.0
7.5
4.3
3.2
3.4
3.0
4.1
3.1
3.0
Costa Rica
10.9
5.7
4.9
4.5
5.2
4.5
0.8
0.0
1.6
2.4
2.6
3.0
2.6
2.2
3.0
Dominica
2.0
2.8
1.1
1.4
0.0
0.8
–0.8
0.0
0.6
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.4
1.4
1.8
Dominican Republic
12.2
6.3
8.5
3.7
4.8
3.0
0.8
1.6
3.3
4.3
4.2
4.0
4.2
4.1
4.1
Ecuador
15.3
3.6
4.5
5.1
2.7
3.6
4.0
1.7
0.4
–0.2
0.5
1.2
–0.2
0.7
0.1
El Salvador
3.5
1.2
5.1
1.7
0.8
1.1
–0.7
0.6
1.0
1.2
1.8
2.0
2.0
1.4
2.0
Grenada
2.8
3.4
3.0
2.4
0.0
–1.0
–0.6
1.7
0.9
2.6
1.8
2.0
0.5
3.0
1.9
Guatemala
7.0
3.9
6.2
3.8
4.3
3.4
2.4
4.4
4.4
3.7
3.9
4.0
5.7
3.2
3.9
Guyana
6.1
4.3
4.4
2.4
1.9
0.7
–0.9
0.8
2.0
1.3
2.9
3.3
1.5
2.2
3.0
Haiti
14.8
4.1
7.4
6.8
6.8
3.9
7.5
13.4
14.7
13.3
11.6
5.5
15.4
13.0
10.0
Honduras
8.2
4.7
6.8
5.2
5.2
6.1
3.2
2.7
3.9
4.4
4.5
4.0
4.7
4.7
4.5
Jamaica
10.9
12.6
7.5
6.9
9.4
8.3
3.7
2.3
4.4
3.4
4.2
5.0
5.2
3.5
5.0
Mexico
5.2
4.2
3.4
4.1
3.8
4.0
2.7
2.8
6.0
4.8
3.6
3.0
6.8
4.3
3.1
Nicaragua
8.9
5.5
8.1
7.2
7.1
6.0
4.0
3.5
3.9
5.9
8.0
7.0
5.7
7.0
7.0
Panama
2.4
3.5
5.9
5.7
4.0
2.6
0.1
0.7
0.9
2.0
2.4
2.0
0.5
2.0
2.4
Paraguay
8.2
4.6
8.2
3.7
2.7
5.0
3.1
4.1
3.6
4.2
4.0
4.0
4.5
4.1
4.0
Peru
2.6
1.5
3.4
3.7
2.8
3.2
3.5
3.6
2.8
1.4
2.0
2.0
1.4
2.4
2.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.4
0.9
5.8
0.8
1.1
0.2
–2.3
–0.3
0.0
1.4
2.0
2.0
0.8
2.0
2.0
St. Lucia
2.8
3.3
2.8
4.2
1.5
3.5
–1.0
–3.1
0.1
1.9
1.9
1.5
2.2
2.0
1.5
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
2.9
0.8
3.2
2.6
0.8
0.2
–1.7
–0.2
2.2
2.4
2.0
2.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
Suriname
15.3
6.9
17.7
5.0
1.9
3.4
6.9
55.5
22.0
7.8
6.0
3.4
9.3
6.8
6.0
Trinidad and Tobago
6.3
10.5
5.1
9.3
5.2
5.7
4.7
3.1
1.9
2.3
3.1
3.8
1.3
2.3
3.1
Uruguay
8.5
6.7
8.1
8.1
8.6
8.9
8.7
9.6
6.2
7.6
6.7
6.1
6.6
7.9
6.5
Venezuela8
20.8
28.2
26.1
21.1
43.5
57.3 111.8 254.4 1,087.5 1,370,000.0 10,000,000.0 10,000,000.0 2,818.2 2,500,000.0 10,000,000.0
Middle East, North 
Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
6.7
6.6
9.3
9.8
9.2
6.7
5.4
4.7
6.4
10.8
10.2
6.0
7.1
13.0
9.0
Afghanistan
. . .
2.2
11.8
6.4
7.4
4.7
–0.7
4.4
5.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
Algeria
3.2
3.9
4.5
8.9
3.3
2.9
4.8
6.4
5.6
6.5
6.7
12.0
4.9
9.0
4.8
Bahrain
1.6
2.0
–0.4
2.8
3.3
2.7
1.8
2.8
1.4
3.0
4.8
1.5
1.4
2.9
4.3
Djibouti
3.4
4.0
5.1
3.7
2.4
2.9
2.1
2.7
0.7
1.0
2.5
2.5
–1.0
1.5
2.5
Egypt
7.0
11.7
11.1
8.6
6.9
10.1
11.0
10.2
23.5
20.9
14.0
7.0
29.8
14.4
11.1
Iran
14.7
12.3
21.5
30.6
34.7
15.6
11.9
9.1
9.6
29.6
34.1
12.0
8.3
47.8
27.7
Iraq
. . .
2.4
5.6
6.1
1.9
2.2
1.4
0.5
0.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
0.2
2.0
2.0
Jordan
3.6
4.8
4.2
4.5
4.8
2.9
–0.9
–0.8
3.3
4.5
2.3
2.5
3.2
4.2
2.5
Kuwait
2.9
4.5
4.9
3.2
2.7
3.1
3.7
3.5
1.5
0.8
3.0
2.7
1.5
0.8
3.0
Lebanon
2.4
4.0
5.0
6.6
4.8
1.9
–3.7
–0.8
4.5
6.5
3.5
2.4
5.0
5.4
2.4
Libya8
–0.1
2.5
15.9
6.1
2.6
2.4
9.8
25.9
28.5
28.1
17.9
12.3
34.0
23.7
13.4
Mauritania
6.2
6.3
5.7
4.9
4.1
3.8
0.5
1.5
2.3
3.8
3.9
4.2
1.2
4.1
3.9
Morocco
1.9
1.0
0.9
1.3
1.9
0.4
1.5
1.6
0.8
2.4
1.4
2.0
1.9
2.4
1.4
Oman
2.5
3.3
4.0
2.9
1.2
1.0
0.1
1.1
1.6
1.5
3.2
3.0
1.6
1.5
3.2
Pakistan
7.5
10.1
13.7
11.0
7.4
8.6
4.5
2.9
4.1
3.9
7.5
5.0
3.9
5.2
7.7
Qatar
5.5
–2.4
2.0
1.8
3.2
3.4
1.8
2.7
0.4
3.7
3.5
2.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
1.6
3.8
3.8
2.9
3.5
2.2
1.3
2.0
–0.9
2.6
2.0
2.1
–1.1
2.6
2.0
Somalia
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
5.3
2.8
2.5
Sudan9
10.2
13.0
18.1
35.6
36.5
36.9
16.9
17.8
32.4
61.8
49.2
61.1
25.2
64.3
56.8
Syria10
4.8
4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tunisia
3.2
4.4
3.5
5.1
5.8
4.9
4.9
3.7
5.3
8.1
7.5
4.0
6.4
8.9
6.8
United Arab Emirates
5.5
0.9
0.9
0.7
1.1
2.3
4.1
1.6
2.0
3.5
1.9
1.9
2.0
3.5
1.9
Yemen
10.9
11.2
19.5
9.9
11.0
8.2
12.0 –12.6
24.7
41.8
20.0
5.0
53.5
30.0
10.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
163
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2000–09
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
2017
2018
2019
Sub-Saharan Africa
10.7
8.1
9.3
9.2
6.5
6.3
6.9
11.2
11.0
8.6
8.5
7.6
10.1
8.8
8.2
Angola
62.4
14.5
13.5
10.3
8.8
7.3
9.2
30.7
29.8
20.5
15.8
6.5
23.7
20.0
12.0
Benin
3.2
2.2
2.7
6.7
1.0
–1.1
0.3
–0.8
0.1
2.3
2.3
1.9
3.0
1.7
2.8
Botswana
8.7
6.9
8.5
7.5
5.9
4.4
3.1
2.8
3.3
3.8
3.9
4.0
3.2
4.4
3.6
Burkina Faso
2.8
–0.6
2.8
3.8
0.5
–0.3
0.9
–0.2
0.4
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.0
Burundi
10.7
6.5
9.6
18.2
7.9
4.4
5.6
5.5
16.6
1.2
7.3
9.0
10.5
5.3
9.0
Cabo Verde
2.0
2.1
4.5
2.5
1.5
–0.2
0.1
–1.4
0.8
1.0
1.6
2.0
0.3
1.0
1.6
Cameroon
2.6
1.3
2.9
2.4
2.1
1.9
2.7
0.9
0.6
1.0
1.1
2.0
0.8
1.0
1.1
Central African Republic
3.4
1.5
1.2
5.9
6.6
11.6
4.5
4.6
4.1
4.0
3.4
3.0
4.2
3.6
3.4
Chad
3.5
–2.1
1.9
7.7
0.2
1.7
6.8
–1.1
–0.9
2.1
2.6
3.0
7.2
–2.3
5.4
Comoros
4.4
3.9
2.2
5.9
1.6
1.3
2.0
1.8
1.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.9
6.2
2.8
Democratic Republic of the Congo
61.5
23.5
14.9
0.9
0.9
1.2
1.0
18.2
41.5
23.0
13.5
4.9
55.0
20.0
14.8
Republic of Congo
2.9
0.4
1.8
5.0
4.6
0.9
3.2
3.2
0.5
1.2
2.0
3.0
1.8
2.1
2.4
Côte d’Ivoire
3.0
1.4
4.9
1.3
2.6
0.4
1.2
0.7
0.8
1.7
2.0
2.0
1.1
2.0
2.0
Equatorial Guinea
5.6
5.3
4.8
3.4
3.2
4.3
1.7
1.4
0.7
0.9
1.4
3.0
–0.2
1.3
1.5
Eritrea
18.7
11.2
3.9
6.0
6.5
10.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
Eswatini
7.9
4.5
6.1
8.9
5.6
5.7
5.0
7.8
6.2
5.0
5.3
5.5
4.7
5.5
4.9
Ethiopia
10.3
8.1
33.2
24.1
8.1
7.4
10.1
7.3
9.9
12.7
9.5
8.0
13.6
10.5
8.0
Gabon
1.1
1.4
1.3
2.7
0.5
4.5
–0.1
2.1
2.7
2.8
2.5
2.5
1.1
2.8
2.5
The Gambia
6.6
5.0
4.8
4.6
5.2
6.3
6.8
7.2
8.0
6.2
5.3
4.8
6.9
5.5
5.0
Ghana
17.7
6.7
7.7
7.1
11.7
15.5
17.2
17.5
12.4
9.5
8.0
6.0
11.8
8.0
8.0
Guinea
15.1
15.5
21.4
15.2
11.9
9.7
8.2
8.2
8.9
8.2
8.0
7.8
9.5
8.0
8.0
Guinea-Bissau
3.0
1.1
5.1
2.1
0.8
–1.0
1.5
1.5
1.1
2.0
2.2
2.8
–1.3
2.0
2.3
Kenya
7.3
4.3
14.0
9.4
5.7
6.9
6.6
6.3
8.0
5.0
5.6
5.0
4.5
6.9
5.0
Lesotho
7.3
3.3
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.6
4.3
6.2
5.3
6.3
5.3
5.0
4.9
7.0
5.0
Liberia
9.8
7.3
8.5
6.8
7.6
9.9
7.7
8.8
12.4
21.3
24.5
8.5
13.9
27.0
22.0
Madagascar
10.4
9.2
9.5
5.7
5.8
6.1
7.4
6.7
8.3
7.8
7.2
5.0
9.0
7.7
6.4
Malawi
10.1
7.4
7.6
21.3
28.3
23.8
21.9
21.7
12.2
9.2
8.4
5.0
7.1
9.0
7.8
Mali
2.5
1.3
3.1
5.3
–0.6
0.9
1.4
–1.8
1.8
2.5
2.1
2.2
1.1
2.0
2.1
Mauritius
5.9
2.9
6.5
3.9
3.5
3.2
1.3
1.0
3.7
5.1
4.5
3.7
4.2
5.9
4.7
Mozambique
10.5
12.7
10.4
2.1
4.2
2.3
2.4
19.2
15.3
6.0
5.7
5.0
7.2
6.5
5.5
Namibia
7.6
4.9
5.0
6.7
5.6
5.3
3.4
6.7
6.1
3.5
5.8
5.8
5.2
2.9
5.8
Niger
3.1
–2.8
2.9
0.5
2.3
–0.9
1.0
0.2
2.4
3.9
2.0
2.0
4.8
2.4
2.0
Nigeria
12.3
13.7
10.8
12.2
8.5
8.0
9.0
15.7
16.5
12.4
13.5
14.5
15.4
12.9
13.0
Rwanda
8.1
2.3
5.7
6.3
4.2
1.8
2.5
5.7
4.8
3.3
5.5
5.0
0.7
5.0
6.0
São Tomé and Príncipe
15.9
13.3
14.3
10.6
8.1
7.0
5.3
5.4
5.7
6.8
5.5
3.0
7.7
6.0
5.0
Senegal
2.0
1.2
3.4
1.4
0.7
–1.1
0.1
0.8
1.3
0.4
0.9
1.5
–0.7
0.8
1.7
Seychelles
8.6
–2.4
2.6
7.1
4.3
1.4
4.0
–1.0
2.9
4.4
3.7
3.0
3.5
5.2
3.8
Sierra Leone
7.4
7.9
6.1
6.6
5.5
4.6
6.7
10.9
18.2
15.6
13.1
8.7
15.3
15.0
13.0
South Africa
6.0
4.3
5.0
5.6
5.8
6.1
4.6
6.3
5.3
4.8
5.3
5.5
4.7
5.3
5.3
South Sudan
. . .
. . .
. . .
45.1
0.0
1.7
52.8
379.8
187.9
106.4
91.4
48.5
117.7
99.4
92.7
Tanzania
6.5
7.2
12.7
16.0
7.9
6.1
5.6
5.2
5.3
3.8
4.7
5.0
4.0
4.3
5.0
Togo
3.0
1.4
3.6
2.6
1.8
0.2
1.8
0.9
–0.7
0.4
1.2
2.0
–1.6
1.5
2.0
Uganda
6.4
3.7
15.0
12.7
4.9
3.1
5.4
5.5
5.6
3.8
4.2
5.0
3.3
4.3
4.5
Zambia
17.2
8.5
8.7
6.6
7.0
7.8
10.1
17.9
6.6
8.5
8.2
8.0
6.1
8.5
8.0
Zimbabwe11
–5.5
3.0
3.5
3.7
1.6
–0.2
–2.4
–1.6
0.9
3.9
9.6
3.9
3.5
6.3
10.9
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3For many countries, inflation for the earlier years is measured on the basis of a retail price index. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation data with broader and more up-to-date coverage are 
typically used for more recent years.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in the group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
5Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
6Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
7Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina starting from 2017 onward.
8See country-specific notes for Argentina, Libya, and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
10Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
11The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values may 
differ from authorities’ estimates.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
164	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP unless noted otherwise)
Average
Projections
2000–09
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.0
–6.3
–4.1
–3.4
–2.8
–3.1
–3.0
–3.2
–3.3
–2.9
Output Gap2
0.0
–2.0
–1.7
–1.3
–0.6
–0.6
0.0
0.6
1.0
0.6
Structural Balance2
–3.8
–5.2
–3.7
–3.0
–2.7
–3.1
–3.0
–3.5
–3.7
–3.2
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
–4.2
–7.6
–4.1
–3.7
–3.2
–3.9
–3.8
–4.7
–5.0
–4.5
Output Gap2
0.2
–2.3
–1.9
–1.2
–0.1
–0.2
0.2
1.1
1.6
0.9
Structural Balance2
–3.7
–6.1
–4.0
–3.4
–3.2
–3.9
–4.0
–5.1
–5.6
–4.8
Net Debt 
45.3
80.3
80.8
80.4
80.1
81.2
78.8
77.7
77.9
83.7
Gross Debt 
65.4
103.3
104.9
104.6
104.8
106.8
105.2
106.1
107.8
117.0
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
–2.5
–3.7
–3.0
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–0.9
–0.6
–0.6
–0.9
Output Gap2
0.7
–1.8
–2.6
–2.3
–1.7
–1.2
–0.2
0.3
0.6
0.4
Structural Balance2
–3.0
–2.2
–1.3
–1.1
–1.0
–0.8
–0.7
–0.7
–1.0
–1.2
Net Debt
55.2
72.1
74.6
74.8
73.8
73.7
71.8
69.5
67.7
61.8
Gross Debt
68.8
89.6
91.5
91.7
89.8
88.8
86.6
84.4
82.0
74.5
Germany 
Net Lending/Borrowing
–2.2
0.0
–0.1
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.5
1.5
0.8
Output Gap2
–0.3
0.5
–0.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.9
1.2
1.4
0.7
Structural Balance2
–2.2
–0.1
0.2
0.9
0.8
1.0
0.9
1.0
0.7
0.4
Net Debt
52.3
58.4
57.6
54.1
51.1
48.2
44.9
41.5
38.3
29.4
Gross Debt
63.9
79.8
77.5
74.6
70.9
67.9
63.9
59.8
56.0
44.6
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.2
–5.0
–4.1
–3.9
–3.6
–3.6
–2.6
–2.6
–2.8
–2.8
Output Gap2
0.5
–0.6
–0.9
–0.9
–0.9
–0.9
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.3
Structural Balance2
–3.6
–4.5
–3.4
–3.3
–2.9
–2.8
–2.5
–2.4
–2.8
–3.0
Net Debt
56.7
80.0
83.0
85.5
86.4
87.5
87.5
87.4
87.2
84.6
Gross Debt
65.6
90.6
93.4
94.9
95.6
96.6
96.8
96.7
96.5
93.9
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.3
–2.9
–2.9
–3.0
–2.6
–2.5
–2.3
–1.7
–1.7
–2.2
Output Gap2
0.1
–2.8
–4.1
–4.1
–3.2
–2.6
–1.5
–0.8
–0.3
0.0
Structural Balance2,4
–4.0
–1.5
–0.6
–1.0
–0.7
–1.3
–1.6
–1.3
–1.5
–2.2
Net Debt
94.9
111.6
116.7
118.8
119.5
119.5
119.5
118.3
117.0
114.4
Gross Debt
103.2
123.4
129.0
131.8
131.5
132.0
131.8
130.3
128.7
125.1
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.3
–8.6
–7.9
–5.6
–3.8
–3.7
–4.3
–3.7
–2.8
–2.0
Output Gap2
–1.3
–3.7
–2.2
–2.6
–2.0
–1.8
–0.8
–0.3
0.1
0.0
Structural Balance2
–5.9
–7.4
–7.3
–5.3
–4.2
–4.1
–4.1
–3.6
–2.8
–2.0
Net Debt
93.6
146.7
146.4
148.5
147.6
152.8
154.9
155.7
154.8
153.8
Gross Debt5
168.9
229.0
232.5
236.1
231.3
235.6
237.6
238.2
236.6
235.4
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.0
–7.6
–5.3
–5.4
–4.2
–2.9
–1.8
–2.0
–1.7
–0.8
Output Gap2
0.9
–2.0
–1.8
–0.7
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Structural Balance2
–3.7
–6.0
–3.9
–4.6
–4.0
–2.9
–1.8
–2.0
–1.7
–0.8
Net Debt
36.7
75.5
76.8
78.8
79.3
78.8
77.9
78.0
77.6
74.5
Gross Debt
41.6
84.1
85.2
87.0
87.9
87.9
87.5
87.4
87.2
84.0
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
0.5
–2.5
–1.5
0.2
–0.1
–1.1
–1.1
–1.2
–1.1
–0.9
Output Gap2
0.5
–0.5
0.0
0.8
–0.2
–0.9
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.0
Structural Balance2
0.2
–2.3
–1.5
–0.5
0.0
–0.7
–1.2
–1.4
–1.3
–0.9
Net Debt6
31.3
28.3
29.3
28.0
27.7
28.5
27.7
27.7
27.2
25.3
Gross Debt
74.6
84.8
85.8
85.0
90.5
91.1
89.7
87.3
84.7
76.6
Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values 
for the relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the 
System of National Accounts (SNA) 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ defined-benefit 
pension plans. Fiscal data for the aggregated major advanced economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and the United States is therefore for the 
period 2001–07.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Excludes one-time measures based on the authorities’ data and, if unavailable, on receipts from the sale of assets.
5Nonconsolidated basis.
6Includes equity shares.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
165
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2000–09
2010–19
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
5.0
4.8
12.5
7.2
3.0
3.6
3.8
2.8
2.2
5.2
4.2
4.0
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
3.4
0.3
5.5
11.0
–1.7
–0.7
–1.8
–13.2
–4.1
4.2
5.4
0.4
In SDRs
2.1
1.2
6.6
7.3
1.3
0.1
–1.7
–5.8
–3.5
4.5
2.9
1.3
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.9
4.4
12.1
6.1
2.9
3.2
3.9
3.8
1.8
4.4
3.4
3.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8.0
5.5
13.8
8.9
3.5
4.7
3.2
1.6
3.0
6.9
4.7
4.8
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.6
4.4
11.6
5.3
1.7
2.5
3.9
4.8
2.4
4.2
3.7
4.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
5.8
14.2
11.6
5.3
5.1
4.2
–0.9
1.8
7.0
6.0
4.8
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.2
0.1
–0.8
–1.5
–0.7
0.9
0.3
1.9
1.0
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.4
0.1
1.7
4.0
0.6
–0.6
–0.6
–4.3
–1.4
0.6
1.6
–0.2
Trade in Goods 
World Trade1
Volume
4.9
4.8
14.4
7.4
2.8
3.2
2.9
2.0
2.1
5.4
4.4
4.1
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
3.3
0.3
6.5
12.2
–1.9
–1.2
–2.3
–14.2
–4.9
5.0
5.8
0.3
In SDRs
2.0
1.2
7.6
8.4
1.1
–0.4
–2.3
–6.9
–4.2
5.2
3.3
1.2
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
1.7
0.3
2.2
4.1
2.7
–3.0
–0.5
–2.3
–5.2
1.7
2.5
1.6
Oil
13.1
1.1
27.9
31.6
1.0
–0.9
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
31.4
–0.9
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
5.3
1.2
26.7
18.1
–10.2
–1.5
–3.9
–17.6
–1.5
6.8
2.7
–0.7
Food
5.5
1.3
12.3
20.5
–2.9
0.4
–4.1
–17.4
2.7
2.2
2.3
1.7
Beverages
5.2
–1.2
14.1
16.6
–18.6
–11.9
20.7
–3.1
–5.0
–9.3
–5.7
–2.7
Agricultural Raw Materials
0.1
2.1
33.2
22.7
–12.7
1.6
2.0
–13.5
–5.7
2.3
1.5
–1.5
Metal
9.4
0.8
48.2
13.5
–16.8
–4.3
–10.1
–23.0
–5.4
22.2
5.3
–3.6
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
0.5
1.3
3.2
0.6
5.9
–2.2
–0.4
6.1
–4.6
1.9
0.2
2.5
Oil
11.8
2.0
29.3
27.2
4.1
–0.1
–7.5
–42.7
–15.1
23.6
28.3
0.1
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
4.1
2.1
28.0
14.2
–7.4
–0.7
–3.9
–10.5
–0.9
7.0
0.3
0.3
Food
4.2
2.3
13.5
16.5
0.1
1.2
–4.1
–10.3
3.4
2.5
0.0
2.7
Beverages
4.0
–0.3
15.3
12.7
–16.1
–11.2
20.8
5.2
–4.4
–9.0
–7.9
–1.8
Agricultural Raw Materials
–1.1
3.1
34.6
18.5
–10.0
2.4
2.0
–6.1
–5.1
2.5
–0.8
–0.6
Metal
8.1
1.8
49.8
9.7
–14.3
–3.5
–10.1
–16.4
–4.8
22.5
2.9
–2.7
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
–1.0
2.1
7.2
–0.7
11.2
–6.1
–0.5
17.0
–4.9
–0.4
–2.4
2.9
Oil
10.2
2.9
34.3
25.5
9.3
–4.1
–7.6
–36.8
–15.4
20.8
25.1
0.4
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
2.6
2.9
32.9
12.7
–2.8
–4.6
–4.0
–1.3
–1.3
4.6
–2.3
0.6
Food
2.7
3.1
17.9
14.9
5.1
–2.8
–4.2
–1.1
3.0
0.2
–2.6
3.1
Beverages
2.5
0.5
19.8
11.2
–11.9
–14.7
20.7
16.1
–4.8
–11.1
–10.2
–1.4
Agricultural Raw Materials
–2.6
3.9
39.8
17.0
–5.5
–1.7
1.9
3.6
–5.5
0.2
–3.4
–0.2
Metal
6.6
2.6
55.5
8.3
–10.0
–7.3
–10.2
–7.8
–5.1
19.8
0.2
–2.3
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
166	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2000–09
2010–19
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Trade in Goods
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.6
4.4
14.4
6.3
2.6
2.6
3.1
2.7
1.5
4.2
3.6
3.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.9
5.4
15.4
7.8
3.8
4.6
2.6
1.2
2.9
6.6
4.5
4.7
Fuel Exporters
5.1
2.3
6.2
5.7
2.7
2.0
–0.2
3.4
2.2
0.7
–0.4
1.3
Nonfuel Exporters
9.0
6.4
19.1
8.7
4.3
5.8
3.8
0.4
3.1
8.1
5.8
5.7
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.4
4.4
13.3
6.0
1.1
2.0
3.3
3.4
2.3
4.7
4.2
4.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
5.8
15.4
11.3
5.1
4.7
2.5
–0.8
2.2
7.2
6.3
4.8
Fuel Exporters
11.0
2.7
7.8
11.8
8.5
3.7
1.0
–7.5
–5.2
2.9
4.6
0.6
Nonfuel Exporters
8.7
6.4
17.3
11.2
4.4
4.9
2.9
0.7
3.7
8.1
6.6
5.5
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.0
4.7
6.1
–0.4
0.3
–1.8
–6.0
–2.1
4.7
3.4
1.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.6
1.8
12.3
13.1
3.1
–1.2
–3.1
–8.9
–7.3
6.6
4.1
1.1
Fuel Exporters
9.0
1.8
21.9
25.7
4.4
–2.5
–6.9
–30.1
–13.5
16.6
16.0
0.8
Nonfuel Exporters
2.8
1.6
8.6
8.1
2.4
–0.6
–1.4
–0.7
–5.5
4.1
1.0
1.1
Imports
Advanced Economies
1.6
0.9
6.1
8.0
0.7
–0.5
–2.0
–7.8
–3.5
4.6
3.2
1.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.7
1.6
11.1
8.2
2.5
–0.7
–2.6
–4.5
–5.7
5.6
2.6
1.3
Fuel Exporters
3.3
1.5
8.5
6.4
3.2
0.0
–2.3
–3.1
–3.8
3.3
1.4
1.7
Nonfuel Exporters
2.6
1.7
11.7
8.6
2.4
–0.9
–2.7
–4.9
–6.1
6.0
2.8
1.3
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.3
0.1
–1.3
–1.8
–1.1
0.9
0.2
2.0
1.4
0.1
0.3
0.1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.8
0.1
1.2
4.5
0.5
–0.5
–0.4
–4.5
–1.7
1.0
1.5
–0.3
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
3.6
0.5
12.7
20.9
1.6
–6.6
–1.9
–22.0
–13.5
10.7
12.3
–1.1
Emerging and Developing Asia
–0.9
–0.1
–6.6
–2.7
1.4
1.1
2.5
8.7
0.1
–3.4
–1.6
0.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
1.6
–0.8
–5.4
0.0
–1.1
2.1
0.9
–0.4
0.6
–2.8
–1.2
–0.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.3
0.0
7.2
5.2
–1.8
–1.3
–2.4
–9.0
1.2
4.5
–1.0
–1.7
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
5.0
–0.1
8.5
12.7
–0.1
–0.1
–4.6
–25.8
–6.2
10.0
11.5
–0.7
Middle East and North Africa
5.3
–0.1
8.4
12.9
0.5
–0.1
–4.7
–26.5
–6.8
10.3
11.9
–0.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
3.6
0.9
12.3
12.3
–1.4
–2.0
–3.3
–15.4
–0.1
7.0
4.0
–1.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.6
0.4
12.4
18.1
1.2
–2.5
–4.7
–27.9
–10.1
12.9
14.4
–0.9
Nonfuel
0.3
0.0
–2.8
–0.5
0.1
0.3
1.3
4.4
0.6
–1.8
–1.7
–0.1
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
12,367
22,609
18,728
22,307
22,608
23,323
23,749
21,097
20,692
22,713
24,921 25,947
Goods
9,794
17,666
14,900
17,929
18,130
18,546
18,629
16,200
15,732
17,400
19,208 19,985
Average Oil Price4
13.1
1.1
27.9
31.6
1.0
–0.9
–7.5
–47.2
–15.7
23.3
31.4
–0.9
In US Dollars a Barrel
49.17
77.29
79.03
104.01
105.01
104.07
96.25
50.79
42.84
52.81
69.38
68.76
Export Unit Value of Manufactures5
1.7
0.3
2.2
4.1
2.7
–3.0
–0.5
–2.3
–5.2
1.7
2.5
1.6
1Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
2As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) 
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2002–04 
shares in world commodity exports.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
4Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 
5Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
167
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances 
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Advanced Economies
–1.7
–35.9
23.3
218.9
244.7
299.0
333.7
439.8
380.4
259.8
219.1
United States
–431.3
–445.7
–426.8
–348.8
–365.2
–407.8
–432.9
–449.1
–515.7
–652.1
–809.6
Euro Area
–7.7
–12.4
174.1
293.1
331.8
377.1
429.4
436.5
417.9
407.3
439.0
Germany
192.3
229.7
248.9
252.5
291.0
301.2
297.5
291.0
326.9
323.6
359.2
France
–16.7
–24.6
–25.9
–14.3
–27.3
–9.0
–18.5
–14.8
–25.6
–19.9
–3.3
Italy
–72.6
–68.3
–7.0
21.3
41.3
27.8
47.6
53.4
41.3
33.6
18.8
Spain
–56.2
–47.4
–3.1
20.7
14.9
13.5
23.8
24.7
16.6
17.3
25.4
Japan
221.0
129.8
59.7
45.9
36.8
136.4
194.9
196.1
183.7
196.2
245.0
United Kingdom
–82.9
–51.6
–100.9
–141.9
–149.6
–142.4
–139.3
–99.2
–99.2
–90.3
–93.0
Canada
–58.2
–49.6
–65.7
–59.4
–43.2
–55.9
–49.3
–48.8
–52.2
–45.6
–48.0
Other Advanced Economies1
283.4
266.0
272.2
347.5
360.4
366.6
348.3
356.8
370.4
367.2
394.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
278.5
375.8
355.3
178.7
173.9
–58.3
–72.8
–14.0
–7.4
–4.2
–340.8
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
68.9
107.3
67.5
17.9
57.6
53.1
0.8
23.5
86.4
73.9
49.7
Russia
67.5
97.3
71.3
33.4
57.5
67.7
24.4
35.4
97.1
85.6
61.0
Excluding Russia
1.4
10.0
–3.8
–15.5
0.1
–14.6
–23.6
–12.0
–10.7
–11.7
–11.3
Emerging and Developing Asia
232.6
97.4
121.2
99.3
231.8
312.1
228.7
151.2
28.2
32.3
–104.8
China
237.8
136.1
215.4
148.2
236.0
304.2
202.2
164.9
97.5
98.4
17.5
India
–47.9
–78.2
–87.8
–32.3
–26.8
–22.1
–14.4
–48.7
–80.4
–74.0
–112.3
ASEAN-53
45.4
49.6
6.3
–3.5
22.5
30.9
43.2
45.9
31.2
26.0
3.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
–86.8
–119.4
–81.8
–71.9
–59.7
–35.2
–32.7
–49.4
–53.2
–26.1
–49.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
–96.0
–111.6
–136.7
–163.4
–184.9
–173.3
–95.0
–82.1
–85.6
–92.9
–127.1
Brazil
–75.8
–77.0
–74.2
–74.8
–104.2
–59.4
–23.5
–9.8
–24.8
–30.9
–44.7
Mexico
–5.2
–12.5
–18.6
–31.0
–24.0
–29.8
–23.3
–19.4
–15.3
–16.0
–24.0
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
170.2
410.7
411.8
332.5
191.8
–123.1
–119.5
–21.4
62.9
67.3
–27.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
–10.4
–8.7
–26.7
–35.7
–62.6
–91.8
–55.1
–35.8
–46.1
–58.8
–81.6
South Africa
–5.6
–9.2
–20.3
–21.2
–17.8
–14.6
–8.2
–8.6
–12.1
–13.5
–16.5
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
309.5
619.9
597.0
465.5
311.6
–78.1
–76.5
74.8
228.7
220.6
99.0
Nonfuel
–29.4
–244.0
–241.7
–286.7
–137.7
19.8
3.7
–88.8
–236.1
–224.8
–439.8
Of Which, Primary Products
–11.5
–28.6
–64.6
–82.9
–55.4
–62.5
–41.3
–55.3
–55.5
–57.2
–63.3
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–262.6
–348.5
–401.9
–374.5
–369.8
–339.9
–257.9
–276.3
–351.7
–340.9
–457.2
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
–23.3
–37.0
–55.0
–54.4
–39.2
–49.0
–52.7
–44.2
–40.1
–44.5
–59.1
Memorandum
World
276.7
339.9
378.6
397.6
418.7
240.6
260.8
425.8
373.0
255.6
–121.7
European Union
–9.4
77.0
206.6
287.1
304.4
310.8
324.9
433.3
429.0
424.4
459.6
Low-Income Developing Countries
–16.6
–22.8
–32.8
–39.7
–43.9
–77.5
–42.5
–35.5
–53.8
–65.0
–88.4
Middle East and North Africa
169.7
405.8
414.3
335.0
193.7
–120.9
–116.1
–9.9
80.1
83.0
–1.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
168	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Advanced Economies
0.0
–0.1
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.4
United States
–2.9
–2.9
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.3
–2.5
–3.0
–3.3
Euro Area
–0.1
–0.1
1.4
2.2
2.5
3.2
3.6
3.5
3.0
2.9
2.6
Germany
5.6
6.1
7.0
6.7
7.5
8.9
8.5
7.9
8.1
7.9
7.3
France
–0.6
–0.9
–1.0
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.8
–0.6
–0.9
–0.7
–0.1
Italy
–3.4
–3.0
–0.3
1.0
1.9
1.5
2.6
2.8
2.0
1.6
0.8
Spain
–3.9
–3.2
–0.2
1.5
1.1
1.1
1.9
1.9
1.2
1.2
1.4
Japan
3.9
2.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
3.1
3.9
4.0
3.6
3.8
4.1
United Kingdom
–3.4
–2.0
–3.8
–5.1
–4.9
–4.9
–5.2
–3.8
–3.5
–3.2
–2.9
Canada
–3.6
–2.8
–3.6
–3.2
–2.4
–3.6
–3.2
–2.9
–3.0
–2.5
–2.1
Other Advanced Economies1
5.0
4.1
4.1
5.1
5.2
5.8
5.4
5.1
5.0
4.8
4.3
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
1.2
1.4
1.3
0.6
0.6
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.7
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
3.2
4.0
2.4
0.6
2.1
2.8
0.0
1.1
4.1
3.3
1.9
Russia
4.1
4.7
3.2
1.5
2.8
4.9
1.9
2.2
6.2
5.2
3.4
Excluding Russia
0.3
1.7
–0.6
–2.2
0.0
–2.7
–5.1
–2.4
–1.9
–2.0
–1.5
Emerging and Developing Asia
2.4
0.8
0.9
0.7
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.9
0.1
0.2
–0.4
China
3.9
1.8
2.5
1.5
2.2
2.7
1.8
1.4
0.7
0.7
0.1
India
–2.8
–4.3
–4.8
–1.7
–1.3
–1.1
–0.6
–1.9
–3.0
–2.5
–2.6
ASEAN-53
2.7
2.6
0.3
–0.2
1.1
1.5
2.0
2.0
1.3
1.0
0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
–5.0
–6.3
–4.4
–3.6
–2.9
–1.9
–1.8
–2.6
–2.8
–1.4
–1.9
Latin America and the Caribbean
–1.9
–1.9
–2.3
–2.7
–3.1
–3.3
–1.9
–1.5
–1.6
–1.8
–2.0
Brazil
–3.4
–2.9
–3.0
–3.0
–4.2
–3.3
–1.3
–0.5
–1.3
–1.6
–1.9
Mexico
–0.5
–1.1
–1.5
–2.4
–1.8
–2.5
–2.2
–1.7
–1.3
–1.3
–1.6
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
6.1
12.7
12.5
9.8
5.5
–4.0
–3.9
–0.7
1.8
1.9
–0.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
–0.8
–0.6
–1.7
–2.2
–3.6
–6.0
–3.9
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
–3.4
South Africa
–1.5
–2.2
–5.1
–5.8
–5.1
–4.6
–2.8
–2.5
–3.2
–3.5
–3.6
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
6.4
10.5
9.6
7.3
5.0
–1.6
–1.7
1.5
4.3
4.1
1.5
Nonfuel
–0.2
–1.2
–1.1
–1.2
–0.6
0.1
0.0
–0.3
–0.8
–0.8
–1.1
Of Which, Primary Products
–0.8
–1.7
–3.5
–4.4
–3.0
–3.4
–2.4
–2.9
–3.0
–3.1
–2.8
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–2.3
–2.7
–3.1
–2.7
–2.6
–2.7
–2.0
–2.0
–2.5
–2.3
–2.3
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
–3.4
–4.8
–6.7
–6.2
–4.5
–5.7
–6.2
–5.7
–4.9
–4.9
–4.9
Memorandum
World
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.3
–0.1
European Union
–0.1
0.4
1.2
1.6
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
–1.3
–1.5
–2.0
–2.2
–2.3
–4.2
–2.4
–1.9
–2.7
–3.0
–2.9
Middle East and North Africa
6.6
13.5
13.5
10.7
6.0
–4.3
–4.2
–0.3
2.6
2.6
0.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
169
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Advanced Economies
0.0
–0.3
0.2
1.5
1.6
2.2
2.5
3.0
2.4
1.6
1.1
United States
–23.3
–21.0
–19.2
–15.2
–15.4
–18.0
–19.5
–19.1
–20.4
–24.9
–27.8
Euro Area
–0.3
–0.4
5.4
8.6
9.3
11.7
13.3
12.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
13.3
13.6
15.3
14.8
16.3
19.0
18.5
16.7
17.3
16.5
15.0
France
–2.3
–3.0
–3.2
–1.7
–3.1
–1.2
–2.4
–1.8
–2.9
–2.1
–0.3
Italy
–13.5
–11.1
–1.2
3.5
6.5
5.1
8.6
8.8
6.2
4.9
2.4
Spain
–15.3
–11.0
–0.8
4.7
3.3
3.4
5.8
5.5
3.4
3.4
3.9
Japan
25.4
13.9
6.5
5.5
4.3
17.4
24.0
22.4
19.5
20.3
23.6
United Kingdom
–12.0
–6.4
–12.6
–17.3
–17.5
–17.9
–18.5
–12.5
–11.7
–10.7
–10.2
Canada
–12.4
–9.1
–11.9
–10.7
–7.6
–11.4
–10.4
–9.5
–9.6
–8.0
–7.1
Other Advanced Economies1
8.6
6.8
6.8
8.4
8.7
9.9
9.6
9.1
8.7
8.3
7.4
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
4.0
4.5
3.9
2.0
2.2
–0.6
–0.9
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–2.9
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
10.3
12.1
7.4
2.0
6.8
9.0
0.2
3.8
11.6
9.7
5.9
Russia
15.3
17.0
12.1
5.6
10.2
17.2
7.3
8.6
19.5
16.9
11.2
Excluding Russia
0.6
3.2
–1.2
–5.1
0.0
–7.5
–13.6
–5.8
–4.4
–4.6
–3.8
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.3
2.8
3.3
2.6
5.8
8.2
6.2
3.7
0.6
0.7
–1.8
China
14.8
6.8
9.9
6.3
9.6
12.9
9.2
6.8
3.7
3.6
0.6
India
–12.6
–17.2
–19.4
–6.9
–5.6
–5.3
–3.2
–9.7
–14.4
–12.0
–12.8
ASEAN-53
6.1
5.5
0.7
–0.4
2.3
3.4
4.7
4.4
2.7
2.1
0.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
–14.8
–17.2
–11.8
–9.7
–7.6
–5.0
–4.5
–6.1
–5.8
–2.7
–4.0
Latin America and the Caribbean
–9.6
–9.0
–10.7
–12.9
–14.9
–16.0
–9.0
–7.0
–6.8
–7.1
–7.9
Brazil
–32.7
–26.3
–26.4
–26.8
–39.5
–26.5
–10.8
–3.9
–9.2
–11.1
–13.7
Mexico
–1.7
–3.4
–4.8
–7.8
–5.7
–7.4
–5.8
–4.4
–3.2
–3.1
–3.7
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and 
Pakistan
13.6
26.8
24.3
20.9
13.7
–9.9
–10.6
–2.0
4.5
4.6
–1.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
–2.7
–1.8
–5.6
–7.4
–13.8
–26.6
–17.5
–9.7
–11.0
–13.4
–15.8
South Africa
–5.2
–7.3
–17.3
–18.7
–16.1
–15.2
–9.1
–8.3
–11.0
–12.0
–12.5
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
16.5
25.3
22.6
18.4
13.8
–4.2
–4.9
4.2
11.2
10.7
4.8
Nonfuel
–0.6
–4.2
–4.0
–4.5
–2.1
0.3
0.1
–1.4
–3.3
–3.0
–4.6
Of Which, Primary Products
–2.9
–5.9
–13.5
–17.6
–12.1
–16.0
–10.7
–12.6
–11.8
–11.7
–10.6
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–8.7
–9.5
–10.8
–9.8
–9.6
–10.0
–7.7
–7.3
–8.3
–7.5
–7.7
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
–10.9
–14.7
–22.1
–21.9
–16.9
–25.4
–30.0
–22.3
–17.5
–17.8
–18.5
Memorandum
World
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.2
1.3
1.9
1.5
1.0
–0.4
European Union
–0.1
1.0
2.8
3.7
3.8
4.3
4.5
5.5
4.9
4.7
4.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
–4.5
–4.8
–6.8
–7.7
–8.3
–16.2
–8.9
–6.3
–8.3
–9.1
–8.4
Middle East and North Africa
13.9
27.1
25.0
21.5
14.1
–10.0
–10.6
–1.1
5.8
5.9
0.0
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
3Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
170	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Advanced Economies
0.0
–0.1
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.4
United States
–2.9
–2.9
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.3
–2.5
–3.0
–3.3
Euro Area1
–0.1
–0.1
1.4
2.2
2.5
3.2
3.6
3.5
3.0
2.9
2.6
Germany
5.6
6.1
7.0
6.7
7.5
8.9
8.5
7.9
8.1
7.9
7.3
France
–0.6
–0.9
–1.0
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.8
–0.6
–0.9
–0.7
–0.1
Italy
–3.4
–3.0
–0.3
1.0
1.9
1.5
2.6
2.8
2.0
1.6
0.8
Spain
–3.9
–3.2
–0.2
1.5
1.1
1.1
1.9
1.9
1.2
1.2
1.4
Netherlands
7.3
9.0
10.7
9.7
8.5
6.3
8.0
10.5
9.9
9.7
8.3
Belgium
1.8
–1.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.9
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
0.2
Austria
2.9
1.6
1.5
1.9
2.5
1.9
2.1
1.9
2.2
1.8
2.0
Greece
–11.4
–10.0
–3.8
–2.0
–1.6
–0.2
–1.1
–0.8
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
Portugal
–10.1
–6.0
–1.8
1.6
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.5
0.0
–0.3
–1.5
Ireland
–1.2
–1.6
–2.6
1.5
1.1
4.4
–4.2
8.5
7.4
6.7
5.0
Finland
1.1
–1.7
–2.3
–1.9
–1.5
–0.9
–0.3
0.7
0.9
0.9
1.1
Slovak Republic
–4.7
–5.0
0.9
1.9
1.1
–1.7
–1.5
–2.1
–1.8
–0.9
0.2
Lithuania
–1.3
–4.5
–1.4
0.8
3.2
–2.8
–1.1
0.8
0.3
0.0
–2.3
Slovenia
–0.1
0.2
2.1
4.4
5.8
4.5
5.5
7.1
6.3
5.5
2.6
Luxembourg
6.7
6.0
5.6
5.5
5.2
5.1
5.1
5.0
4.9
4.8
4.6
Latvia
2.0
–3.2
–3.6
–2.7
–1.7
–0.5
1.4
–0.8
–2.0
–2.6
–3.4
Estonia
1.8
1.3
–1.9
0.5
0.3
2.0
1.9
3.1
2.2
1.1
–2.4
Cyprus
–11.3
–4.1
–6.0
–4.9
–4.3
–1.5
–4.9
–6.7
–3.1
–5.2
–3.6
Malta
–4.7
–0.2
1.7
2.7
8.8
4.5
7.0
13.6
11.6
11.1
10.6
Japan
3.9
2.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
3.1
3.9
4.0
3.6
3.8
4.1
United Kingdom
–3.4
–2.0
–3.8
–5.1
–4.9
–4.9
–5.2
–3.8
–3.5
–3.2
–2.9
Korea
2.6
1.6
4.2
6.2
6.0
7.7
7.0
5.1
5.0
4.7
4.1
Canada
–3.6
–2.8
–3.6
–3.2
–2.4
–3.6
–3.2
–2.9
–3.0
–2.5
–2.1
Australia
–3.7
–3.1
–4.3
–3.4
–3.1
–4.6
–3.3
–2.6
–2.8
–3.1
–2.7
Taiwan Province of China
8.3
7.8
8.9
10.0
11.5
14.2
13.7
14.5
13.8
13.6
10.5
Switzerland
14.8
7.9
10.3
11.3
8.5
10.8
9.4
9.8
10.2
9.8
9.3
Sweden
6.0
5.6
5.6
5.2
4.5
4.5
4.3
3.3
2.6
2.8
3.0
Singapore
23.4
22.1
17.0
16.5
18.7
18.6
19.0
18.8
18.5
18.3
15.9
Hong Kong SAR
7.0
5.6
1.6
1.5
1.4
3.3
4.0
4.3
3.4
3.1
3.4
Norway
10.9
12.4
12.5
10.3
10.5
7.9
3.8
5.5
7.8
7.8
7.1
Czech Republic
–3.6
–2.1
–1.6
–0.5
0.2
0.2
1.6
1.1
–0.4
–0.9
–1.9
Israel
3.9
2.1
0.5
3.0
4.4
5.3
3.8
2.9
2.3
2.3
2.9
Denmark
6.6
6.6
6.3
7.8
8.9
8.8
7.3
7.6
7.7
7.5
6.3
New Zealand
–2.3
–2.8
–3.9
–3.2
–3.2
–3.1
–2.3
–2.7
–3.6
–3.8
–3.8
Puerto Rico
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
39.4
40.9
39.3
40.2
34.2
25.3
27.0
33.3
35.9
38.1
41.0
Iceland
–6.4
–5.1
–3.8
5.8
3.9
5.2
7.5
3.5
2.4
2.0
2.2
San Marino
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Major Advanced Economies
–0.8
–0.8
–0.9
–0.7
–0.6
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.7
Euro Area2
0.5
0.8
2.3
2.8
3.0
3.4
3.4
3.8
3.6
3.5
3.2
1Data corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
2Data calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
171
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Commonwealth of Independent States1
3.2
4.0
2.4
0.6
2.1
2.8
0.0
1.1
4.1
3.3
1.9
Russia
4.1
4.7
3.2
1.5
2.8
4.9
1.9
2.2
6.2
5.2
3.4
Excluding Russia
0.3
1.7
–0.6
–2.2
0.0
–2.7
–5.1
–2.4
–1.9
–2.0
–1.5
Armenia
–13.6
–10.4
–10.0
–7.3
–7.6
–2.6
–2.3
–2.8
–3.8
–3.8
–4.7
Azerbaijan
28.4
26.0
21.4
16.6
13.9
–0.4
–3.6
4.1
6.6
8.1
9.6
Belarus
–14.5
–8.2
–2.8
–10.0
–6.6
–3.3
–3.5
–1.7
–2.5
–4.2
–2.0
Georgia
–10.3
–12.8
–11.7
–5.8
–10.7
–12.0
–12.8
–8.9
–10.5
–10.2
–8.6
Kazakhstan
0.9
5.3
0.5
0.5
2.8
–2.8
–6.5
–3.4
–0.2
0.2
0.6
Kyrgyz Republic
–2.2
–2.9
3.7
–13.3
–16.0
–16.0
–11.6
–4.0
–12.3
–11.8
–12.6
Moldova 
–6.4
–10.0
–6.5
–4.2
–4.5
–4.9
–3.4
–6.3
–7.4
–6.3
–5.7
Tajikistan
–9.6
–7.3
–9.2
–7.8
–2.8
–6.0
–5.2
–0.5
–4.7
–4.3
–3.3
Turkmenistan
–12.9
–0.8
–0.9
–7.3
–6.1
–15.6
–19.9
–11.5
–8.2
–6.4
–5.9
Ukraine2
–2.2
–6.3
–8.1
–9.2
–3.9
1.7
–1.5
–1.9
–3.1
–3.9
–3.1
Uzbekistan
7.0
5.7
1.2
2.8
1.7
0.7
0.6
3.5
–0.5
–1.5
–2.6
Emerging and Developing Asia
2.4
0.8
0.9
0.7
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.9
0.1
0.2
–0.4
Bangladesh
0.4
–1.0
0.7
1.2
1.3
1.9
0.6
–2.0
–3.2
–2.7
–0.9
Bhutan
–22.2
–29.8
–21.4
–25.4
–26.4
–28.3
–29.4
–22.8
–22.8
–15.0
2.9
Brunei Darussalam
36.6
34.7
29.8
20.9
31.9
16.7
12.9
16.7
7.8
17.4
15.7
Cambodia
–14.9
–11.9
–14.0
–13.4
–10.1
–9.0
–8.6
–8.5
–10.8
–10.6
–7.0
China
3.9
1.8
2.5
1.5
2.2
2.7
1.8
1.4
0.7
0.7
0.1
Fiji
–4.5
–5.1
–1.4
–9.7
–6.2
–2.2
–2.9
–5.7
–4.7
–4.0
–3.3
India
–2.8
–4.3
–4.8
–1.7
–1.3
–1.1
–0.6
–1.9
–3.0
–2.5
–2.6
Indonesia
0.7
0.2
–2.7
–3.2
–3.1
–2.0
–1.8
–1.7
–2.4
–2.4
–2.2
Kiribati
–2.2
–13.1
–4.4
8.3
25.0
46.7
19.4
9.0
16.9
7.1
–15.7
Lao P.D.R.
–16.5
–15.3
–26.0
–28.4
–20.0
–18.0
–13.0
–12.1
–13.9
–12.3
–8.7
Malaysia
10.1
10.9
5.2
3.5
4.4
3.0
2.4
3.0
2.9
2.3
1.7
Maldives
–7.3
–14.8
–6.6
–4.3
–3.2
–7.4
–24.5
–19.5
–18.2
–15.2
–9.5
Marshall Islands
–17.8
–2.1
–6.2
–9.2
–1.2
15.0
7.6
–0.3
–0.6
–1.0
–3.1
Micronesia
–15.4
–18.8
–13.4
–10.1
1.2
4.2
3.3
3.6
3.2
3.1
3.2
Mongolia
–13.0
–26.5
–27.4
–25.4
–11.3
–4.0
–6.3
–10.4
–8.3
–10.8
0.7
Myanmar
–1.1
–1.8
–4.0
–4.9
–2.2
–5.1
–3.9
–4.3
–5.3
–5.7
–5.8
Nauru
46.3
26.1
38.1
18.8
–13.5
–9.5
1.7
4.1
–7.7
–7.5
–6.0
Nepal
–2.4
–1.0
4.8
3.3
4.5
5.0
6.3
–0.4
–8.2
–6.3
–3.4
Palau
–9.3
–11.5
–11.5
–12.0
–15.2
–7.7
–11.7
–18.1
–17.5
–17.2
–13.3
Papua New Guinea
–20.4
–24.0
–36.1
–30.8
1.3
12.0
24.1
24.5
23.4
23.6
19.9
Philippines
3.6
2.5
2.8
4.2
3.8
2.5
–0.4
–0.8
–1.5
–1.5
–1.3
Samoa
–6.7
–6.9
–9.0
–1.7
–8.1
–3.1
–4.7
–2.3
–3.1
–4.5
–4.5
Solomon Islands
–32.9
–8.3
1.7
–3.4
–4.3
–3.0
–3.9
–4.2
–6.4
–8.3
–6.8
Sri Lanka
–1.9
–7.1
–5.8
–3.4
–2.5
–2.3
–2.1
–2.6
–2.9
–2.7
–2.1
Thailand
3.4
2.5
–0.4
–1.2
3.7
8.0
11.7
11.2
9.1
8.1
4.2
Timor-Leste
39.7
39.1
39.7
42.3
27.0
6.6
–21.6
–10.2
–1.2
–2.6
–12.6
Tonga
–18.5
–13.2
–7.9
–11.5
–14.7
–12.0
–6.9
–11.6
–17.1
–14.1
–6.3
Tuvalu
–12.0
–37.1
18.2
–6.6
2.9
–52.8
23.2
4.2
3.5
–2.0
–11.3
Vanuatu
–5.9
–7.8
–6.5
–3.3
2.4
–10.7
–4.6
–1.5
–8.5
–7.6
–6.4
Vietnam
–3.8
0.2
6.0
4.5
4.9
–0.1
2.9
2.5
2.2
2.0
1.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
–5.0
–6.3
–4.4
–3.6
–2.9
–1.9
–1.8
–2.6
–2.8
–1.4
–1.9
Albania
–11.3
–13.2
–10.1
–9.3
–10.8
–8.6
–7.6
–6.9
–7.1
–6.6
–6.2
Bosnia and Herzegovina
–6.1
–9.5
–8.7
–5.3
–7.4
–5.4
–4.9
–4.8
–6.0
–6.6
–5.0
Bulgaria
–1.7
0.3
–0.9
1.3
0.1
0.0
2.3
4.5
2.4
1.6
0.1
Croatia
–1.1
–0.7
–0.1
0.9
2.0
4.5
2.6
3.9
2.7
2.3
0.5
Hungary
0.3
0.7
1.8
3.8
1.5
3.5
6.0
3.2
2.3
2.1
1.0
Kosovo
–11.7
–12.7
–5.8
–3.4
–6.9
–8.6
–7.9
–6.6
–7.2
–6.6
–5.2
FYR Macedonia
–2.0
–2.5
–3.2
–1.6
–0.5
–2.0
–2.7
–1.3
–1.1
–1.6
–2.6
Montenegro
–20.3
–14.8
–15.3
–11.4
–12.4
–11.0
–16.2
–16.3
–16.8
–16.0
–8.3
Poland
–5.4
–5.2
–3.7
–1.3
–2.1
–0.6
–0.3
0.3
–0.8
–1.3
–1.5
Romania
–5.1
–5.0
–4.8
–1.1
–0.7
–1.2
–2.1
–3.4
–3.5
–3.4
–3.0
Serbia
–6.4
–8.6
–11.5
–6.1
–6.0
–4.7
–3.1
–5.7
–5.7
–5.6
–4.1
Turkey
–5.8
–8.9
–5.5
–6.7
–4.7
–3.7
–3.8
–5.6
–5.7
–1.4
–2.4
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
172	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Latin America and the Caribbean
–1.9
–1.9
–2.3
–2.7
–3.1
–3.3
–1.9
–1.5
–1.6
–1.8
–2.0
Antigua and Barbuda
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
2.0
6.8
0.2
–7.3
–13.8
–4.4
–2.1
Argentina 
–0.4
–1.0
–0.4
–2.1
–1.6
–2.7
–2.7
–4.9
–3.7
–3.2
–3.5
Aruba
–19.4
–10.5
3.5
–12.9
–5.2
4.1
5.0
0.8
1.1
0.7
0.8
The Bahamas
–7.9
–10.9
–14.3
–14.3
–20.0
–13.7
–7.3
–15.7
–12.7
–8.0
–3.3
Barbados
–5.6
–11.8
–8.5
–8.4
–9.2
–6.1
–4.3
–3.8
–3.1
–3.4
–2.7
Belize
–2.9
–1.1
–1.2
–4.5
–7.8
–9.8
–9.0
–7.7
–6.0
–5.8
–5.0
Bolivia
3.9
0.3
7.2
3.4
1.7
–5.8
–5.6
–6.3
–5.2
–5.1
–4.7
Brazil
–3.4
–2.9
–3.0
–3.0
–4.2
–3.3
–1.3
–0.5
–1.3
–1.6
–1.9
Chile
1.4
–1.6
–3.9
–4.0
–1.7
–2.3
–1.4
–1.5
–2.5
–2.7
–1.8
Colombia
–3.1
–2.9
–3.1
–3.3
–5.2
–6.3
–4.3
–3.3
–2.4
–2.4
–2.4
Costa Rica
–3.2
–5.3
–5.1
–4.8
–4.8
–3.5
–2.3
–2.9
–3.3
–3.5
–4.5
Dominica
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
–7.1
–1.9
0.8
–12.5
–32.7
–23.4
–12.6
Dominican Republic
–7.5
–7.5
–6.5
–4.1
–3.3
–1.9
–1.1
–0.2
–1.6
–2.1
–2.7
Ecuador
–2.3
–0.5
–0.2
–1.0
–0.5
–2.1
1.4
–0.3
–0.5
0.7
1.2
El Salvador
–2.9
–5.5
–5.8
–6.9
–5.4
–3.2
–2.1
–2.0
–3.9
–4.3
–4.7
Grenada
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
–4.4
–3.8
–3.2
–6.8
–7.5
–7.5
–6.8
Guatemala
–1.4
–3.4
–2.6
–2.5
–2.1
–0.2
1.5
1.5
1.0
0.4
–1.2
Guyana
–8.4
–12.2
–11.3
–13.3
–9.5
–5.1
0.4
–6.7
–6.1
–4.3
40.7
Haiti
–1.5
–4.3
–5.7
–6.6
–8.5
–3.1
–1.0
–4.0
–4.0
–2.9
–2.7
Honduras
–4.3
–8.0
–8.5
–9.5
–6.9
–4.7
–2.7
–1.7
–3.2
–3.4
–3.8
Jamaica
–8.0
–12.2
–11.1
–9.2
–7.5
–3.2
–2.7
–4.6
–4.9
–4.2
–1.2
Mexico
–0.5
–1.1
–1.5
–2.4
–1.8
–2.5
–2.2
–1.7
–1.3
–1.3
–1.6
Nicaragua
–8.9
–11.9
–10.7
–10.9
–7.1
–9.1
–7.5
–5.0
–6.2
–6.4
–6.8
Panama
–10.3
–12.6
–10.0
–9.4
–13.1
–7.9
–5.5
–4.9
–7.0
–6.1
–5.1
Paraguay
0.2
0.6
–0.9
1.6
–0.1
–0.8
1.2
–0.8
–1.3
–0.9
–0.2
Peru
–2.4
–1.8
–2.8
–4.6
–4.4
–4.8
–2.7
–1.1
–1.8
–2.2
–2.1
St. Kitts and Nevis
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
–4.5
–9.1
–10.7
–10.1
–9.9
–15.8
–16.0
St. Lucia
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
3.4
6.9
–1.9
1.3
–1.6
–3.0
–1.8
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
–25.7
–14.9
–15.8
–14.8
–13.3
–12.3
–9.1
Suriname
14.9
9.8
3.3
–3.8
–7.9
–16.3
–5.2
–0.1
–3.3
–2.4
–0.9
Trinidad and Tobago
18.5
16.9
13.0
20.1
14.7
7.6
–2.9
10.2
10.7
7.3
5.1
Uruguay
. . .
. . .
–4.0
–3.6
–3.2
–1.0
0.8
1.5
0.9
0.2
–1.3
Venezuela
1.9
4.9
0.8
2.0
2.3
–6.6
–1.6
2.0
6.1
4.0
0.0
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
6.1
12.7
12.5
9.8
5.5
–4.0
–3.9
–0.7
1.8
1.9
–0.6
Afghanistan
29.4
26.6
10.9
0.3
5.8
2.9
7.3
5.0
5.1
0.8
–5.2
Algeria
7.5
9.9
5.9
0.4
–4.4
–16.4
–16.5
–13.2
–9.0
–7.9
–3.0
Bahrain
3.0
8.8
8.4
7.4
4.6
–2.4
–4.6
–4.5
–2.5
–2.3
–3.6
Djibouti
2.8
–13.1
–18.8
–23.3
–25.1
–31.8
–9.4
–13.8
–14.3
–14.8
–9.3
Egypt
–1.9
–2.5
–3.6
–2.2
–0.9
–3.7
–6.0
–6.3
–2.6
–2.4
–1.2
Iran
4.2
10.4
6.0
6.7
3.2
0.3
4.0
2.2
1.3
0.3
–0.4
Iraq
1.6
10.9
5.1
1.1
2.6
–6.5
–7.8
2.3
6.9
3.1
–4.9
Jordan
–7.1
–10.3
–15.2
–10.4
–7.3
–9.1
–9.5
–10.6
–9.6
–8.6
–6.3
Kuwait
31.8
42.9
45.5
40.3
33.4
3.5
–4.6
5.9
11.3
11.0
4.4
Lebanon
–20.2
–15.2
–23.6
–26.1
–26.0
–18.3
–21.7
–22.8
–25.6
–25.5
–21.3
Libya3
21.1
9.9
29.9
0.0
–78.4
–54.4
–24.7
8.4
1.5
2.9
–1.3
Mauritania
–8.2
–5.0
–24.1
–22.0
–27.3
–19.8
–15.1
–14.4
–16.0
–17.2
–6.5
Morocco
–4.4
–7.6
–9.3
–7.6
–5.9
–2.1
–4.2
–3.6
–4.3
–4.5
–2.3
Oman
8.6
13.0
10.2
6.6
5.2
–15.9
–18.7
–15.2
–3.3
–0.5
–4.4
Pakistan
–2.2
0.1
–2.1
–1.1
–1.3
–1.0
–1.7
–4.1
–5.9
–5.3
–6.1
Qatar
19.1
31.1
33.2
30.4
24.0
8.5
–5.5
3.8
4.8
6.6
6.6
Saudi Arabia
12.6
23.6
22.4
18.1
9.8
–8.7
–3.7
2.2
8.4
8.8
2.4
Somalia
. . .
. . .
. . .
–3.4
–5.2
–4.7
–6.3
–6.6
–6.3
–5.7
–6.4
Sudan4
–2.6
–4.0
–12.8
–11.0
–5.8
–8.3
–7.6
–10.5
–14.2
–13.1
–10.4
Syria5
–2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tunisia
–4.8
–7.4
–8.3
–8.4
–9.1
–8.9
–8.8
–10.5
–9.6
–8.5
–6.0
United Arab Emirates
4.2
12.6
19.7
19.0
13.5
4.9
3.7
6.9
7.2
7.5
4.2
Yemen
-3.4
-3.0
-1.7
-3.1
-1.7
-6.2
-5.1
-4.0
-9.3
-7.4
-7.4
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
173
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2023
Sub-Saharan Africa
–0.8
–0.6
–1.7
–2.2
–3.6
–6.0
–3.9
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
–3.4
Angola
9.0
11.7
10.8
6.1
–2.6
–8.8
–4.8
–1.0
–2.1
–1.9
–0.7
Benin
–8.2
–7.3
–7.4
–7.4
–8.6
–9.0
–9.4
–11.1
–10.6
–8.9
–6.5
Botswana
–2.8
3.1
0.3
8.9
15.4
7.8
13.7
12.3
8.7
7.7
10.0
Burkina Faso
–2.2
–4.0
–6.7
–11.3
–8.1
–8.5
–7.2
–8.1
–8.6
–7.6
–6.3
Burundi
–12.2
–14.4
–18.6
–19.3
–18.5
–17.7
–13.1
–12.3
–13.4
–12.6
–9.5
Cabo Verde
–12.4
–16.3
–12.6
–4.9
–9.1
–3.2
–2.4
–6.2
–9.1
–10.0
–8.9
Cameroon
–2.5
–2.7
–3.3
–3.6
–4.0
–3.8
–3.2
–2.7
–3.2
–3.0
–3.0
Central African Republic
–10.2
–7.6
–6.5
–3.3
–14.8
–9.7
–5.5
–8.4
–8.9
–8.4
–5.3
Chad
–8.5
–5.8
–7.8
–9.1
–8.9
–13.6
–9.2
–5.7
–4.2
–5.5
–4.3
Comoros
–0.4
–6.0
–5.5
–7.0
–6.3
–0.4
–7.4
–4.1
–9.2
–10.1
–8.8
Democratic Republic of the Congo
–10.5
–5.2
–4.6
–5.0
–4.6
–3.7
–3.1
–0.5
0.0
–1.8
–2.9
Republic of Congo
7.3
14.0
17.7
13.8
1.4
–54.1
–73.6
–12.9
9.1
12.4
–5.1
Côte d’Ivoire 
1.9
10.4
–1.2
–1.4
1.4
–0.6
–1.1
–4.6
–4.6
–4.2
–2.8
Equatorial Guinea
–20.2
–5.7
–1.1
–2.4
–4.3
–16.2
–12.9
–5.9
–3.1
–3.6
–6.0
Eritrea
–6.1
3.2
2.7
3.6
4.0
–1.4
–2.1
–2.4
–1.6
–2.3
–2.7
Eswatini
–8.7
1.0
12.5
18.7
21.2
26.1
17.2
13.7
10.3
9.8
14.0
Ethiopia
–1.4
–2.5
–6.9
–5.9
–6.4
–10.2
–9.0
–8.1
–6.2
–6.2
–4.4
Gabon
14.9
24.0
17.9
7.3
7.6
–5.6
–9.9
–4.9
–1.6
–0.5
3.7
The Gambia
–9.5
–7.5
–4.5
–6.8
–7.2
–9.8
–5.9
–13.1
–12.5
–13.6
–11.8
Ghana
–8.6
–9.0
–11.7
–11.9
–9.5
–7.7
–6.7
–4.5
–4.1
–4.0
–3.6
Guinea
–6.4
–18.4
–20.0
–12.5
–13.4
–12.5
–31.1
–6.9
–21.2
–16.4
–10.9
Guinea-Bissau
–13.5
–1.3
–8.4
–4.6
0.5
1.9
1.3
–2.0
–3.6
–4.1
–3.1
Kenya
–5.9
–9.2
–8.4
–8.8
–10.4
–6.7
–5.2
–6.3
–5.6
–5.3
–4.1
Lesotho
–8.9
–13.4
–8.4
–5.1
–4.8
–3.9
–8.2
–3.7
–6.0
–12.5
–6.9
Liberia
–17.6
–12.8
–11.4
–17.0
–19.4
–20.8
–14.1
–19.1
–18.3
–21.4
–20.6
Madagascar
–10.2
–7.0
–7.6
–5.9
–0.3
–1.9
0.6
–0.3
–2.2
–3.4
–4.4
Malawi
–8.6
–8.6
–9.2
–8.4
–8.3
–9.4
–13.6
–9.5
–9.3
–8.1
–7.6
Mali
–10.7
–5.1
–2.2
–2.9
–4.7
–5.3
–7.2
–5.8
–7.2
–7.8
–7.1
Mauritius
–10.0
–13.5
–7.1
–6.2
–5.6
–4.8
–4.3
–6.6
–8.2
–10.4
–4.0
Mozambique
–16.1
–25.3
–44.7
–42.9
–38.2
–40.3
–39.3
–22.4
–18.2
–44.7
–105.8
Namibia
–3.5
–3.0
–5.7
–4.0
–10.8
–12.4
–13.8
–3.3
–6.0
–7.6
–5.5
Niger
–19.8
–25.1
–16.1
–16.8
–15.4
–20.5
–15.7
–14.1
–16.2
–18.3
–12.1
Nigeria
3.6
2.6
3.8
3.7
0.2
–3.2
0.7
2.8
2.0
1.0
0.1
Rwanda
–7.2
–7.4
–11.2
–8.7
–10.3
–14.5
–15.8
–6.8
–8.9
–9.4
–5.3
São Tomé and Príncipe
–22.9
–27.7
–21.9
–15.2
–21.9
–13.0
–6.5
–8.2
–7.0
–10.2
–7.4
Senegal
–3.5
–6.5
–8.7
–8.2
–7.0
–5.4
–4.0
–7.3
–7.7
–7.1
–6.1
Seychelles
–19.4
–23.0
–21.1
–11.9
–23.1
–18.6
–20.1
–20.5
–18.4
–18.0
–17.0
Sierra Leone
–22.7
–65.0
–31.8
–17.5
–18.2
–17.4
–2.3
–11.3
–13.4
–14.1
–9.3
South Africa
–1.5
–2.2
–5.1
–5.8
–5.1
–4.6
–2.8
–2.5
–3.2
–3.5
–3.6
South Sudan
. . .
18.2
–15.9
–3.9
–1.5
–7.1
1.3
–5.0
–8.8
2.7
–1.8
Tanzania
–7.7
–10.8
–11.6
–10.6
–10.1
–8.4
–4.5
–2.8
–4.3
–5.5
–4.5
Togo
–5.8
–7.8
–7.6
–13.2
–10.0
–11.0
–9.3
–8.0
–9.2
–8.0
–5.9
Uganda
–8.0
–9.9
–6.8
–7.1
–8.1
–7.1
–2.9
–4.6
–6.9
–8.9
–3.6
Zambia
7.5
4.7
5.4
–0.6
2.1
–3.9
–4.5
–3.9
–4.0
–3.4
–1.8
Zimbabwe6
–14.3
–20.1
–13.1
–16.6
–14.2
–9.5
–3.4
–4.1
–5.8
–5.6
–5.0
1Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
2Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
3See country-specific note for Libya in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
5Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
6The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar 
values may differ from authorities’ estimates.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
174	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
–123.6
–260.6
–149.4
229.5
363.3
349.7
436.4
512.0
337.0
269.6
Direct Investment, Net
340.7
358.9
111.9
154.3
235.9
69.5
–146.5
292.9
–28.6
156.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–969.0
–1,111.5
–246.3
–540.9
71.8
175.9
505.1
151.3
389.5
125.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
–114.1
–6.4
–98.3
73.9
–11.5
–107.6
14.5
–13.9
1.8
–18.8
Other Investment, Net
265.8
148.9
–189.9
389.2
–67.8
–14.8
–116.6
–167.2
–110.0
–66.4
Change in Reserves
352.9
349.8
273.2
153.1
134.9
226.7
179.7
248.9
84.0
73.5
United States
Financial Account Balance 
–446.4
–526.0
–448.2
–400.3
–297.3
–325.9
–385.1
–331.9
–567.1
–643.2
Direct Investment, Net
85.8
173.1
126.9
104.7
135.7
–202.0
–181.5
24.4
–341.3
–171.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–620.8
–226.3
–498.3
–30.7
–114.9
–53.5
–195.1
–212.5
–170.4
–398.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
–14.1
–35.0
7.1
2.2
–54.3
–27.0
7.8
23.1
23.4
16.8
Other Investment, Net
100.9
–453.7
–88.4
–473.4
–260.1
–37.1
–18.4
–165.2
–78.8
–90.1
Change in Reserves
1.8
15.9
4.5
–3.1
–3.6
–6.3
2.1
–1.7
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Financial Account Balance 
–16.9
–40.9
184.3
443.7
350.9
296.5
384.1
467.7
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
82.3
124.9
59.4
23.8
90.3
276.1
187.0
49.7
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
–81.4
–383.3
–175.8
–156.9
40.8
79.7
552.5
355.7
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
–4.4
5.5
38.9
42.1
66.2
96.6
19.6
28.7
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–27.1
197.7
242.9
528.5
147.8
–167.7
–392.4
35.1
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
13.7
14.3
19.0
6.2
5.8
11.8
17.4
–1.5
. . .
. . .
Germany
Financial Account Balance
123.7
167.7
194.3
300.0
317.8
264.9
284.3
316.3
326.9
323.6
Direct Investment, Net
60.6
10.3
33.6
26.0
95.3
74.8
33.2
47.1
59.5
50.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
154.1
–51.4
66.8
209.6
177.7
213.5
228.8
228.1
253.4
247.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
17.6
39.8
30.9
31.8
43.3
29.0
35.8
10.3
28.5
26.1
Other Investment, Net
–110.7
165.1
61.1
31.4
4.8
–49.9
–15.4
32.3
–14.4
–1.1
Change in Reserves
2.1
3.9
1.7
1.2
–3.3
–2.4
1.9
–1.5
0.0
0.0
France
Financial Account Balance
–1.6
–78.6
–48.0
–19.2
–10.3
–0.8
–14.4
–36.0
–24.3
–18.6
Direct Investment, Net
34.3
19.8
19.4
–13.9
47.2
7.9
28.1
8.3
13.2
17.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
–155.0
–335.1
–50.6
–79.3
–23.8
43.2
23.8
22.4
34.4
43.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
–4.1
–19.4
–18.4
–22.3
–31.8
14.5
–17.6
–1.4
–8.7
–16.3
Other Investment, Net
115.5
263.8
–3.6
98.2
–2.9
–74.2
–51.1
–61.9
–65.8
–65.6
Change in Reserves
7.7
–7.7
5.2
–1.9
1.0
8.0
2.5
–3.4
2.6
2.6
Italy
Financial Account Balance
–107.1
–79.9
–4.1
29.0
68.5
39.1
72.4
53.3
43.4
35.7
Direct Investment, Net
21.3
17.2
6.8
0.9
3.1
2.7
–4.5
–12.7
2.6
3.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
62.5
25.6
–22.4
–5.4
5.5
108.2
176.5
111.1
72.2
28.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
6.6
–10.1
7.5
4.0
–4.8
2.6
–3.3
–6.5
–2.7
–0.6
Other Investment, Net
–198.9
–113.9
2.1
27.5
65.9
–75.0
–95.1
–41.7
–28.7
4.6
Change in Reserves
1.4
1.3
1.9
2.0
–1.3
0.6
–1.3
3.0
0.0
0.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
175
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Spain
Financial Account Balance
–58.9
–43.4
0.5
41.6
14.8
23.1
27.9
27.3
19.8
20.6
Direct Investment, Net
–1.9
12.8
–27.2
–24.6
8.6
31.0
18.5
22.9
19.9
20.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–46.6
43.1
53.7
–83.6
–12.1
10.2
55.1
26.3
6.7
6.2
Financial Derivatives, Net
–11.4
2.9
–10.7
1.4
1.7
–1.1
–2.9
–2.5
0.0
0.0
Other Investment, Net
0.0
–116.2
–18.2
147.8
11.5
–22.6
–51.8
–23.4
–6.7
–5.9
Change in Reserves
1.1
13.9
2.8
0.7
5.1
5.6
9.1
4.1
0.0
0.0
Japan
Financial Account Balance
247.3
158.4
53.9
–4.3
58.9
180.9
263.7
158.0
180.4
193.0
Direct Investment, Net
72.5
117.8
117.5
144.7
118.6
133.3
134.4
149.7
132.5
144.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
147.9
–162.9
28.8
–280.6
–42.2
131.5
276.5
–53.5
–47.0
–44.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
–11.9
–17.1
6.7
58.1
34.0
17.7
–16.1
30.5
31.7
32.6
Other Investment, Net
–5.5
43.4
–61.1
34.8
–60.1
–106.7
–125.4
7.7
52.8
48.8
Change in Reserves
44.3
177.3
–37.9
38.7
8.5
5.1
–5.7
23.6
10.5
11.0
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
–108.1
–43.3
–92.6
–132.5
–154.2
–142.6
–145.8
–77.9
–101.7
–92.6
Direct Investment, Net
–10.1
53.4
–34.8
–11.2
–176.1
–106.0
–219.5
81.7
64.6
53.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
–201.0
–215.5
275.0
–284.2
16.4
–201.8
–195.4
–86.3
0.0
0.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
–69.3
7.4
–65.8
63.4
31.2
–128.6
29.3
12.7
1.8
–8.4
Other Investment, Net
162.9
103.4
–279.1
91.8
–37.5
261.6
231.0
–94.8
–180.5
–150.7
Change in Reserves
9.4
7.9
12.1
7.8
11.7
32.2
8.8
8.8
12.4
13.2
Canada
Financial Account Balance
–58.3
–49.4
–62.7
–56.9
–42.2
–57.8
–51.5
–40.0
–52.2
–45.6
Direct Investment, Net
6.3
12.5
12.8
–12.0
1.3
22.2
36.3
54.4
30.2
28.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–109.9
–104.3
–63.8
–27.1
–32.9
–44.8
–119.2
–81.0
–62.7
–66.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
41.4
34.3
–13.4
–22.5
–15.9
–43.8
25.8
–14.2
–19.8
–7.2
Change in Reserves
3.9
8.1
1.7
4.7
5.3
8.5
5.6
0.8
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
283.8
284.7
256.3
375.4
352.3
303.7
337.9
342.6
372.5
360.6
Direct Investment, Net
93.5
–6.5
–34.8
26.3
–7.3
–108.1
–79.0
–52.7
–47.0
–24.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–57.1
46.8
148.7
138.4
180.7
333.5
275.2
163.4
203.2
208.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
–15.2
31.1
–28.3
–33.5
–23.5
–14.2
–0.8
–29.6
–40.4
–37.1
Other Investment, Net
–16.8
88.5
–104.0
143.1
96.0
–83.4
–8.6
43.8
202.0
172.2
Change in Reserves
279.3
125.1
274.7
101.3
106.3
175.9
151.0
217.7
54.6
42.2
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Financial Account Balance
150.3
239.6
119.4
33.9
15.9
–275.3
–420.7
–257.0
23.6
33.9
Direct Investment, Net
–456.7
–530.6
–486.7
–480.2
–416.6
–340.5
–271.5
–343.6
–326.1
–323.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–223.7
–145.4
–234.4
–155.7
–113.2
114.5
–46.3
–174.8
–31.0
–19.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–18.8
163.2
399.0
83.0
409.4
460.1
385.6
95.4
370.7
321.2
Change in Reserves
848.4
747.0
442.3
590.9
128.8
–513.7
–476.8
162.7
10.7
56.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
176	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Financial Account Balance
87.4
103.0
62.6
2.6
12.2
53.9
3.7
29.1
88.2
76.1
Direct Investment, Net
–8.5
–15.2
–27.6
–3.6
19.2
0.6
–34.3
–1.6
2.6
1.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–14.2
17.9
3.5
–0.2
28.8
12.0
–2.4
–17.4
–0.6
–2.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
36.0
64.3
44.4
27.5
73.0
38.8
29.9
18.8
19.9
9.3
Change in Reserves
72.4
34.2
40.9
–21.5
–114.1
–4.9
10.1
28.8
66.0
67.5
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
146.5
65.7
7.4
31.7
150.4
87.1
–31.6
–91.2
30.5
41.3
Direct Investment, Net
–225.0
–277.3
–222.0
–273.2
–203.4
–139.8
–26.9
–145.2
–137.9
–128.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–93.3
–58.0
–115.5
–64.7
–123.9
82.3
31.5
–45.9
14.2
–16.8
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.2
–0.3
1.5
–2.0
0.8
–1.3
–10.0
2.6
2.0
2.0
Other Investment, Net
–97.3
–28.6
207.4
–78.7
281.3
462.4
356.6
–98.2
234.5
238.1
Change in Reserves
562.9
431.7
139.2
451.3
196.2
–316.1
–381.9
196.5
–80.7
–52.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
–89.2
–107.2
–66.7
–62.7
–44.0
–9.9
–14.3
–45.7
–35.8
–16.8
Direct Investment, Net
–26.8
–39.9
–27.7
–26.5
–32.8
–35.0
–30.7
–24.7
–32.2
–27.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–45.8
–53.5
–70.2
–40.0
–19.3
24.6
–4.2
–24.0
5.4
–0.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.0
1.6
–3.0
–1.4
0.3
–1.8
0.1
–3.2
–0.7
–0.9
Other Investment, Net
–52.4
–30.1
6.4
–13.3
8.0
12.8
–2.9
18.0
–1.0
15.0
Change in Reserves
35.9
14.6
27.8
18.5
–0.2
–10.4
23.5
–11.7
–7.3
–2.3
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
–115.1
–126.6
–146.5
–188.3
–205.3
–192.5
–102.5
–90.4
–84.4
–91.3
Direct Investment, Net
–111.3
–145.1
–149.2
–145.3
–141.0
–134.7
–130.9
–137.3
–128.3
–123.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–95.9
–106.9
–80.9
–101.2
–109.6
–59.0
–51.5
–39.0
–8.8
–2.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.7
5.5
2.5
1.8
4.4
1.2
–1.1
4.7
0.6
0.7
Other Investment, Net
0.3
11.8
21.9
44.8
1.8
28.7
60.1
63.5
60.8
35.2
Change in Reserves
91.0
108.1
59.1
11.7
39.1
–28.9
20.9
17.5
–8.7
–1.2
Middle East, North Africa, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Financial Account Balance
127.1
320.6
284.1
304.4
180.5
–134.5
–207.8
–21.0
62.5
75.0
Direct Investment, Net
–48.1
–20.5
–25.5
–7.9
–28.9
0.5
–7.4
–6.6
4.2
1.6
Portfolio Investment, Net
26.0
74.4
57.0
72.5
132.6
69.8
–6.4
–27.1
–23.7
9.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
63.5
128.3
98.4
112.0
61.0
–65.6
–55.0
93.7
50.9
23.5
Change in Reserves
85.9
137.8
154.3
128.1
16.3
–138.9
–138.5
–80.7
31.2
40.7
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
–6.4
–15.8
–21.6
–53.7
–78.0
–79.4
–68.3
–37.8
–37.5
–50.4
Direct Investment, Net
–37.0
–32.7
–34.6
–23.6
–29.6
–32.1
–41.2
–28.2
–34.5
–47.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–0.4
–19.3
–28.4
–22.0
–21.8
–15.2
–13.3
–21.5
–17.6
–5.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
–0.2
–1.7
–1.7
–0.8
–1.5
–0.4
0.9
0.3
–0.2
–0.2
Other Investment, Net
31.2
17.5
20.5
–9.3
–15.8
–17.0
–3.0
–0.2
5.7
0.1
Change in Reserves
0.3
20.7
21.0
2.8
–8.5
–14.4
–10.8
12.1
10.3
4.0
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
177
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
250.8
511.8
445.7
376.1
226.2
–85.8
–158.5
67.2
226.7
223.2
Direct Investment, Net
–32.5
–24.0
–29.3
13.0
5.4
6.9
–29.3
11.7
21.6
15.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
20.4
88.9
50.2
79.1
164.6
80.9
–9.3
–38.9
–14.4
3.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
146.0
250.3
188.7
183.5
157.7
8.5
34.4
147.4
116.4
89.5
Change in Reserves
115.1
194.7
234.5
100.2
–106.5
–189.7
–154.6
–53.5
102.5
114.3
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
–99.0
–272.2
–326.3
–342.2
–210.3
–189.5
–262.2
–324.2
–203.1
–189.3
Direct Investment, Net
–422.0
–506.6
–457.4
–493.2
–422.0
–347.4
–242.2
–355.4
–347.7
–339.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–244.1
–234.3
–284.7
–234.8
–277.7
33.5
–37.0
–135.9
–16.6
–22.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.7
5.8
–0.9
–2.4
3.9
–2.2
–10.0
4.3
1.8
1.5
Other Investment, Net
–164.4
–87.1
210.4
–100.5
251.7
451.6
351.2
–52.0
254.3
231.6
Change in Reserves
732.2
552.3
207.7
490.7
235.3
–324.0
–322.1
216.2
–91.8
–58.3
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
–269.1
–365.7
–398.1
–402.7
–390.8
–309.8
–272.7
–289.0
–320.4
–306.2
Direct Investment, Net
–212.8
–281.7
–275.7
–265.1
–288.1
–289.7
–306.7
–293.4
–305.3
–320.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–221.5
–182.6
–215.9
–179.6
–198.4
–50.2
–49.4
–108.0
–17.5
–31.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–54.3
–78.7
–31.1
–27.3
–13.8
36.3
18.9
28.2
31.8
15.1
Change in Reserves
219.3
175.2
127.4
73.2
104.6
–4.3
77.5
81.2
–28.7
29.5
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013-17
Financial Account Balance
0.9
–28.3
–46.3
–48.2
–31.9
–41.9
–54.3
–38.8
–33.0
–34.1
Direct Investment, Net
–20.3
–20.8
–27.4
–24.1
–19.9
–25.5
–26.2
–24.9
–25.8
–32.1
Portfolio Investment, Net
–11.1
0.8
–1.7
–10.5
–4.1
1.9
–1.0
–23.0
–21.0
–2.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
7.3
2.1
–5.7
–16.8
0.0
–24.9
–23.7
8.8
8.0
–1.6
Change in Reserves
25.3
–9.8
–13.3
4.1
–7.0
7.3
–2.1
0.8
7.2
3.6
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance
26.6
–21.0
–30.0
263.4
379.1
74.4
15.7
255.1
360.6
303.5
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available because 
of data constraints.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
178	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2000–09
2004–11
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020–23
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.8
–0.7
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.9
0.8
0.5
0.4
Current Account Balance
–0.9
–0.7
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.4
Savings
22.0
21.5
21.7
21.9
22.5
22.7
22.2
22.8
22.8
22.9
23.0
Investment
22.7
22.2
21.2
21.1
21.4
21.5
21.3
21.6
22.0
22.4
22.7
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.5
–4.3
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.2
–2.5
–3.0
–3.2
Current Account Balance
–4.5
–4.3
–2.6
–2.1
–2.1
–2.2
–2.3
–2.3
–2.5
–3.0
–3.3
Savings
17.8
16.7
18.7
19.2
20.3
20.1
18.6
18.9
18.8
18.7
18.8
Investment
22.0
21.1
20.0
20.4
20.8
21.0
20.3
20.6
21.1
21.8
22.1
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
Euro Area 
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.1
0.0
1.5
2.4
2.6
3.1
3.6
3.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
–0.2
–0.1
1.4
2.2
2.5
3.2
3.6
3.5
3.0
2.9
2.8
Savings
22.8
22.7
22.3
22.4
22.9
23.7
24.1
24.7
24.9
25.1
25.4
Investment
22.5
22.2
20.0
19.6
19.9
20.3
20.7
20.8
21.3
21.6
22.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.4
5.5
7.0
6.7
7.6
8.9
8.6
7.9
8.1
7.9
7.5
Current Account Balance
3.4
5.6
7.0
6.7
7.5
8.9
8.5
7.9
8.1
7.9
7.5
Savings
23.7
25.3
26.3
26.2
27.1
28.1
28.2
28.0
28.5
28.7
28.9
Investment
20.3
19.8
19.3
19.5
19.6
19.2
19.7
20.1
20.4
20.8
21.4
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.0
0.0
–1.1
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.7
–0.5
–0.9
–0.7
–0.3
Current Account Balance
1.0
–0.1
–1.0
–0.5
–1.0
–0.4
–0.8
–0.6
–0.9
–0.7
–0.3
Savings
23.4
22.7
21.7
21.8
21.8
22.3
21.9
22.9
22.7
22.9
23.4
Investment
22.4
22.8
22.6
22.3
22.7
22.7
22.7
23.5
23.7
23.6
23.7
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.8
–1.8
–0.1
1.0
2.1
1.7
2.4
2.7
2.1
1.7
1.2
Current Account Balance
–0.9
–1.9
–0.3
1.0
1.9
1.5
2.6
2.8
2.0
1.6
1.1
Savings
20.2
19.2
17.5
18.0
19.0
18.8
19.7
20.3
20.1
19.9
19.4
Investment
21.1
21.1
17.9
17.0
17.0
17.3
17.1
17.5
18.1
18.4
18.3
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.2
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
–5.5
–6.0
0.3
2.2
1.6
1.8
2.2
2.1
1.4
1.4
1.6
Current Account Balance
–6.2
–6.5
–0.2
1.5
1.1
1.1
1.9
1.9
1.2
1.2
1.4
Savings
22.2
21.1
19.8
20.2
20.5
21.5
22.4
23.0
22.9
23.1
23.4
Investment
28.3
27.6
20.0
18.7
19.5
20.4
20.5
21.1
21.8
22.0
22.0
Capital Account Balance
0.7
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.1
3.4
0.9
0.7
0.7
3.1
3.8
4.0
3.6
3.7
4.1
Current Account Balance
3.2
3.4
1.0
0.9
0.8
3.1
3.9
4.0
3.6
3.8
4.1
Savings
27.9
26.9
23.6
24.1
24.7
27.1
27.5
28.0
28.1
28.4
28.7
Investment
24.7
23.5
22.7
23.2
23.9
24.0
23.6
24.0
24.5
24.6
24.5
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
–2.8
–3.0
–3.8
–5.2
–5.0
–5.0
–5.3
–3.9
–3.6
–3.3
–3.0
Current Account Balance
–2.8
–3.0
–3.8
–5.1
–4.9
–4.9
–5.2
–3.8
–3.5
–3.2
–2.9
Savings
14.7
13.7
12.1
11.1
12.3
12.3
12.0
13.6
13.7
14.0
14.7
Investment
17.5
16.7
15.9
16.2
17.3
17.2
17.3
17.4
17.2
17.2
17.7
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
179
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2000–09
2004–11
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020–23
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.1
–0.4
–3.6
–3.2
–2.4
–3.6
–3.2
–3.0
–3.0
–2.5
–2.1
Current Account Balance
1.1
–0.4
–3.6
–3.2
–2.4
–3.6
–3.2
–2.9
–3.0
–2.5
–2.1
Savings
23.0
22.8
21.3
21.7
22.5
20.5
20.0
20.8
20.8
21.5
22.2
Investment
21.9
23.2
24.9
24.9
24.9
24.1
23.2
23.7
23.8
24.0
24.3
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.8
4.1
4.1
5.2
5.1
5.4
5.5
5.0
5.0
4.8
4.4
Current Account Balance
3.8
4.1
4.1
5.1
5.2
5.8
5.4
5.1
5.0
4.8
4.5
Savings
29.7
30.3
30.2
30.3
30.5
30.8
30.1
30.5
30.6
30.5
30.0
Investment
25.6
25.9
26.0
25.1
25.2
24.8
24.7
25.3
25.5
25.6
25.4
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.6
2.8
1.3
0.7
0.6
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.4
Current Account Balance
2.5
2.8
1.3
0.6
0.6
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.5
Savings
29.5
32.2
33.5
32.8
33.0
32.7
32.0
32.2
32.7
32.6
32.1
Investment
27.3
29.6
32.4
32.4
32.6
32.9
32.2
32.2
32.8
32.8
32.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Net Lending and Borrowing
6.0
4.8
2.2
0.6
0.6
2.8
0.0
1.2
4.1
3.3
2.3
Current Account Balance
6.5
5.1
2.4
0.6
2.1
2.8
0.0
1.1
4.1
3.3
2.3
Savings
27.4
27.1
27.1
24.3
25.1
26.0
24.8
25.8
26.3
26.7
26.6
Investment
21.1
22.0
24.7
23.6
22.9
22.8
24.3
24.5
22.0
23.2
24.2
Capital Account Balance
–0.5
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
–1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.7
3.9
1.0
0.8
1.6
2.0
1.4
0.9
0.2
0.2
–0.1
Current Account Balance
3.6
3.8
0.9
0.7
1.5
2.0
1.4
0.9
0.1
0.2
–0.1
Savings
38.4
42.4
43.7
43.0
43.6
42.4
41.1
40.7
40.3
39.9
38.9
Investment
35.2
38.8
42.6
42.3
42.0
40.4
39.7
39.9
40.1
39.8
39.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.5
–5.3
–3.4
–2.5
–1.7
–0.6
–1.1
–1.9
–2.0
–0.5
–1.1
Current Account Balance
–4.8
–5.8
–4.4
–3.6
–2.9
–1.9
–1.8
–2.6
–2.8
–1.4
–1.8
Savings
19.7
19.9
20.5
21.5
22.1
22.9
22.4
23.0
22.7
22.2
21.3
Investment
24.2
25.7
24.9
25.0
24.9
24.7
24.1
25.5
25.4
23.7
23.0
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.5
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.3
0.6
0.6
0.8
0.9
0.7
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.1
–0.1
–2.3
–2.7
–3.1
–3.3
–1.9
–1.5
–1.6
–1.7
–1.9
Current Account Balance
–0.2
–0.2
–2.3
–2.7
–3.1
–3.3
–1.9
–1.5
–1.6
–1.8
–1.9
Savings
20.3
21.3
20.0
19.3
17.9
18.2
17.5
17.9
18.0
17.9
18.4
Investment
20.4
21.3
22.4
22.3
21.6
21.8
19.3
19.0
20.0
20.7
21.5
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan
Net Lending and Borrowing
7.8
9.5
12.0
10.0
6.3
–3.6
–3.7
–0.7
2.0
2.0
0.1
Current Account Balance
8.3
10.1
12.5
9.8
5.5
–4.0
–3.9
–0.7
1.8
1.9
0.0
Savings
34.6
37.3
38.0
36.2
32.9
25.0
24.7
26.5
29.7
29.4
27.0
Investment
27.0
28.0
25.9
25.9
26.7
28.3
27.6
26.8
27.2
26.6
25.9
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.9
2.3
–0.6
–1.7
–3.3
–5.6
–3.4
–1.9
–2.4
–3.0
–3.1
Current Account Balance
0.7
0.9
–1.7
–2.2
–3.6
–6.0
–3.9
–2.3
–2.8
–3.4
–3.4
Savings
20.2
21.5
19.5
18.7
18.8
16.7
17.4
19.0
17.8
17.6
17.9
Investment
19.7
20.6
21.0
20.9
22.0
22.0
20.8
21.1
20.5
20.9
21.2
Capital Account Balance
1.2
1.5
1.1
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
180	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2000–09
2004–11
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020–23
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
9.1
10.0
9.3
7.4
4.7
–1.5
–1.6
1.4
4.4
4.1
2.3
Current Account Balance
9.6
10.4
9.6
7.3
5.0
–1.6
–1.7
1.5
4.3
4.1
2.2
Savings
33.9
35.0
34.6
32.0
30.2
26.6
25.4
27.4
29.7
29.5
27.5
Investment
24.7
25.0
25.4
24.9
25.3
28.2
26.5
25.6
24.8
24.7
24.5
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.6
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.8
0.8
–0.9
–1.0
–0.4
0.3
0.1
–0.2
–0.7
–0.6
–0.8
Current Account Balance
0.6
0.6
–1.1
–1.2
–0.6
0.1
0.0
–0.3
–0.8
–0.8
–0.9
Savings
28.4
31.4
33.2
33.1
33.7
33.9
33.2
33.1
33.3
33.2
32.8
Investment
28.0
30.9
34.2
34.2
34.2
33.7
33.1
33.4
34.2
34.2
34.0
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.7
–1.1
–2.7
–2.4
–2.3
–2.3
–1.8
–1.8
–2.3
–2.1
–2.1
Current Account Balance
–1.1
–1.4
–3.1
–2.7
–2.6
–2.7
–2.0
–2.0
–2.5
–2.3
–2.3
Savings
22.3
23.6
23.1
22.5
22.5
22.0
22.2
22.5
22.4
22.7
23.2
Investment
23.6
25.2
26.1
25.2
25.1
24.6
24.1
24.5
24.8
24.9
25.5
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2013–17
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.4
–1.7
–6.1
–6.0
–4.1
–5.4
–6.1
–5.4
–4.6
–4.6
–4.7
Current Account Balance
–0.9
–2.3
–6.7
–6.2
–4.5
–5.7
–6.2
–5.7
–4.9
–4.9
–4.9
Savings
20.2
20.1
14.5
13.1
14.1
12.5
12.6
13.9
14.8
15.3
16.8
Investment
21.7
22.3
20.7
19.2
18.6
17.7
18.3
18.9
19.3
19.9
21.3
Capital Account Balance
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.0
0.3
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.1
Current Account Balance
0.0
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.0
Savings
23.9
24.7
26.2
26.2
26.7
26.7
26.0
26.5
26.7
26.8
26.8
Investment
23.9
24.4
25.4
25.5
25.8
26.0
25.5
25.8
26.2
26.5
26.8
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the 
US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites 
were weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are 
from individual countries’ national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net 
borrowing) are from the balance of payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. 
Savings (S ) minus investment (I ) is equal to the current account balance (CAB ) (S − I = CAB ). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB ) is the sum of the current account balance and the 
capital account balance (KAB ) (NLB = CAB + KAB ). In practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from 
asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic 
structure.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
181
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
Averages
2000–09
2010–19
2016
2017
2018
2019
2016–19
2020–23
World Real GDP
3.9
3.8
3.3
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.6
3.6
Advanced Economies
1.8
2.0
1.7
2.3
2.4
2.1
2.1
1.6
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.1
5.2
4.4
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.9
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
1.9
1.3
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.5
World Trade, Volume1
5.0
4.8
2.2
5.2
4.2
4.0
3.9
3.8
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.6
4.4
2.4
4.2
3.7
4.0
3.6
3.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
5.8
1.8
7.0
6.0
4.8
4.9
5.3
Exports
Advanced Economies
3.9
4.4
1.8
4.4
3.4
3.1
3.1
3.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
8.0
5.5
3.0
6.9
4.7
4.8
4.8
4.6
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.2
0.1
1.0
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
0.2
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.4
0.1
–1.4
0.6
1.6
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
1.7
0.3
–5.2
1.7
2.5
1.6
0.1
0.1
Oil
13.1
1.1
–15.7
23.3
31.4
–0.9
7.9
–3.2
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
5.3
1.2
–1.5
6.8
2.7
–0.7
1.7
0.2
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.6
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.9
1.6
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.8
5.2
4.2
4.3
5.0
5.2
4.7
4.3
Interest Rates 
Real Six-Month LIBOR2
1.2
–0.6
0.0
–0.4
0.2
1.1
0.2
1.5
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3
2.1
0.5
0.4
–0.2
–0.1
0.5
0.2
0.9
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
–0.9
0.4
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.7
0.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.5
0.5
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.5
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
31.1
28.3
29.7
30.1
29.9
29.8
29.9
27.9
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.3
10.0
10.7
9.8
10.4
10.4
10.3
9.8
1Data refer to trade in goods and services.
2London interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits minus percent change in US GDP deflator.
3GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States.
Annual Percent Change
Percent of GDP
Percent
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
This page intentionally left blank 
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
1
CHAPTER
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
183
World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Financial Systems and Economic Cycles	
September 2006
World Economic Outlook: Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy	
April 2007
World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality	
October 2007
World Economic Outlook: Housing and the Business Cycle	
April 2008
World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries	
October 2008
World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery	
April 2009
World Economic Outlook: Sustaining the Recovery	
October 2009
World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth	
April 2010
World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing	
October 2010
World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment, Commodities, 
and Capital Flows 	
April 2011
World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks 	
September 2011
World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain 	
April 2012
World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth	
October 2012
World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks	
April 2013
World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions	
October 2013
World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven	
April 2014
World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties	
October 2014
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors	
April 2015
World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices	
October 2015
World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long 	
April 2016
World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies	
October 2016
World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?	
April 2017
World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges	
October 2017
World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change	
April 2018
World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth	
October 2018
I.  Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting  
Measuring Inequality: Conceptual, Methodological, and Measurement Issues	
October 2007, Box 4.1
New Business Cycle Indices for Latin America: A Historical Reconstruction	
October 2007, Box 5.3
Implications of New PPP Estimates for Measuring Global Growth	
April 2008, Appendix 1.1
Measuring Output Gaps	
October 2008, Box 1.3
Assessing and Communicating Risks to the Global Outlook	
October 2008, Appendix 1.1
Fan Chart for Global Growth	
April 2009, Appendix 1.2
Indicators for Tracking Growth	
October 2010, Appendix 1.2
Inferring Potential Output from Noisy Data: The Global Projection Model View	
October 2010, Box 1.3
Uncoordinated Rebalancing	
October 2010, Box 1.4
World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios	
April 2011, Box 1.2
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK  
SELECTED TOPICS
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
184	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement	
October 2014, Box 3.3
Tariff Scenarios	
October 2016, Scenario Box
World Growth Projections over the Medium Term	
October 2016, Box 1.1
II.  Historical Surveys
Historical Perspective on Growth and the Current Account	
October 2008, Box 6.3
A Historical Perspective on International Financial Crises	
October 2009, Box 4.1
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
What Is the Effect of Recessions?	
October 2015, Box 1.1
III.  Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
Asia Rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth	
September 2006, Chapter 3
Japan’s Potential Output and Productivity Growth	
September 2006, Box 3.1
The Evolution and Impact of Corporate Governance Quality in Asia	
September 2006, Box 3.2
Decoupling the Train? Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy	
April 2007, Chapter 4
Spillovers and International Business Cycle Synchronization: A Broader Perspective	
April 2007, Box 4.3
The Discounting Debate	
October 2007, Box 1.7
Taxes versus Quantities under Uncertainty (Weitzman, 1974)	
October 2007, Box 1.8
Experience with Emissions Trading in the European Union	
October 2007, Box 1.9
Climate Change: Economic Impact and Policy Responses	
October 2007, Appendix 1.2
What Risks Do Housing Markets Pose for Global Growth?	
October 2007, Box 2.1
The Changing Dynamics of the Global Business Cycle	
October 2007, Chapter 5
Major Economies and Fluctuations in Global Growth	
October 2007, Box 5.1
Improved Macroeconomic Performance—Good Luck or Good Policies?	
October 2007, Box 5.2
House Prices: Corrections and Consequences	
October 2008, Box 1.2
Global Business Cycles	
April 2009, Box 1.1
How Similar Is the Current Crisis to the Great Depression?	
April 2009, Box 3.1
Is Credit a Vital Ingredient for Recovery? Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2009, Box 3.2
From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How Strong?	
April 2009, Chapter 3
What’s the Damage? Medium-Term Output Dynamics after Financial Crises	
October 2009, Chapter 4
Will the Recovery Be Jobless?	
October 2009, Box 1.3
Unemployment Dynamics during Recessions and Recoveries: Okun’s Law and Beyond	
April 2010, Chapter 3
Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Economies?	
October 2010, Box 1.1
The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?	
April 2012, Box 1.2
How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?	
October 2012, Box 1.3
Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?	
October 2012, Chapter 4
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe	
April 2013, Chapter 2, 
Spillover Feature
Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?	
April 2013, Chapter 4
What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?	
October 2013, Box 1.2
Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages	
October 2013, Chapter 3
Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the  
Caucasus and Central Asia	
October 2013, Box 3.1
Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy	
October 2013, Box 3.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
185
Saving and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 3.1
On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,  
and after the Global Financial Crisis 	
April 2014, Chapter 4
The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies	
April 2014, Box 4.1
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011	
October 2014, Box 1.2
Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	
October 2014, Chapter 2, 
Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output  	
April 2015, Chapter 3
Steady As She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output	
April 2015, Box 3.1
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries— 
The Role of External Factors	
April 2016, Box 1.2
Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market  
Reforms in Advanced Economies	
April 2016, Chapter 3
Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated  
External Environment	
April 2017, Chapter 3 
Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2017, Box 2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence  
Over the Forecast Horizon	
October 2017, Box 1.3
Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality	
April 2018, Chapter 3
Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?	
April 2018, Chapter 4
Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth	
April 2018, Box 1.3
Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.2
Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.3
The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008	
October 2018, Chapter 2
IV.  Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
The Boom in Nonfuel Commodity Prices: Can It Last?	
September 2006, Chapter 5
International Oil Companies and National Oil Companies in a Changing Oil Sector Environment	
September 2006, Box 1.4
Commodity Price Shocks, Growth, and Financing in Sub-Saharan Africa	
September 2006, Box 2.2
Has Speculation Contributed to Higher Commodity Prices?	
September 2006, Box 5.1
Agricultural Trade Liberalization and Commodity Prices	
September 2006, Box 5.2
Recent Developments in Commodity Markets	
September 2006,  
Appendix 2.1
Who Is Harmed by the Surge in Food Prices?	
October 2007, Box 1.1
Refinery Bottlenecks	
October 2007, Box 1.5
Making the Most of Biofuels	
October 2007, Box 1.6
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2008, Appendix 1.2
Dollar Depreciation and Commodity Prices	
April 2008, Box 1.4
Why Hasn’t Oil Supply Responded to Higher Prices?	
April 2008, Box 1.5
Oil Price Benchmarks	
April 2008, Box 1.6
Globalization, Commodity Prices, and Developing Countries	
April 2008, Chapter 5
The Current Commodity Price Boom in Perspective	
April 2008, Box 5.2
Is Inflation Back? Commodity Prices and Inflation	
October 2008, Chapter 3 
Does Financial Investment Affect Commodity Price Behavior?	
October 2008, Box 3.1
Fiscal Responses to Recent Commodity Price Increases: An Assessment	
October 2008, Box 3.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
186	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Monetary Policy Regimes and Commodity Prices	
October 2008, Box 3.3
Assessing Deflation Risks in the G3 Economies	
April 2009, Box 1.3
Will Commodity Prices Rise Again When the Global Economy Recovers?	
April 2009, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2009, Appendix 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
October 2009, Appendix 1.1
What Do Options Markets Tell Us about Commodity Price Prospects?	
October 2009, Box 1.6
What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatility?	
October 2009, Box 1.7
How Unusual Is the Current Commodity Price Recovery?	
April 2010, Box 1.2
Commodity Futures Price Curves and Cyclical Market Adjustment	
April 2010, Box 1.3
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
October 2010, Appendix 1.1
Dismal Prospects for the Real Estate Sector	
October 2010, Box 1.2
Have Metals Become More Scarce and What Does Scarcity Mean for Prices?	
October 2010, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2011, Appendix 1.2
Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances	
April 2011, Chapter 3
Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production	
April 2011, Box 3.1
Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?	
April 2011, Box 3.2
Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity	
April 2011, Box 3.3
Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends	
April 2011, Appendix 3.1
The Energy and Oil Empirical Models	
April 2011, Appendix 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
September 2011,  
Appendix 1.1
Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices	
September 2011, Box 1.4
Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy	
September 2011, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Review	
April 2012, Chapter 1, 
Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters	
April 2012, Chapter 4
Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.1
Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.2
Commodity Market Review	
October 2012, Chapter 1, 
	
Special Feature
Unconventional Energy in the United States	
October 2012, Box 1.4
Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?	
October 2012, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Review	
April 2013, Chapter 1,  
	
Special Feature
The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?	
April 2013, Chapter 3
Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?	
April 2013, Box 3.1
Commodity Market Review	
October 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
Special Feature
Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.1
Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.2
Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting	
April 2014, Box 1.3
Commodity Prices and Forecasts	
April 2014, Chapter 1, 
Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas	
October 2014, Chapter 1, 
in the World Economy	
Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment	
April 2015, Chapter 1,  
in an Era of Low Oil Prices	
Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?  	
April 2015, Box 1.1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
187
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy	
October 2015, Chapter 1, 
	
Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift	
October 2015, Chapter 1, 
	
Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath  
of the Commodity Boom	
October 2015, Chapter 2
The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon	
October 2015, Box 2.1
Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?	
October 2015, Box 2.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the 	
April 2016, Chapter 1, 
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	
Special Feature	
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and 	
October 2016, Chapter 1, 
Markets in the World Economy	
Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?	
October 2016, Box 3.3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and 	
April 2017, Chapter 1, 
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2017, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?	
April 2018, Box 1.2
The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles	
April 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
October 2018, Box 1.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand	
October 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
October 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
October 2018, Chapter 3
Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 3.1
V.  Fiscal Policy
Improved Emerging Market Fiscal Performance: Cyclical or Structural?	
September 2006, Box 2.1
When Does Fiscal Stimulus Work?	
April 2008, Box 2.1
Fiscal Policy as a Countercyclical Tool	
October 2008, Chapter 5
Differences in the Extent of Automatic Stabilizers and Their Relationship with Discretionary Fiscal Policy	
October 2008, Box 5.1
Why Is It So Hard to Determine the Effects of Fiscal Stimulus?	
October 2008, Box 5.2
Have the U.S. Tax Cuts Been “TTT” [Timely, Temporary, and Targeted]?	
October 2008, Box 5.3
Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation	
October 2010, Chapter 3
Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances	
September 2011, Chapter 4
Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?	
October 2012, Box 1.1
The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies	
October 2012, Box 1.2
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance	
April 2013, Box 1.2
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.5
Commodity Booms and Public Investment	
October 2015, Box 2.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
188	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant	
October 2017, Chapter 4
The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions	
October 2017, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes	
April 2018, Box 1.5
VI.  Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
How Do Financial Systems Affect Economic Cycles?	
September 2006, Chapter 4
Financial Leverage and Debt Deflation	
September 2006, Box 4.1
Financial Linkages and Spillovers	
April 2007, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Conditions in Industrial Countries and Financial Flows to Emerging Markets  	
April 2007, Box 4.2
Macroeconomic Implications of Recent Market Turmoil: Patterns from Previous Episodes	
October 2007, Box 1.2
What Is Global Liquidity?	
October 2007, Box 1.4
The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for Monetary Policy	
April 2008, Chapter 3
Is There a Credit Crunch?	
April 2008, Box 1.1
Assessing Vulnerabilities to Housing Market Corrections	
April 2008, Box 3.1
Financial Stress and Economic Downturns	
October 2008, Chapter 4
The Latest Bout of Financial Distress: How Does It Change the Global Outlook?	
October 2008, Box 1.1
Policies to Resolve Financial System Stress and Restore Sound Financial Intermediation	
October 2008, Box 4.1
How Vulnerable Are Nonfinancial Firms?	
April 2009, Box 1.2
The Case of Vanishing Household Wealth	
April 2009, Box 2.1
Impact of Foreign Bank Ownership during Home-Grown Crises	
April 2009, Box 4.1
A Financial Stress Index for Emerging Economies	
April 2009, Appendix 4.1
Financial Stress in Emerging Economies: Econometric Analysis	
April 2009, Appendix 4.2
How Linkages Fuel the Fire	
April 2009, Chapter 4
Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations	
October 2009, Chapter 3
Were Financial Markets in Emerging Economies More Resilient than in Past Crises?	
October 2009, Box 1.2
Risks from Real Estate Markets	
October 2009, Box 1.4
Financial Conditions Indices	
April 2011, Appendix 1.1
House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets	
April 2011, Box 1.1
International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking	
April 2011, Box 1.3
Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications	
September 2011, Box 1.2
Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?	
September 2011, Box 1.3
Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging	
April 2012, Chapter 2,  
	
Spillover Feature
The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy	
October 2012, Chapter 2, 
	
Spillover Feature
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening	
October 2013, Box 1.1
Credit Supply and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 1.1 
Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	
April 2014, Chapter 2, 
Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates	
April 2014, Chapter 3
Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update	
October 2014, Box 1.1
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Box 2.2
A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Box 3.5
Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?	
October 2017, Box 1.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
189
The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
October 2018, Box 2.3
Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
October 2018, Box 3.2
VII.  Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
The Globalization of Labor	
April 2007, Chapter 5
Emigration and Trade: How Do They Affect Developing Countries?	
April 2007, Box 5.1
Labor Market Reforms in the Euro Area and the Wage-Unemployment Trade-Off	
October 2007, Box 2.2
Globalization and Inequality	
October 2007, Chapter 4
The Dualism between Temporary and Permanent Contracts: Measures, Effects, and Policy Issues	
April 2010, Box 3.1
Short-Time Work Programs	
April 2010, Box 3.2
Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies	
September 2011, Box 1.1
The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession	
April 2012, Box 1.1
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment	
April 2016, Box 3.2
Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment After the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects	
April 2018, Chapter 2
Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus  
Advanced Economies	
April 2018, Box 2.1
Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates	
April 2018, Box 2.4
Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil	
April 2018, Box 3.3
The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
October 2018, Box 2.1
The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:  	
October 2018, Box 2.2 
The Case of Industrial Robots
VIII.  Exchange Rate Issues
How Emerging Market Countries May Be Affected by External Shocks	
September 2006, Box 1.3
Exchange Rates and the Adjustment of External Imbalances	
April 2007, Chapter 3
Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices and External Adjustment	
April 2007, Box 3.3
Depreciation of the U.S. Dollar: Causes and Consequences	
April 2008, Box 1.2
Lessons from the Crisis: On the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime	
April 2010, Box 1.1
Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets	
April 2014, Box 1.4
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?	
October 2015, Chapter 3
The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade	
October 2015, Box 3.1
Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains	
October 2015, Box 3.2
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
190	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
IX.  External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Capital Flows to Emerging Market Countries: A Long-Term Perspective	
September 2006, Box 1.1
How Will Global Imbalances Adjust?	
September 2006, Box 2.1
External Sustainability and Financial Integration	
April 2007, Box 3.1
Large and Persistent Current Account Imbalances	
April 2007, Box 3.2
Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances	
October 2007, Box 1.3
Managing the Macroeconomic Consequences of Large and Volatile Aid Flows	
October 2007, Box 2.3
Managing Large Capital Inflows	
October 2007, Chapter 3
Can Capital Controls Work?	
October 2007, Box 3.1
Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances: Progress Report	
April 2008, Box 1.3
How Does the Globalization of Trade and Finance Affect Growth? Theory and Evidence	
April 2008, Box 5.1
Divergence of Current Account Balances across Emerging Economies	
October 2008, Chapter 6
Current Account Determinants for Oil-Exporting Countries	
October 2008, Box 6.1
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Implications for Global Financial Markets	
October 2008, Box 6.2
Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis	
April 2009, Box 1.4
Trade Finance and Global Trade: New Evidence from Bank Surveys	
October 2009, Box 1.1
From Deficit to Surplus: Recent Shifts in Global Current Accounts	
October 2009, Box 1.5
Getting the Balance Right: Transitioning out of Sustained Current Account Surpluses	
April 2010, Chapter 4
Emerging Asia: Responding to Capital Inflows	
October 2010, Box 2.1
Latin America-5: Riding Another Wave of Capital Inflows	
October 2010, Box 2.2
Do Financial Crises Have Lasting Effects on Trade?	
October 2010, Chapter 4
Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery	
April 2011, Box 2.1
International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?	
April 2011, Chapter 4
External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points	
September 2011, Box 1.5
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
External Rebalancing in the Euro Area	
October 2013, Box 1.3
The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows	
October 2013, Chapter 4
Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions	
October 2013, Box 4.1
The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom	
October 2014, Box 1.SF.1
Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?	
October 2014, Chapter 4
Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment	
October 2014, Box 4.1
A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area	
October 2014, Box 4.2
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2015, Box 1.2
Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits	
October 2015, Box 1.2
Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies	
October 2015, Box 1.3
Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2016, Box 1.1
Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Chapter 2
Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2016, Box 2.1
The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization	
April 2016, Box 3.3
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?	
October 2016, Chapter 2
The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with  
China’s Final Demand	
April 2017, Box 2.3
Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and  
Developing Economies	
April 2017, Box 2.4
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters	
October 2017, Box 1.4
Remittances and Consumption Smoothing	
October 2017, Box 1.5
A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators	
April 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Services Trade	
April 2018, Box 3.2
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
SELECTED TOPICS
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
191
Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2018, Box 4.3
Global Trade Tensions	
October 2018, Scenario box
X.  Regional Issues
EMU: 10 Years On	
October 2008, Box 2.1
Vulnerabilities in Emerging Economies	
April 2009, Box 2.2
East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe	
April 2012, Box 2.1
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions	
April 2018, Box 2.3
XI.  Country-Specific Analyses
Why Is the U.S. International Income Account Still in the Black, and Will This Last?	
September 2005, Box 1.2
Is India Becoming an Engine for Global Growth?	
September 2005, Box 1.4
Saving and Investment in China	
September 2005, Box 2.1
China’s GDP Revision: What Does It Mean for China and the Global Economy?	
April 2006, Box 1.6
What Do Country Studies of the Impact of Globalization on Inequality Tell Us?  
Examples from Mexico, China, and India	
October 2007, Box 4.2
Japan after the Plaza Accord	
April 2010, Box 4.1
Taiwan Province of China in the Late 1980s	
April 2010, Box 4.2
Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?	
April 2011, Box 1.4
Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?	
April 2012, Box 1.3
The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation	
April 2012, Box 3.1
Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland	
April 2012, Box 3.2
Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?	
October 2013, Box 1.4
Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?	
April 2014, Box 1.2
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade	
October 2014, Box 3.1
Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?	
October 2015, Box 3.3
The Japanese Experience with Deflation	
October 2016, Box 3.2
Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in US States and Metropolitan Areas	
April 2018, Box 2.2
XII.  Special Topics
Climate Change and the Global Economy	
April 2008, Chapter 4
Rising Car Ownership in Emerging Economies: Implications for Climate Change	
April 2008, Box 4.1
South Asia: Illustrative Impact of an Abrupt Climate Shock	
April 2008, Box 4.2
Macroeconomic Policies for Smoother Adjustment to Abrupt Climate Shocks	
April 2008, Box 4.3
Catastrophe Insurance and Bonds: New Instruments to Hedge Extreme Weather Risks	
April 2008, Box 4.4
Recent Emission-Reduction Policy Initiatives	
April 2008, Box 4.5
Complexities in Designing Domestic Mitigation Policies	
April 2008, Box 4.6
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up Human Development?	
October 2015, Box 2.3
Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms	
April 2016, Box 3.1
Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method	
April 2016, Box 3.4
A Global Rush for Land	
October 2016, Box 1.SF.1
Conflict, Growth, and Migration 	
April 2017, Box 1.1
Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity 	
April 2017, Box 1.2
Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Case of the Brazil, Russia, India, China,  
and South Africa 	
April 2017, Box 2.1
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
192	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview	
April 2017, Box 3.1
The Elasticity of Substitution Between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation	
April 2017, Box 3.2
Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World	
April 2017, Box 3.3
Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income	
April 2017, Box 3.4
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?	
October 2017, Chapter 3
The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones	
October 2017, Box 3.1
The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis	
October 2017, Box 3.2
Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies	
October 2017, Box 3.3
Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets	
October 2017, Box 3.4
Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution	
October 2017, Box 3.5
Mitigating Climate Change	
October 2017, Box 3.6
Smartphones and Global Trade	
April 2018, Box 1.1
Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics	
April 2018, Box 1.4
The Changing Service Content of Manufactures	
April 2018, Box 3.1
Patent Data and Concepts	
April 2018, Box 4.1
International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers	
April 2018, Box 4.2
Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation	
April 2018, Box 4.4
Increasing Market Power	
October 2018, Box 1.1
Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
October 2018, Box 1.5
Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
October 2018, Box 1.6
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018	
193
E
xecutive Directors broadly shared the 
assessment of global economic prospects 
and risks. They observed that the global 
expansion, while remaining strong, has lost 
some momentum and growth may have plateaued 
in some major economies. Prospects increasingly 
diverge among countries, reflecting differences in 
policy stances and the combined impact of tighter 
financial conditions, rising trade barriers, higher oil 
prices, and increased geopolitical tensions. Beyond 
2019, growth in most advanced economies is expected 
to be held back by slow labor force growth and 
weak labor productivity. In emerging market and 
developing economies, growth is projected to remain 
relatively robust, although income convergence toward 
advanced economy levels would likely be less favorable 
for countries undergoing substantial fiscal adjustment, 
economic transformation, or conflicts. 
Directors generally agreed that near-term risks to the 
global outlook have recently shifted to the downside 
and some have partially materialized. Trade barriers 
have risen, with adverse consequences for investment 
and growth. Financial conditions in most emerging 
market and developing countries have tightened since 
mid-April. Capital flows to some of these countries have 
declined, reflecting weak fundamentals, higher politi-
cal risks, and/or U.S. monetary policy normalization. 
While financial conditions in advanced economies 
remain broadly accommodative, an inflation surprise 
could lead to an abrupt tightening of monetary policy 
and to an intensification of market pressures across a 
broader range of countries. In addition, most Directors 
saw as key risks a further escalation of trade tensions, 
a rise in political and policy uncertainties, and growing 
inequality. Meanwhile, high debt levels limit the room 
for maneuver in many countries.
Most Directors considered that the recent intensi-
fication of trade tensions and the potential for further 
escalation pose a substantial risk to global growth and 
welfare. They noted that unilateral trade actions and 
retaliatory measures could disrupt global supply chains, 
weaken investor confidence, and undermine broader 
multilateral cooperation at a time when it is urgently 
needed to address shared challenges. They therefore 
urged all countries to adopt a cooperative approach to 
promote growth in goods and services trade, reduce 
trade costs, resolve disagreements without raising tariff 
and nontariff barriers, and modernize the rules-based 
multilateral trading system. The possibility of an 
outcome in which trade issues could be resolved in 
a positive way was also pointed out. Directors noted 
that persistent large external imbalances continue to 
call for sustained efforts, mindful of countries’ cycli-
cal positions, to increase domestic growth potential in 
surplus countries and to raise supply or rein in demand 
in deficit countries.
Given a narrowing window of opportunity, 
Directors underscored the urgency of policy measures 
to sustain the expansion, strengthen resilience, and 
raise medium-term growth prospects. They encouraged 
countries to rebuild fiscal buffers where needed, and 
implement growth-friendly measures calibrated to 
avoid procyclicality and the risk of sharp drags on 
activity. Directors agreed that, where inflation is below 
target, continued monetary accommodation remains 
appropriate. Where inflation is close to or above target, 
monetary support should be withdrawn in a gradual, 
data-dependent, and well-communicated manner. 
Directors emphasized the critical role of structural 
reforms in boosting potential output, ensuring that gains 
are widely shared, and improving safety nets—including 
to protect those vulnerable to structural change. 
Most Directors shared the assessment that near-term 
risks to financial stability have increased while medium-
term risks remain elevated. They highlighted, in particu-
lar, the buildup of financial vulnerabilities over the past 
few years of very accommodative financial conditions, 
including high and rising public and corporate debt, 
The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the  
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 20, 2018.
IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK, 
OCTOBER 2018
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: CHALLENGES TO STEADY GROWTH
194	
International Monetary Fund | October 2018
and stretched asset valuations in some major markets. 
Addressing these vulnerabilities remains an important 
priority for many countries. For some countries, priori-
ties include cleaning up bank balance sheets, improving  
corporate governance, and addressing risks from the 
sovereign-bank nexus, although a number of Directors felt 
that regulatory issues pertaining to sovereign exposures 
would best be left to the remit of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, which is the standard-setting 
body on the matter for a number of member countries. 
Directors also stressed the importance of completing and 
fully implementing the regulatory reform agenda, and of 
avoiding a rollback of reforms that have contributed to a 
more resilient financial system ten years after the global 
financial crisis. 
Directors agreed that financial regulators and super-
visors should remain vigilant about potential threats to 
financial stability and stand ready to act. They called 
for special attention to liquidity conditions and new 
risks, including those related to cybersecurity, finan-
cial technology, and other institutions or activities 
outside the perimeter of prudential regulation. These 
require policymakers to further develop policy tools, 
including macroprudential policies, and deploy them 
proactively as needed, as well as enhance coordination 
across borders.
Directors stressed that, as monetary policy normal-
ization proceeds in advanced economies, emerging 
market and developing economies need to prepare for 
an environment of tighter financial conditions and 
higher volatility. Countries need to tackle their vulner-
abilities and enhance resilience with an appropriate 
mix of fiscal, monetary, exchange rate, and prudential 
policies. In certain circumstances, capital flow man-
agement measures may be appropriate but not as a 
substitute for macroeconomic adjustment. Directors 
observed that markets have so far differentiated among 
emerging market and developing economies based on 
their fundamentals and idiosyncratic factors. In this 
context, they underlined the importance of main-
taining credible policy and institutional frameworks, 
strengthening governance, and improving human 
and physical capital. Directors noted that the current 
environment highlights the need for the Fund to offer 
granular, tailored policy advice and stand ready to pro-
vide financial support to its members as needed.
Directors underscored that priorities for low-income 
developing countries include building resilience, lifting 
potential growth, improving inclusiveness, and making 
progress toward the 2030 Sustainable Development 
Goals, while commodity exporters should also pri-
oritize economic diversification. Stronger efforts are 
needed to create room for development expenditure, 
through broadening the tax base, improving revenue 
administration, and prioritizing spending on health, 
education, and infrastructure, while cutting wasteful 
subsidies. Directors also called for urgent action to 
contain debt vulnerabilities, which are rising in many 
countries. They stressed that both debtors and creditors 
share a responsibility for ensuring sustainable financing 
practices and enhancing debt transparency. 
Directors agreed that public sector balance sheet 
analysis provides a useful tool to analyze public 
finances. By revealing the full scale of public assets 
in addition to debt and nondebt liabilities, it helps 
governments identify risks and manage both assets and 
liabilities, potentially reducing borrowing costs and 
raising returns on assets. Directors noted that the long-
term intertemporal analysis is particularly relevant in 
aging societies. They also saw the benefits of the added 
transparency in enriching the policy debate. At the 
same time, Directors acknowledged that the balance 
sheet approach still has limitations, notably data qual-
ity and differences in accounting practices hindering 
cross-country comparisons, and thus it should be used 
with caveats to complement traditional fiscal analysis.
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
Highlights from IMF Publications
Advancing the Frontiers of  
Monetary Policy
$30. English. Paperback 
ISBN 978-1-48432-594-0. 296pp. 
The ASEAN Way: Sustaining  
Growth and Stability
$25. English. Paperback 
ISBN 978-1-51355-890-5. 308pp. 
Race to the Next Income Frontier
$40. English. Paperback  
ISBN 978-14843-0313-9. 430pp. 
Realizing Indonesia’s Economic 
Potential
$30. English. Paperback 
ISBN 978-1-48433-714-1. 336pp.
Modernizing China:  
Investing in Soft Infrastructure
$38. English. Paperback 
ISBN 978-1-51353-994-2. 388pp. 
To order, visit bookstore.imf.org/weo1018
Finance & Development Magazine
$29 annual subscription fee.  
Free to developing countries. 
English ISSN 0145-1707
©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution
