World Economic Outlook October 2017 Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges World Economic and Financial Surveys I N T E R N A T I O N A L M O N E T A R Y F U N D  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution  2017 International Monetary Fund Cover and Design: Luisa Menjivar and Jorge Salazar Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company Cataloging-in-Publication Data Joint Bank-Fund Library Names: International Monetary Fund. Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund) Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and financial surveys. Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial surveys, 0256-6877. Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online) Subjects: LCSH: Economic development Periodicals. | International economic relations  Periodicals. | Debts, External Periodicals. | Balance of payments Periodicals. | International finance Periodicals. | Economic forecasting Periodicals. Classification: LCC HC10.W79 HC10.80 ISBN 978-1-48431-249-0 (paper) 978-1-48432-114-0 (Web PDF) 978-1-48432-112-6 (ePub) 978-1-48432-111-9 (Mobi) The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 21, 2017. The views expressed in this publication are those of the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF s Executive Directors or their national authorities. Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2017. Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges. Washington, DC, October. Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail: International Monetary Fund, Publication Services P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201 E-mail: publications@imf.org www.imfbookstore.org www.elibrary.imf.org  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution International Monetary Fund | October 2017 iii Assumptions and Conventions x Further Information and Data xi Preface xii Foreword xiii Executive Summary xv Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies 1 Recent Developments and Prospects 2 The Forecast 10 Risks 22 Policy Priorities 25 Scenario Box 1. Impact of Recommended Policies in the Group of Twenty Economies 35 Box 1.1. Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies 37 Box 1.2. Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained? 42 Box 1.3. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence over the Forecast Horizon 45 Box 1.4. Macroeconomic Changes in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters 50 Box 1.5. Remittances and Consumption Smoothing 55 Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts 59 References 70 Chapter 2. Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications 73 Introduction 73 Wage Determination A Primer 75 Advanced Economy Labor Markets: Surface Healing Masks Deeper Changes 76 Drivers of Recent Wage Dynamics 82 Summary and Policy Implications 88 Box 2.1. Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level 91 Box 2.2. Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence 94 Box 2.3. Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence 96 Annex 2.1. Country Coverage and Data 98 Annex 2.2. Empirical Methodologies 98 Annex 2.3. Empirical Results 103 References 113 Chapter 3: The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? 117 Introduction 117 Temperature and Precipitation: Historical Patterns and Projections 121 The Macroeconomic Impact of Weather Shocks 125 Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change 131 Long-Term Effects of Temperature Increase A Model-Based Approach 137 Summary and Policy Implications 139 CONTENTS  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES iv International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Box 3.1. The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones 142 Box 3.2. The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis 145 Box 3.3. Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies 148 Box 3.4. Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets 151 Box 3.5. Historical Climate, Economic Development, and World Income Distribution 154 Box 3.6. Mitigating Climate Change 156 Annex 3.1. Data Sources and Country Groupings 159 Annex 3.2. Weather Shocks and Natural Disasters 161 Annex 3.3. Empirical Analysis of the Macroeconomic Effects of Weather Shocks and the Role of Policies 161 Annex 3.4. The Impact of Weather Changes and Natural Disasters on International Migration 173 Annex 3.5. Model-Based Analysis 174 Annex 3.6. Reduced Form Approach to Estimating Potential Long-Term Effects of Climate Change 176 References 177 Chapter 4. Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? 185 Introduction 185 Spillovers from Fiscal Policy A Conceptual Framework 187 Spillovers on Economic Activity: Empirical Evidence 190 The Transmission of Fiscal Shocks Model-Based Analysis 196 Fiscal Reforms 200 Conclusions 203 Box 4.1. The Spillover Impact of US Government Spending Shocks on External Positions 205 Annex 4.1. Data 207 Annex 4.2. Empirical Strategy 209 Annex 4.3. Robustness Tests 211 References 213 Statistical Appendix 217 Assumptions 217 What s New 218 Data and Conventions 219 Country Notes 219 Classification of Countries 220 General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification 220 Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2017 221 Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup 222 Table C. European Union 222 Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings 223 Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries 224 Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods 226 Table G. Key Data Documentation 227 Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies 237 List of Tables Output (Tables A1 A4) 242 Inflation (Tables A5 A7) 249 Financial Policies (Table A8) 254 Foreign Trade (Table A9) 255 Current Account Transactions (Tables A10 A12) 257 Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13) 264  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution CONTENTS  International Monetary Fund | October 2017 v Flow of Funds (Table A14) 268 Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15) 271 World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics 273 IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, October 2017 283 Tables Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections 14 Scenario Table 1. Assumed Policy Actions Relative to the WEO Baseline 36 Table 1.3.1. Correlates of Growth Projections, EMDEs, 2017 22 46 Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 63 Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 64 Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 65 Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 66 Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 67 Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment 68 Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 69 Table 2.3.1. Precrisis Financial Vulnerabilities and Postcrisis Labor Adjustments 97 Annex Table 2.1.1. Country Coverage 98 Annex Table 2.1.2. Data Sources 98 Annex Table 2.2.1. Aggregate Forces and Sectoral Exposures 102 Annex Table 2.3.1. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves 103 Annex Table 2.3.2. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves with Alternative Measures 104 Annex Table 2.3.3. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share by Country Group 106 Annex Table 2.3.4. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average 106 Annex Table 2.3.5. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average 107 Annex Table 2.3.6. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract Employment Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average 107 Annex Table 2.3.7. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract Employment Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average 108 Annex Table 2.3.8. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables 109 Annex Table 2.3.9. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables: Excluding 2008 and 2009 110 Annex Table 2.3.10. Drivers of Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share, Aggregate Analysis 110 Annex Table 2.3.11. Drivers of Sectoral Nominal Wage Growth 111 Annex Table 2.3.12. Drivers of Sectoral Part-Time Employment Shares 111 Annex Table 2.3.13. Drivers of Nominal Wage Growth, Employment Growth, and Part-Time Employment 113  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES vi International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table 3.1.1. Characteristics of the Average Tropical Cyclone by Country Group 142 Table 3.1.2. Effect of Weather and Wind Shocks on Economic Activity 143 Table 3.5.1. Effect of Historical Climate on Current Real Output 154 Annex Table 3.1.1. Data Sources 159 Annex Table 3.1.2. Country and Territory Groups 160 Annex Table 3.2.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Natural Disasters, 1990 2014 162 Annex Table 3.3.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Output 164 Annex Table 3.3.2. Effect of Weather Shocks on Sectoral Output 167 Annex Table 3.3.3. Effect of Weather Shocks on Productivity, Capital, and Labor 168 Annex Table 3.3.4. Role of Policy Buffers 170 Annex Table 3.3.5. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions 171 Annex Table 3.3.6. Role of Development: Evidence from Subnational Data 172 Annex Table 3.4.1. Effect of Weather Shocks and Natural Disasters on Emigration, 1980 2015 173 Annex Table 3.5.1. Parameterization of the Debt, Investment, and Growth Model 175 Annex Table 4.1.1. Data Sources for Quarterly Fiscal Data by Source Country 207 Annex Table 4.1.2. Data Sources for Recipient Countries 208 Annex Table 4.1.3. Recipient Countries in Sample 208 Online Tables Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in Goods and Services Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria: External Debt by Maturity Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario: Selected Economic Indicators Figures Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators 2 Figure 1.2. Global Fixed Investment and Trade 3 Figure 1.3. Commodity Prices 3 Figure 1.4. Global Inflation 4  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution CONTENTS  Figure 1.5. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions 6 Figure 1.6. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, November 2016 September 2017 7 Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and Credits 7 Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates 8 Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows 8 Figure 1.10. Revisions to 2017 Growth and 2016 Output Gaps 9 Figure 1.11. Emerging Markets: Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses 11 Figure 1.12. GDP Growth, 1999 2022 11 Figure 1.13. Fiscal Indicators 12 Figure 1.14. Global Current Account Balances 20 Figure 1.15. Real Exchange Rates and Current Account Balances in Relation to Economic Fundamentals 21 Figure 1.16. Net International Investment Positions 21 Figure 1.17. Geopolitical Risk Index 24 Figure 1.18. Risks to the Global Outlook 25 Figure 1.19. Recession and Deflation Risks 26 Figure 1.20. Advanced Economy Output Gaps, 2017 27 Figure 1.21. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Output Gaps, 2017 29 Figure 1.22. Per Capita Real GDP Growth across Low-Income Developing Countries 32 Scenario Figure 1. Group of Twenty Macro Scenario 35 Figure 1.1.1. Population Shares by Age Group and Gender 37 Figure 1.1.2. Labor Force Participation Rates by Age Group and Gender 38 Figure 1.1.3. Decomposition of Change in Labor Force Participation Rate, 2007 16 38 Figure 1.1.4. Changes in Labor Force Participation, Select Advanced Economies, 2007 16 39 Figure 1.1.5. Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates for the 25 54 Age Group by Gender, Select Advanced Economies 40 Figure 1.1.6. Convergence in Female Labor Force Participation Rates 40 Figure 1.2.1. Capital Flows to Emerging Market and Developing Economies 42 Figure 1.2.2. China: Reserves and Capital Flows 43 Figure 1.2.3. Latest Capital Flows Trends and Prospects 43 Figure 1.3.1. Per Capital Real GDP Growth across Country Groups 45 Figure 1.3.2. Per Capita Real GDP Growth, Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region 45 Figure 1.3.3. EMDEs  per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials vis- -vis Advanced Economies: 1995 2016 versus 2017 22 47 Figure 1.3.4. Distribution of EMDE per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect to Advanced Economies 47 Figure 1.3.5. Distribution of EMDE per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect to Advanced Economies, by Type of Export Earnings and Region 48 Figure 1.3.6. Distribution of EMDE Population by per Capita Real GDP Growth Rate 48 Figure 1.3.7. Projected per Capita Real Growth Rates and 2011 Real Levels, AEs and EMDEs 49 Figure 1.4.1. Commodity Prices 50 Figure 1.4.2. Exchange Rate Regimes of Commodity-Exporting Emerging Market and Developing Economies 51 Figure 1.4.3. Commodity Terms of Trade 51 Figure 1.4.4. Evolution of Exchange Rates 52 Figure 1.4.5. Net Export Adjustment, 2013 16 52 Figure 1.4.6. Fiscal Indicators 53 Figure 1.4.7. Change in per Capita GDP Growth and Inflation in Fuel Exporters, Conditional on CToT 54 Figure 1.5.1. Net Remittances as a Share of Output, 2015 55 Figure 1.5.2. Financial Integration 56 Figure 1.5.3. Smoothing Effects of Remittances 57 Figure 1.5.4. Contribution of Remittances to Consumption Risk Sharing 58 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 vii  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments 59 Figure 2.1. Distribution of Labor Market Indicators 77 Figure 2.2. Distribution of Nominal Wage Growth and Correlation with Changes in the Unemployment Rate 78 Figure 2.3. Job Attributes: Involuntary Part-Time Employment 79 Figure 2.4. Job Attributes: Temporary Contracts 79 Figure 2.5. Job Attributes: Hours per Worker 80 Figure 2.6. Average Nominal Wage Growth, 2009 16, Actual versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral Employment Shares 81 Figure 2.7. Changes in Labor Market Indicators, Actual versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral Employment Shares 81 Figure 2.8. Job Attributes and Changes in Sectoral Employment Shares, 2008 16 82 Figure 2.9. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour: Panel Estimation 84 Figure 2.10. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour: Country-by-Country Estimation, Cross-Country Dispersion 84 Figure 2.11. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time Employment on Growth of Compensation per Hour, 2000 16 86 Figure 2.12. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics, 2000 16 86 Figure 2.13. Year Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, 2000 16 87 Figure 2.14. Changes in Growth Expectations and Labor Market Institutions 88 Figure 2.15. Long-Term Drivers of Labor Market Dynamics 89 Figure 2.16. Effects on Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share, Aggregate Analysis 89 Figure 2.1.1. Evolution of Skill Premiums in the United States 91 Figure 2.1.2. Skill Premiums and Changes in Skill Premiums in European Economies 92 Figure 2.1.3. Nominal Wage Growth by Sector and Skill Group 92 Figure 2.1.4. Employment Shares by Skill 93 Figure 2.1.5. Employment Shares by Skill and Changes in Hours per Worker 93 Figure 2.2.1. Changes in Employment Shares 94 Figure 2.2.2. Changes in Employment Shares, 2007 14 95 Figure 2.2.3. Wage Cuts and Freezes, 2014 95 Figure 2.3.1. Estimated Nominal Wage Growth and Employment Growth Differences Based on Uncertainty and Growth Expectations 96 Figure 2.3.2. Wage and Employment Growth by Debt Maturity in 2008 96 Annex Figure 2.2.1. Distribution of Real Compensation Growth Measures 99 Annex Figure 2.2.2. Growth of Real Compensation per Hour and Unemployment Rates 99 Annex Figure 2.2.3. Factors Associated with Nominal Wage Growth 100 Annex Figure 2.2.4. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time Employment on Compensation and Wages, 2000 16 100 Annex Figure 2.2.5. Correlations between Aggregate Wage Growth and Two-Quarter-Lagged Public Wage Growth 101 Annex Figure 2.3.1. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics, 2000 16 105 Annex Figure 2.3.2. Decomposition of Sectoral Wage Dynamics, 2000 15 112 Annex Figure 2.3.3. Effects on Part-Time Employment Share, Sectoral Analysis 112 Figure 3.1. Average Global Temperature 118 Figure 3.2. Increase in Average Global Temperature and Contributions of Key Factors 121 Figure 3.3. Temperature and Precipitation across Broad Country Groups 122 Figure 3.4. Annual CO2 Emissions across Broad Country Groups 122 Figure 3.5. Temperature and Precipitation Projections under the RCP 8.5 Scenario 124 Figure 3.6. Natural Disasters: Historical and Projected Monthly Probability of Occurrence 125 Figure 3.7. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output 126 Figure 3.8. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe 127 viii International Monetary Fund | October 2017  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution CONTENTS    Figure 3.9. Effect of Temperature Increase on Sectoral Output Estimated at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income Developing Country 128 Figure 3.10. Effect of Temperature Increase on Productivity, Capital, and Labor Input Estimated at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income Developing Country 130 Figure 3.11. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output Estimated at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income Developing Country over Time 131 Figure 3.12. Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: A Toolkit 132 Figure 3.13. Role of Policy Buffers 134 Figure 3.14. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions 134 Figure 3.15. Role of Development: Evidence from Subnational Data 135 Figure 3.16. Effect of Temperature and Natural Disasters on International Migration 136 Figure 3.17. Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase for a Representative Low-Income Developing Country: Model Simulations 138 Figure 3.18. Vulnerability to Temperature Increase and Adaption Prospects 141 Figure 3.1.1. Effect of Tropical Cyclone Exposure on Real GDP per Capita 144 Figure 3.1.2. Cumulative Effect of Average Tropical Cyclone on Real GDP per Capita after Seven Years 144 Figure 3.2.1. Role of Policies: A Model-Based Analysis 145 Figure 3.4.1. Insurance Penetration: Non-Life Insurance Premium 151 Figure 3.4.2. Catastrophe Bond Market 152 Figure 3.4.3. Temperature Shocks and Stock Price Predictability: Food and Beverages Sector 152 Figure 3.6.1. Effectiveness of Mitigation Policies in China 157 Annex Figure 3.3.1. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe, with Countries Rescaled in Proportion to Their Projected Population as of 2100 165 Annex Figure 3.6.1. The Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe 177 Figure 4.1. Output Gap in Selected Countries 186 Figure 4.2. The Transmission of a Fiscal Shock 188 Figure 4.3. Tracking Tax Shocks in the United States 191 Figure 4.4. Dynamic Responses of Recipient Countries  Output to Fiscal Shocks 192 Figure 4.5. Spillovers of Fiscal Shocks on Recipient Countries  Output 193 Figure 4.6. Dynamic Responses of Components of Recipient Countries  Output to a Fiscal Shock 193 Figure 4.7. Spillovers under Various Economic and Policy Conditions 194 Figure 4.8. Dynamic Responses of Components of Recipient Countries  Output under Normal Times and Effective Lower Bound in Recipient Countries 195 Figure 4.9. Dynamic Responses of Recipient Countries  Output to US Spending Shock under Various Exchange Rate Regimes 196 Figure 4.10. Impact of Fiscal Shocks on Global GDP Based on Various Instruments 197 Figure 4.11. Spillovers from US Fiscal Shocks with and without Monetary Accommodation 198 Figure 4.12. Regional GDP Impact of Government Spending Shocks from the United States, Europe, and China 199 Figure 4.13. Dynamic Responses to a US Government Spending Shock 199 Figure 4.14. Spillovers from US Spending Shock with and without a US Term-Premium Increase 200 Figure 4.15. Spillovers from Corporate Income Tax Reduction Financed by an Offsetting Increase in Value-Added Tax 201 Figure 4.16. Spillovers from Increase in Government Investment in Five Major Economies 203 Figure 4.1.1. Response of Recipient Countries  Trade Balance and Real Exchange Rate vis- -vis US Dollar 205 Annex Figure 4.3.1. Effects of Spending Shock and Tax Shock on Recipient Countries  Output: Comparison with Panel Vector Autoregression 211 Annex Figure 4.3.2. Effects of Spending and Tax Shock on Recipient Countries  Output: Forecast Errors 212 Annex Figure 4.3.3. Effects of US Tax Shock on Recipient Countries  Output: Comparison with US Narrative Tax Shock, 1995 2007 213 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 ix  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY x International Monetary Fund | October 2017 A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook (WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during July 20 to August 17, 2017, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism II (ERM II), which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $50.28 a barrel in 2017 and $50.17 a barrel in 2018 and will remain unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that the six-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on US dollar deposits will average 1.4 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018; that the three-month euro deposit rate will average  0.3 percent in 2017 and 2018; and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will yield on average 0.1 percent in 2017 and 0.2 percent in 2018. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would in any event be involved in the projections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through September 22, 2017. The following conventions are used throughout the WEO: . . . to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;   between years or months (for example, 2016 17 or January June) to indicate the years or months covered, including the beginning and ending years or months; and / between years or months (for example, 2016/17) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.  Billion  means a thousand million;  trillion  means a thousand billion.  Basis points  refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to   of 1 percentage point). Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and government finance data for each country. For some countries, the figures for 2016 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country. What is new in this publication:   Data for Somalia are included in the emerging market and developing economies group composites. Somalia is classified as a member of the Middle East and North Africa region.   Starting with the October 2017 WEO, the real GDP per capita data in Statistical Tables A1, B1, and B2 are shown at purchasing power parity. This differs from the treatment of these data in the April 2017 WEO and earlier issues, in which the data were shown in local national currency. In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:   If no source is listed on tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.   When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.   Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding. As used in this report, the terms  country  and  economy  do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis. Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of the weighted group data. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the part of the International Monetary Fund, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution International Monetary Fund | October 2017 xi WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY FURTHER INFORMATION AND DATA This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary. imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compila- tion of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages. The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histori- cal data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF s International Financial Statistics. The WEO data and metadata provided are  as is  and  as available,  and every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but it cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a con- certed effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents. For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm). Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax, or online forum (telephone inquiries cannot be accepted): World Economic Studies Division Research Department International Monetary Fund 700 19th Street, NW Washington, DC 20431, USA Fax: (202) 623-6343 Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution xii International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF s surveil- lance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a comprehen- sive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out in particular by the IMF s area departments namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, European Depart- ment, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department, the Monetary and Capital Markets Department, and the Fiscal Affairs Department. The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Maurice Obstfeld, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Deputy Director, Research Department; Oya Celasun, Division Chief, Research Department; and Helge Berger, Assistant Director, Research Department and Head of the IMF s Spillover Task Force. The primary contributors to this report were Sebastian Acevedo, Patrick Blagrave, Christian Bogmans, Francesco Grigoli, Giang Ho, Gee Hee Hong, Zs ka K cz n, Ksenia Koloskova, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian, Akito Matsumoto, Mico Mrkaic, Malhar Nabar, Natalija Novta, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, Evgenia Pugacheva, Petia Topalova, and Esteban Vesperoni. Other contributors include JaeBin Ahn, Gavin Asdorian, Manoj Atolia, Claudio Baccianti, Kimberly Beaton, Jared Bebee, Felicia Belostecinic, John C. Bluedorn, Luis Cat o, Eugenio Cerutti, Angela Espiritu, Rachel Yuting Fan, Alan Xiaochen Feng, Bertrand Gruss, Meron Haile, Mahnaz Hemmati, Benjamin Hilgenstock, Ava Yeabin Hong, Benjamin Hunt, Hao Jiang, Christopher Johns, Sung Eun Jung, Alimata Kini-Kabor , Lama Kiyasseh, Robin Koepke, Jungjin Lee, Yiqun Li, Ricardo Marto, Trevor Charles Meadows, Joannes Mongardini, Susanna Mursula, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, Ian Parry, Adina Popescu, Daniel Rivera Greenwood, Ippei Shibata, Kadir Tanyeri, Nicholas Tong, Jilun Xing, Yuan Zeng, Qiaoqiao Zhang, and Huiyuan Zhao. Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production and editorial support from Michael Harrup, Christine Ebrahimzadeh, and Linda Kean and editorial assistance from James Unwin, Lucy Scott Morales, Sherrie Brown, and Vector Talent Resources. The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, as well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 21, 2017. However, both pro- jections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive Directors or to their national authorities. PREFACE  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution T he global cyclical upswing that began midway through 2016 continues to gather strength. Only a year and a half ago, the world economy faced stalling growth and financial market turbulence. The picture now is very different, with accelerating growth in Europe, Japan, China, and the United States. Financial conditions remain buoyant across the world, and financial markets seem to be expecting little turbulence going forward, even as the Federal Reserve continues its monetary normalization process and the European Central Bank inches up to its own. These positive developments give good cause for greater confidence, but neither policymakers nor mar- kets should be lulled into complacency. A closer look suggests that the global recovery may not be sustain- able not all countries are participating, inflation often remains below target with weak wage growth, and the medium-term outlook still disappoints in many parts of the world. The recovery is also vulnerable to seri- ous risks. Financial markets that ignore these risks are susceptible to disruptive repricing, and are sending a misleading message to policymakers. Policymakers, in turn, need to maintain a longer-term vision and seize the current opportunity to implement the structural and fiscal reforms needed for greater resilience, produc- tivity, and investment. The possibility that they don t  governments far too often wait for crises to push them into decisive action is itself a source of risks to the outlook, as well as a barrier to more inclusive and sustainable growth. Recent economic progress provides a global environment of opportunity, and policymakers should not let their chance go to waste. The current recovery is incomplete in some impor- tant ways: within countries, across countries, and over time. Within countries. Even as negative output gaps close across the advanced economies, growth in nominal and real wages remains weak compared with past recoveries. Weak wage growth is one source of the sur- prisingly weak inflation that itself is a source of con- cern, as it leaves nominal interest rates low and makes encounters with the effective lower bound, the point at which central banks can no longer lower interest rates, more likely. Chapter 2 of this World Economic Outlook report studies the recent surprisingly slow growth of nominal wages, which reinforces a lon- ger trend of stagnant median wages, rising income inequality, and job polarization such that middle-skill but well-paying jobs have become increasingly scarce. Those developments have stoked considerable popular anti-globalization backlash one significant threat to the world economy although technological develop- ments and government policies together have played larger roles in increasing income inequality, and fears of faster automation are a current cause of anxiety. Emerging markets have faced similar pressures in the face of trade liberalization and technological change, but growth has in many cases lifted all deciles of their income distributions and attitudes toward trade s effects on labor markets remain largely optimistic. Across countries. The current upswing reaches more broadly than any in a decade roughly 75 percent of the world economy, measured by GDP at purchasing power parity is sharing in the acceleration. But that means the glass is 25 percent empty, implying a drag on world growth and a potential source of destabilizing political shocks. Emerging and low-income commod- ity exporters, especially energy exporters, continue to struggle, as do several countries experiencing civil or political unrest, mostly in the Middle East, North and sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America. And many of these same countries are the ones that are also most exposed to the negative impacts of climate change  already being felt via more frequent extreme weather events in some regions, such as heat waves and heavy precipitation. Chapter 3 focuses on the economic costs of climate change and the need for adaptation invest- ments in low-income countries. Advanced economies will not be immune to future climate developments, however through either direct impacts in some advanced regions, such as the coastal United States, or the spillovers from mass migrations and geopolitical instability emanating from poorer countries. Over time. Behind recent positive growth develop- ments, longer-term trend per capita growth rates in FOREWORD International Monetary Fund | October 2017 xiii  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES many economies will be lower than trend growth rates of the past. In particular, most advanced economies face medium-term growth rates significantly lower than in the decade before the global financial crisis of 2007 09. The reasons behind these slowdowns differ across countries. For some economies, notably China s, declining long-term growth is a natural result of rebalancing and convergence. For emerging com- modity exporters, which benefited from China s own rapid manufacturing growth in years past, perma- nently lower export prices call for new growth models. For advanced economies, expected slow productivity growth and aging workforces play major roles. Lower trend per capita growth rates can be problematic for several reasons: they make it harder for the poor to raise their living standards; they raise the pain of real- locating resources in the face of economic changes; they deter productivity-enhancing investment; they harm the sustainability of publicly funded social safety nets; and they feed political resentment by undermin- ing hopes for the future and beliefs about the fairness of economic outcomes. In turn, these forces could derail the baseline forecast. The preceding gaps in the recovery challenge policymakers to action action that should take place now, while times are good. Needed structural reforms differ across countries, but all countries have ample room for measures that would raise economic resil- ience along with potential output. For some countries where output gaps have closed, the time has come to think about gradual fiscal consolidation, to reduce swollen public debt levels and create buffers to be used in the next recession. Such actions could entail adverse spillovers abroad, as discussed in Chapter 4. Countries with more fiscal space can, however, offset the reduction in global demand for example, through much-needed productive infrastructure investment or through fiscal spending that supports structural reforms. This global fiscal package can also help reduce excess global imbalances. Critically important to inclusive and sustainable growth is investment in people at all life-cycle stages, but especially the young. Better education, training, and retraining can both ease labor market adjustment to secular economic transformation coming from all sources, not only trade and raise productivity. In the short term, the excessive youth unemployment that afflicts many countries urgently deserves attention. Investing in human capital should help to push labor s income share upward, contrary to the broad trend of recent decades but governments should also consider correcting distortions that may have reduced workers  bargaining power excessively. In sum, policy should promote an environment conducive to sustainable real wage growth. Numerous global problems require multilateral action. Priorities for mutually beneficial coopera- tion include strengthening the global trading system, further improving financial regulation, enhancing the global financial safety net, reducing international tax avoidance, fighting famine and infectious diseases, mitigating greenhouse gas emissions before they create more irreversible damage, and helping poorer coun- tries, which are not themselves substantial emitters, adapt to climate change. If the strength of the cur- rent upswing makes the moment ideal for domestic reforms, its breadth makes multilateral cooperation opportune. Policymakers should act while the window of opportunity is open. Maurice Obstfeld Economic Counsellor xiv International Monetary Fund | October 2017  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution EXECUTIVE SUMMARY International Monetary Fund | October 2017 xv The global upswing in economic activity is strengthening. Global growth, which in 2016 was the weakest since the global financial crisis at 3.2 percent, is projected to rise to 3.6 percent in 2017 and to 3.7 percent in 2018. The growth forecasts for both 2017 and 2018 are 0.1 percentage point stronger compared with the April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecast. Broad-based upward revisions in the euro area, Japan, emerging Asia, emerging Europe, and Russia where growth outcomes in the first half of 2017 were better than expected more than offset downward revisions for the United States and the United Kingdom. But the recovery is not complete: while the baseline outlook is strengthening, growth remains weak in many countries, and inflation is below target in most advanced economies. Commodity exporters, especially of fuel, are particularly hard hit as their adjustment to a sharp stepdown in foreign earnings continues. And while short- term risks are broadly balanced, medium-term risks are still tilted to the downside. The welcome cyclical pickup in global activity thus provides an ideal window of opportunity to tackle the key policy challenges namely to boost potential output while ensuring its benefits are broadly shared, and to build resilience against down- side risks. A renewed multilateral effort is also needed to tackle the common challenges of an integrated global economy. The global pickup in activity that started in the second half of 2016 gained further momentum in the first half of 2017. Growth is projected to rise over this year and next in emerging market and devel- oping economies, supported by improved external factors a benign global financial environment and a recovery in advanced economies. Growth in China and other parts of emerging Asia remains strong, and the still-difficult conditions faced by several commod- ity exporters in Latin America, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and sub-Saharan Africa show some signs of improvement. In advanced economies, the notable 2017 growth pickup is broad based, with stronger activity in the United States and Canada, the euro area, and Japan. Prospects for medium-term growth are more subdued, however, as negative output gaps shrink (leaving less scope for cyclical improve- ment) and demographic factors and weak productivity weigh on potential growth. Changes to aggregate growth forecasts relative to the April 2017 WEO are generally positive but modest, with some meaningful changes for specific country groups and individual countries.   In line with stronger-than-expected momentum in the first half of 2017, the forecast sees a stronger rebound in advanced economies in 2017 (to 2.2 percent versus 2.0 percent foreseen in April), driven by stronger growth in the euro area, Japan, and Canada. In contrast, compared with the April 2017 WEO forecast, growth has been marked down for 2017 in the United Kingdom and for both 2017 and 2018 in the United States, implying a 0.1 percentage-point aggregate growth downgrade for advanced economies in 2018. Activity in the United Kingdom slowed more than anticipated in the first half of 2017; as for the United States, given the significant policy uncertainty, the forecast now uses a baseline assumption of unchanged poli- cies, whereas in April it assumed a fiscal stimulus driven by then-anticipated tax cuts.   Growth prospects for emerging and developing economies are marked up by 0.1 percentage point for both 2017 and 2018 relative to April, primarily owing to a stronger growth projection for China. The country s 2017 forecast (6.8 percent, against 6.6 percent in April) reflects stronger growth outturns in the first half of 2017 as well as more buoyant external demand. For 2018, the revision mainly reflects an expectation that the authorities will maintain a sufficiently expansionary policy mix to meet their target of doubling real GDP between 2010 and 2020. Growth forecasts have also been marked up for emerging Europe for 2017, reflect- ing stronger growth in Turkey and other countries in the region, for Russia for 2017 and 2018, and Brazil in 2017. Financial market sentiment has generally been strong, with continued gains in equity markets in  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES both advanced and emerging market economies. Given current expectations of a more gradual pace of monetary policy normalization compared with March, US long-term interest rates have declined by some 25 basis points since then, and the dollar has depreciated by more than 5 percent in real effective terms, with a commensurate real appreciation of the euro. Despite expectations of more robust global demand going forward, commodity prices have remained low, with oil prices reflecting stronger-than-anticipated supply. Headline consumer price inflation has softened since the spring, as the boost to prices from the oil price recovery of 2016 has faded and the decline in oil prices in recent months has started to exert downward pressure. Despite stronger growth in domestic demand, core inflation has generally remained muted across advanced economies, reflecting still-weak wage growth (Chapter 2). Inflation is likely to rise only gradually toward central bank targets. Across emerging and developing economies, the waning of pass-through effects from earlier currency depreciations against the US dollar, and in some cases recent appreciations, have helped moderate core inflation rates. Short-term risks are broadly balanced. On the positive side, the recovery could strengthen further, supported by strong consumer and business confidence and benign financial conditions. At the same time, in an environment of high policy uncertainty and geo- political tensions, policy missteps which the baseline assumes will be avoided could take a toll on market confidence, resulting in tighter financial conditions and weaker asset prices. Risks to growth in the medium term are still skewed to the downside, owing to several potential hazards:   A more rapid and sizable tightening of global financial conditions. This could take the form of higher long- term interest rates in the United States and else- where, triggered by faster-than-expected monetary policy normalization or a decompression of term premia, with adverse repercussions for vulnerable economies. Monetary policy tightening in the euro area, if it had to come while the recovery in prices and growth is still lagging in highly indebted mem- ber economies, could pose risks for these econo- mies if they have not undertaken the needed fiscal adjustment and implemented structural reforms to boost supply potential. Tighter global financial conditions could also result from a sharp decrease in global risk appetite from its currently strong levels, which would take a toll on macroeconomic activity through weaker confidence, lower asset valuations, and wider risk premia.   Financial turmoil in emerging market economies. The upward revision to China s growth forecasts reflects a slower rebalancing of activity toward services and consumption, a higher projected debt trajectory, and diminished fiscal space. Unless the Chinese authori- ties counter the associated risks by accelerating their recent encouraging efforts to curb the expansion of credit, these factors imply a heightened probability of a sharp growth slowdown in China, with adverse international repercussions. Following a period of abundant credit supply, a sudden tightening of global financial conditions (and an associated US dollar appreciation) could expose financial fragili- ties in some emerging markets, imposing strains on economies with US dollar pegs, high leverage, and balance sheet mismatches.   Persistently low inflation in advanced economies. If domestic demand were to falter, it could lead to a decline in medium-term inflation expectations, prolonging and reinforcing the weakness in infla- tion. Low inflation and nominal interest rates would in turn reduce central banks  capacity to lower real interest rates to restore full employment in an eco- nomic downturn.   A broad rollback of the improvements in financial regulation and oversight achieved since the global financial crisis. Such a rollback could lower capital and liquidity buffers or weaken supervisory effective- ness, with negative repercussions for global financial stability.   An inward shift in policies. A shift toward protection- ism would reduce trade and cross-border investment flows, harming global growth.   Noneconomic factors. These would include geopoliti- cal tensions, domestic political discord, risks from weak governance and corruption, extreme weather events, and terrorism and security concerns, which could derail growth. These risks are closely interconnected and can be mutually reinforcing. For example, an inward turn in policies could be associated with increased geopoliti- cal tensions as well as with rising global risk aversion; noneconomic shocks can weigh directly on economic activity while shaking confidence and market senti- ment; and a faster-than-anticipated tightening of global xvi International Monetary Fund | October 2017  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution Executive Summary financial conditions or a shift toward protectionism in advanced economies could exacerbate capital outflow pressures on emerging markets. The welcome cyclical pickup in global economic activity after disappointing growth over the past few years provides an ideal window of opportunity to undertake key reforms designed to boost potential output and ensure that its benefits are broadly shared and to build resilience against downside risks. With countries still facing differences in cyclical conditions, varied stances of monetary and fiscal policy remain appropriate. Completing the economic recovery and adopting strategies to ensure fiscal sustainability remain important goals in many economies. Important areas of strategic focus include:   Raising potential output: Structural reforms and growth-friendly fiscal policy are needed to boost productivity and labor supply, with differing pri- orities across countries. Looking ahead, ongoing structural transformation (labor-saving technologi- cal change and cross-border competition) demands comprehensive policy approaches, including policies that reduce the pain of adjustment and provide opportunities for all.   Securing the recovery and building resilience: In advanced economies, monetary policy settings should remain accommodative until there are firm signs of inflation returning to targets. As docu- mented in Chapter 2, still-subdued wage pressures mostly reflect remaining slack, not fully captured by headline unemployment rates. At the same time, stretched asset valuations and increasing leverage in some parts of the financial sector require close mon- itoring, with proactive micro- and macroprudential supervision, as necessary. The stance of fiscal policy should be aligned with structural reform efforts, taking advantage of favorable cyclical conditions to place public debt on a sustainable path while supporting demand where still needed and feasible. As Chapter 4 emphasizes, higher public spending designed to boost potential output can result in both domestic benefits as well as positive spillovers to other countries, especially if it involves economies with slack and monetary accommodation. Indeed, adopting these policy recommendations would help reduce external imbalances, notably for advanced economies with excess surpluses, where stronger domestic demand would offset negative demand effects from the needed rebalancing by deficit countries. In many emerging market and developing economies, fiscal space to support demand is lim- ited, especially in commodity exporters. But mon- etary policy can generally be supportive, as inflation appears to have peaked in many countries. Exchange rate flexibility helps with the adjustment to com- modity price shocks. Efforts to improve governance and the investment climate would also strengthen growth prospects. In low-income countries, many of which need to undertake durable fiscal adjustment efforts and reduce financial vulnerabilities, growth- enhancing reforms would help make the best use of the coming demographic dividend by spurring job creation.   Strengthening international cooperation: For many of the challenges that the global economy confronts, individual country actions can be more effective if supported by multilateral cooperation. Preserving the global economic expansion will require policy- makers to avoid protectionist measures and to do more to ensure that gains from growth are shared more widely. In addition to preserving an open trad- ing system, key areas for collective action include: safeguarding global financial stability; achieving equitable tax systems and avoiding a race to the bot- tom; continuing to support low-income countries as they pursue their development goals; and mitigating and adapting to climate change. As Chapter 3 illus- trates, many of the economies suffering the worst consequences of higher temperatures and changed weather patterns are those with the fewest resources to deal with these challenges. Richer countries will increasingly feel direct negative effects from unmiti- gated climate change, however, and will not be immune to spillovers from the rest of the world. International Monetary Fund | October 2017 xvii  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution This page intentionally left blank  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 1 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The pickup in growth projected in the April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO) is strengthening. The global growth forecast for 2017 and 2018 3.6 percent and 3.7 percent, respectively is 0.1 percentage point higher in both years than in the April and July forecasts. Notable pickups in investment, trade, and industrial production, coupled with strengthening business and consumer confi- dence, are supporting the recovery. With growth outcomes in the first half of 2017 generally stronger than expected, upward revisions to growth are broad based, including for the euro area, Japan, China, emerging Europe, and Russia. These more than offset downward revisions for the United States, the United Kingdom, and India. However, the recovery is not complete: although the baseline outlook is better, growth remains weak in many countries. The outlook for advanced economies has improved, notably for the euro area, but in many countries inflation remains weak, indicating that slack has yet to be eliminated, and prospects for growth in GDP per capita are held back by weak productivity growth and rising old-age dependency ratios. Prospects for many emerging market and developing economies in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, and Latin Amer- ica are lackluster, with several experiencing stagnant per capita incomes. Fuel exporters are particularly hard hit by the protracted adjustment to lower commodity revenues. Risks to the baseline are broadly balanced in the short term but skewed to the downside in the medium term. Short-term growth could increase further, as stronger confidence and favorable market conditions unleash pent-up demand, but setbacks are also possible. With high policy uncertainty, missteps which the baseline assumes will be avoided or other shocks could materialize, taking a toll on market confidence and asset valuations, and tightening financial conditions. Over the medium term, dealing with financial sector challenges will be essential. Minimizing the risk of a sharp slowdown in China will require the Chinese authorities to intensify their efforts to rein in the credit expansion. Many other economies need to guard against a buildup of financial stability risks in a global environment of easy finance and monitor the risks from volatility as advanced economies  central banks gradually withdraw stimulus. A decom- pression of risk premiums and higher long-term interest rates would expose fragilities, including by worsening public debt dynamics. Although progress has been made in addressing European banking sector issues, remaining problems need to be addressed forcefully to avoid weak- ening confidence and fears of adverse feedback loops between low demand, prices, and balance sheets in parts of the euro area. Persistently low inflation in advanced economies, which could ensue if domestic demand were to falter, also carries significant risks, as it could lead to lower medium-term inflation expectations and interest rates, reducing central banks  capacity to cut real interest rates in an economic downturn. Although the chances of advanced economy policies turning inward appear to have diminished in the near term, pressures for increased protectionism have not disappeared and ought to be resisted. A host of noneconomic risks, including intensified conflict and geopolitical tensions, also remain salient. The welcome cyclical upturn after disappointing growth over the past few years provides an ideal window of opportunity to undertake critical reforms, thereby staving off downside risks and raising potential output and standards of living more broadly. Structural reforms and growth-friendly fiscal policy measures are needed to boost productivity and labor supply, with varying prior- ities across countries. In advanced economies, monetary policy should remain accommodative until there are firm signs of inflation returning to targets. At the same time, stretched asset valuations and increasing leverage in some market segments bear close monitoring, including through proactive micro- and macroprudential supervi- sion, as necessary. Fiscal policy should be aligned with structural reform efforts, taking advantage of favorable cyclical conditions to place public debt on a sustain- able path while supporting demand where still needed and feasible. In many emerging market and developing economies, fiscal space to support demand is limited, especially in commodity exporters. But monetary policy can generally be supportive because inflation appears to have peaked in many countries. Exchange rate flexibil- ity helps the adjustment to external shocks. Efforts to improve governance and the investment climate would also strengthen growth prospects. Growth-enhancing GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES 1 CHAPTER  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 2 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 reforms would help low-income countries many of which need to undertake durable fiscal adjustment efforts and reduce financial vulnerabilities make the best use of the coming demographic dividend by spurring job creation. Recent Developments and Prospects World Economy Keeping Its Momentum The pickup in global activity that started in 2016 gathered steam in the first half of 2017, reflecting firmer domestic demand growth in advanced econo- mies and China and improved performance in other large emerging market economies. The continued recovery in global investment spurred stronger man- ufacturing activity (Figures 1.1 and 1.2). World trade growth moderated in the second quarter after expand- ing very briskly in the first. Global purchasing manager indices and other high-frequency indicators for July and August suggest that global growth momentum continued into the third quarter of 2017. Among advanced economies, domestic demand and output grew faster in the first half of 2017 than in the second half of 2016. In the United States, weakness in consumption in the first quarter turned out to be temporary, while business investment continued to strengthen, partly reflecting a recovery in the energy sector. In the euro area and Japan, stronger private consumption, investment, and external demand bolstered overall growth momentum in the first half of the year. Growth in most of the other advanced economies, with the notable exception of the United Kingdom, picked up in the first half of 2017 from its pace in the second half of 2016, with both domestic and external demand contributing. Among emerging market and developing economies, higher domestic demand in China and continued recovery in key emerging market economies supported growth in the first half of 2017. In India, growth momentum slowed, reflecting the lingering impact of the authorities  currency exchange initiative as well as uncertainty related to the midyear introduction of the country-wide Goods and Services Tax. Higher external demand boosted growth in other emerging market economies in East Asia. In Brazil, strong export perfor- mance and a diminished pace of contraction in domes- tic demand allowed the economy to return to positive growth in the first quarter of 2017, after eight quarters of decline. Mexico maintained growth momentum, despite uncertainty related to the renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement and significant 0 1 2 3 4 2011: H1 13: H1 15: H1 17: H1 18: H2 4. Advanced Economies GDP Growth (Annualized semiannual percent change)  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 2012 13 14 15 16 Aug. 17  10  5 0 5 10 15 20  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 2011 12 13 14 15 16 Aug. 17 Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators 1. World Trade, Industrial Production, and Manufacturing PMI (Three-month moving average; annualized percent change , unless noted otherwise) Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics; Markit Economics; and IMF staff estimates. Note: CC = consumer con dence; PMI = purchasing managers  index; WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1Australia, Canada (PMI only), Czech Republic, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong SAR (CC only), Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand (PMI only), Norway (CC only), Singapore (PMI only), Sweden (CC only), Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China, United Kingdom, United States. 2Argentina (CC only), Brazil, China, Colombia (CC only), Hungary, India (PMI only), Indonesia, Latvia (CC only), Malaysia (PMI only), Mexico (PMI only), Philippines (CC only), Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand (CC only), Turkey, Ukraine (CC only). April 2017 WEO October 2017 WEO 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2011: H1 13: H1 15: H1 17: H1 18: H2 5. Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2. Manufacturing PMI (Three-month moving average; deviations from 50) 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 2012 13 14 15 16 Aug. 17 Advanced economies1 Emerging market economies2 Manufacturing PMI (deviations from 50; right scale) Industrial production 3. Consumer Con dence (Index, 2010 = 100) Advanced economies1 Emerging market economies2 World World trade volumes Global activity strengthened in the  rst half of 2017, re ecting  rmer domestic demand growth in advanced economies and China and improved performance in other large emerging market economies. Global manufacturing purchasing managers  indices indicate strong momentum continued into the third quarter.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 3 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 tightening of monetary policy over the past two years. Recovering domestic and external demand supported rebounding growth in Russia and Turkey. Internal and cross-border conflict in parts of the Middle East still weighed on economic activity, while Venezuela faced a political and humanitarian crisis amid a deepen- ing recession. Softer Commodity Prices The IMF s Primary Commodities Price Index declined by 5 percent between February and August 2017 that is, between the reference periods for the April 2017 WEO and the current report (Figure 1.3). Some of the biggest price drops were among fuels:   Oil prices fell by 8.1 percent between Febru- ary and August, even as the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some non-OPEC oil exporters announced in May that they would extend oil production cuts through the first quarter of 2018. The main drivers of lower prices were higher-than-expected US shale produc- tion and stronger-than-expected production recov- eries in Libya and Nigeria. In addition, exports from OPEC countries remained at relatively high levels, even with lower production. Following some strengthening in recent weeks, oil prices stood at about $50 a barrel as of late August, still lower than in the spring.   The natural gas price index an average for Europe, Japan, and the United States decreased by 9.6 per- cent from February to August 2017. The decline was mostly tied to seasonal factors and robust supply from the United States and Russia, and lower oil prices, which some natural gas prices are indexed to. The diplomatic rift between Qatar, the world s largest exporter of liquefied natural gas, and several other countries in the region, including Saudi Ara- bia, has not affected liquefied natural gas markets, as Qatar s exports have continued.   The coal price index an average of Australian and South African prices increased by 16.5 percent between February and August 2017. Following the end of the disruption to coal transportation in Australia caused by Cyclone Debbie in late March, coal prices declined until June. Strong demand from Figure 1.2. Global Fixed Investment and Trade Source: IMF staff calculations. 1Data for 2017:Q2 are based on preliminary estimates for Russia. 2Other countries include Brazil, Canada, India, Korea, Mexico, Russia, South Africa, Taiwan, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. Structures Other Equipment Unclassi ed Residential Total 1. Contribution of Gross Fixed Capital Formation to GDP Growth1 (Percentage point contribution, year-over-year)  6  3 0 3 6 9 12 2015:Q1 15:Q2 15:Q3 15:Q4 16:Q1 16:Q2 16:Q3 16:Q4 17:Q1 17:Q2 United States Euro area Japan 2. Real Merchandise Imports (Seasonally adjusted quarter-over-quarter annualized percent change) China Other countries2 World Investment began to pick up in the third quarter of 2016. Global trade accelerated as well, before moderating more recently.  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 2015:Q115:Q2 15:Q3 15:Q4 16:Q1 16:Q2 16:Q3 16:Q4 17:Q1 17:Q2 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates. Commodity prices softened during the  rst half of 2017. Average petroleum spot price Food Metals Figure 1.3. Commodity Prices (De ated using US consumer price index; index, 2014 = 100)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 4 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 China helped prices recover. Starting July 1, China imposed coal import restrictions on several ports to limit the adverse impact of lower international prices on production. Together with the cutback of coal production in China and sporadic labor disputes in coal mines in Australia, these restrictions have put renewed upward pressure on prices. Among nonfuel commodities, prices of metals were up modestly but agricultural commodity prices declined:   Metal prices have increased modestly (0.8 percent) from February to August, with considerable varia- tion across commodities. By June, the metal price index had reached its lowest point in eight months as demand projections (especially from the United States and China) were revised down. However, prices rebounded since and remained on an upward trajectory in August with the improvement in mac- roeconomic sentiment, especially in China. Copper and aluminum prices increased by slightly more than 9 percent between February and August 2017, reflecting strong demand and tight supplies; iron ore prices dropped by about 16 percent over the same period mainly because of an increase in supply from Australia, Brazil, and China.   The IMF s agricultural price index declined by 5 percent between February and August 2017. Cereal prices rallied in June amid concerns over hot and dry weather in the Northern Hemisphere, but then declined substantially in August as fore- casts for grain stocks at the end of the 2017 18 season increased unexpectedly. Meat prices increased on stronger-than-expected demand and tighter supplies. Muted Inflation Pressures Headline consumer price inflation has softened since the spring as the boost to prices from the oil price recovery of 2016 has faded and the decline in oil prices (between March and July) has started to exert downward pressure (Figure 1.4). Expectations of consumer price inflation for the year have therefore diminished, especially in emerging market and devel- oping economies. Core inflation inflation rates when fuel and food prices are excluded has been generally soft. In most advanced economies, core inflation has failed to decisively increase toward central bank targets, even as domestic demand has gathered pace and unemploy- ment rates have fallen compared with the previous  10  5 0 5 10 15 20 2013 14 15 16 Jul. 17 2 3 4 5 6 7 2013 14 15 16 Jul. 17 1 2 3 4 5 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Jun. 17 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.9 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 Jan. 16 Apr. 16 Jul. 16 Oct. 16 Jan. 17 Apr. 17 Aug. 17 Consumer price in ation Core consumer price in ation Figure 1.4. Global In ation (Three-month moving average; annualized percent change, unless noted otherwise) 3. Producer Price In ation1 Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: AEs = Advanced economies (AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST, FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HKG, IRL, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, NOR, PRT, SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, TWN, USA); EA = euro area; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies (BGR, BRA, CHL, CHN, COL, HUN, IDN, IND, MEX, MYS, PER, PHL, POL, ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, ZAF). Panel 6 is equalized to 100 in 2007 by shifting the level. Country list uses International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 1In panel 3, AEs excludes HKG, ISR, and TWN. EMDEs includes UKR; excludes IDN, IND, PER, and PHL. 2In panel 4, AEs includes AUS; excludes LUX. 3In panel 7, blue line includes AUS and NZL; excludes BEL. Red line includes AUS and MLT; excludes HKG, SGP, and TWN. 7. Unemployment Rate and Wage Growth in AEs3 (Percent)  2  1 0 1 2 3 2013 14 15 16 Jul. 17 1. Advanced Economies 2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies Unemployment rate (right inverted scale) Wage rate (two-quarter moving average; percent change from a year ago)  1 0 1 2 3 4 Jan. 16 Apr. 16 Jul. 16 Oct. 16 Jan. 17 Apr. 17 Jul. 17 5. Core Consumer Price In ation (Percent change from a year ago) United States United Kingdom EA Japan 96 98 100 102 104 106 2007 09 11 13 15 17: Q2 4. Consumer Price In ation Expectation for 2017 (Percent) World AEs EMDEs 6. Labor Income Shares (Percent) Headline consumer price in ation has moderated since the spring, re ecting a decline in oil prices. While unemployment rates have continued to decline, wage growth remains subdued. AEs2 EMDEs (right scale)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 5 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 year. Core inflation in the euro area has been stuck in low gear at about 1.2 percent since April (after hovering at just below 1 percent for a couple of years), while in Japan it remained slightly negative for six months through July. In the United States where core inflation is higher the annual change in the core personal consumption expenditure deflator (the Federal Reserve s preferred measure) declined from just below 2 percent in early 2017 to 1.4 percent in August. This decline in part reflected one-off factors (including a reduction in prices of cell phone plans and prescription drug prices). Many other advanced economies, including Australia, Canada, Denmark, Korea, Norway, and especially Taiwan Province of China, are also experiencing weak inflation pressure. The United Kingdom, where the strong depreciation of the pound since last summer has passed through into higher consumer prices, is an exception to this pattern. Sluggishness in core inflation in advanced economies a surprise in view of stronger-than-  expected activity has coincided with slow trans- mission of declining unemployment rates into faster wage growth. Real wages in most large advanced economies have moved broadly with labor productiv- ity in recent years, as indicated by flat labor income shares (Figure 1.4, panel 6). As shown in Chapter 2, muted growth in nominal wages in recent years partly reflects sluggishness in labor productivity.1 However, the analysis also reveals continued spare capacity in labor markets as a key drag: wage growth has been particularly soft where unemployment and the share of workers involuntarily working part time remain high. The corollary of this finding is that, once firms and workers become more confident in the outlook, and labor markets tighten, wages should accelerate. In the short term, higher wages should feed into higher unit labor costs (unless productivity picks up), and higher 1The part of the wage-inflation weakening attributable to lower productivity growth would likely have little or no pass-through into weaker price inflation, given that the changes would have no net effect on conventionally measured unit labor costs. A broad slowdown in total factor productivity and an interrelated decline in capital accu- mulation have been the drivers of the slowdown in labor productivity (Adler and others 2017). Shifts in the composition of the labor force since the global financial crisis may also have exerted downward pressure on productivity and wages. These shifts include the expanded shares of female and older workers, whose participation rates have generally risen (Box 1.1). New entrants tend to be paid less than exist- ing workers (Daly, Hobijn, and Pedtke 2017). A larger share of older workers has also been linked to slower productivity growth (Feyrer 2007; Aiyar, Ebeke, and Shao 2016; Adler and others 2017). prices should, in turn, spur nominal wage growth in a self-reinforcing dynamic. In many emerging market and developing econo- mies, the waning of pass-through effects from earlier exchange rate depreciations and, in some cases, recent appreciations against the US dollar, have helped moderate core inflation rates. However, much of the softening of core inflation in emerging market econo- mies in recent months can be attributed to India and Brazil, where a one-off drop in food price inflation in June and high excess capacity in the economy after two years of recession, respectively, have also contributed to weaker inflation. In China, core inflation remained broadly stable at about 2 percent in July. In con- trast, some other countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan region are experiencing continued inflationary pressures in 2017 as a result of exchange rate depreciations, the removal of subsidies, or increases in excise or value-added taxes. Supportive Financial Conditions Market sentiment has remained strong and vol- atility low since the publication of the most recent (April 2017) WEO, even as expectations of US fiscal easing have dimmed. On the monetary policy front, the US Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates in June to 1 1.25 percent, as expected. Following the Federal Open Market Committee announcement of September 20, markets priced in a 70 percent probability of one additional rate increase by the end of 2017. In most other advanced economies, the monetary policy stance remained broadly unchanged, except for Canada, which raised its policy rate by   of a percentage point in July and September. With markets pricing in a slightly more gradual nor- malization of US monetary policy than anticipated in the spring, given diminished expectations about fiscal stimulus, nominal yields on 10-year US Treasury bonds as of mid-September have declined by about 20 basis points from their March 2017 average (Figure 1.5). Long-term sovereign bond yields have remained broadly stable in Japan and Germany, risen by some 10 basis points in the United Kingdom, and declined by 20 30 basis points in France, Italy, and Spain, as spreads relative to German bund yields compressed sharply, particularly in the aftermath of the French presidential election. Equity markets in advanced econ- omies have continued to rise in recent months amid strong earnings, further improvements in consumer  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 6 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 and business confidence, and favorable macroeconomic data. Market volatility indicators remain low. With narrowing interest differentials, the US dollar weakened in real effective terms by over 7 percent from March to mid-September 2017 (Figure 1.6, panel 1), more than reversing its gains after the US election, whereas the euro and the Canadian dollar appreciated by 6 percent on stronger growth prospects and higher policy rates in Canada. Among other currencies, the yen depreciated by about 3 percent and the Swiss franc and Korean won by 4 percent. In emerging market economies, financial conditions since March generally have been supportive of a pickup in economic activity. Equity markets have strengthened (Figure 1.7); long-term interest rates on local-currency bonds have generally declined (Figure 1.8), China being the exception; and spreads on the Global Emerging Markets Bond Index have fallen slightly. As search for yield continues (Chapter 1 of the October Global Financial Stability Report [GFSR]), emerging market currencies have generally strengthened relative to the US dollar. As of August 2017, changes since March in real effective terms have generally been moderate (Figure 1.6, panel 2). The Mexican peso appreciated by 10 percent on tighter monetary policy and declining concerns about trade-related frictions with the United States, while the South African rand depreciated by 7 percent on domes- tic political uncertainty, the Brazilian real depreciated by over 4 percent on monetary policy easing and concerns about the reform agenda, and the Russian ruble depreci- ated by a similar amount on weakening oil prices. Capital flows to emerging market economies have remained resilient in recent months, continuing their recovery after a sharp decline in late 2015 and early 2016. As discussed in Box 1.2, this pattern reflects a pickup in capital flows to China and a strong global recovery in nonresident portfolio inflows in the first half of 2017 (Figure 1.9, panel 1) as investor optimism about the global economic outlook improved and financial conditions eased. Key Forces Shaping the Outlook Continued Cyclical Recovery in Advanced Economies (and Revisions to Potential Output) In advanced economies, the ongoing cyclical recovery is stronger than previously projected. Indeed, positive surprises in growth in the first half of 2017 typically occurred in countries where estimates for output were below potential in 2016 (Figure 1.10,  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 2017 18 19 Sep. 20 2. Policy Rate Expectations1 (Percent; dashed lines are from the April 2017 WEO) Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff calculations. Note: MSCI = Morgan Stanley Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor s; TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index; WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States, the sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro interbank offered forward rate for the euro area; updated September 15, 2017. 2Interest rates are 10-year government bond yields, unless noted otherwise. Data are through September 15, 2017. 3Data are through September 15, 2017. Figure 1.5. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions (Percent, unless noted otherwise) 10 15 20 25 30 35 2013 14 15 16 Sep. 17 6. Price-to-Earnings Ratios3 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 2013 14 15 16 Aug. 17 5. Equity Markets (Index, 2007 = 100) S&P 500  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 2013 14 15 16 Sep. 17 3. Key Interest Rates2 Japan United States 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 2015 16 17 18 19 Sep. 20 Sep. 16, 2015 Sep. 16, 2016 Nov. 8, 2016 Apr. 3, 2017 Sep. 15, 2017 US average 30-year  xed-rate mortgage United States Japan Germany Italy Germany 1. US Policy Rate Expectations1 MSCI Emerging Market Euro Stoxx TOPIX United States Euro area United Kingdom 0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200 2013 14 15 16 Sep. 17 4. Credit Spreads3 (Basis points) US high grade US high yield Euro high grade Euro high yield Market sentiment has been strong in advanced economies. Compared with the spring, a more gradual normalization of US monetary policy is anticipated and credit spreads remain compressed.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 7 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 panel 1). With growth generally above potential out- put, economic slack is gradually being reduced. Positive revisions to growth have also come with some upward revisions to the estimated path of potential out- put. Indeed, despite an upward revision to the cumula- tive growth rate over 2016 18 relative to the October 2016 WEO forecast of about 0.7 percentage point, the forecast of the output gap for 2018 has been revised in absolute terms by only half as much. As Figure 1.10, panel 2 shows, the upward revision to growth exceeds the decline in the output gap for most individual countries. The difference is explained by slightly higher projected potential growth during this period (about In real effective terms, the US dollar weakened by about 7 percent and the euro strengthened by 6 percent from March to August 2017. Changes in most emerging market currencies have been moderate.  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 USA EA JPN GBR SWE CHE KOR TWN SGP CAN NOR AUS NZL  12  8  4 0 4 8 12 16 ZAF CHN IND IDN MYS PHL THA HUN POL RUS TUR BRA CHL COL MEX PER Figure 1.6. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, November 2016 September 2017 (Percent) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: EA = euro area. Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 1Latest data available are for September 15, 2017. 2. Emerging Market Economies1 Latest relative to August 2017 August 2017 relative to March 2017 March 2017 relative to November 8, 2016 1. Advanced Economies1  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 20 25 2012 13 14 15 16 Jul. 17 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 2006 08 10 12 14 17: Q2 MEX (right scale) CHN MYS Figure 1.7. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and Credit BRA CHN IND MEX  10 0 10 20 30 40 2012 13 14 15 16 Jun 17 3. COL IDN MYS RUS TUR 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 2006 08 10 12 14 17: Q2 BRA COL IDN IND RUS TUR 4. 5. 2. 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 2012 13 14 15 16 Aug. 17 1. Equity Markets (Index, 2007 = 100) Emerging Europe China Emerging Asia excluding China Latin America Equity indices in emerging market economies have risen since the spring and credit growth remains supportive of a pickup in activity. Real Credit Growth1 (Year-over-year percent change) Credit-to-GDP Ratio1 (Percent) Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics (IFS) database; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 1Credit is other depository corporations  claims on the private sector (from IFS), except in the case of Brazil, for which private sector credit is from the Monetary Policy and Financial System Credit Operations published by Banco Central do Brasil, and China, for which credit is total social  nancing after adjusting for local government debt swaps.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 8 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 2013 14 15 16 Sep. 17 Emerging Europe China Emerging Asia excluding China Latin America 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 2013 14 15 16 Sep. 17 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 2012 13 14 15 16 Aug. 17 1. Policy Rate (Percent) Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates 3. Ten-Year Government Bond Yields2 (Percent) 4. EMBI Sovereign Spreads2 (Basis points)  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 BRA CHL CHN COL IDN IND MEX MYS PER PHL POL RUS THA TUR ZAF August 2016 August 2016 average August 2017 August 2017 average 2. Real Policy Rates1 (Percent) Long maturity yields on local currency debt have generally declined. Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia, and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 1De ated by two-year-ahead World Economic Outlook in ation projections. 2Data are through September 15, 2017.  6  3 0 3 6 9 12 15 2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17: Q1  40  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 40 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 Aug. 17 Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows 1. Net Flows in Emerging Market Funds (Billions of US dollars) 2. Capital In ows (Percent of GDP) Taper tantrum Greek crisis Irish crisis 1st ECB LTROs Bond Equity EM-VXY  6  3 0 3 6 9 12 15 2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17: Q1 3. Capital Out ows Excluding Change in Reserves (Percent of GDP)  6  3 0 3 6 9 12 15 2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17: Q1 4. Change in Reserves (Percent of GDP) Emerging Europe Emerging Asia excluding China Latin America China Saudi Arabia Emerging Europe Emerging Asia excluding China Latin America Emerging Europe Emerging Asia excluding China Latin America Total China Saudi Arabia Total China Saudi Arabia Total China equity market sell-off US presidential election Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; EPFR Global; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Capital in ows are net purchases of domestic assets by nonresidents. Capital out ows are net purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents. Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia, and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. ECB = European Central Bank; EM-VXY = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Volatility Index; LTROs = longer-term re nancing operations. Capital  ows to emerging market economies continued to recover.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 9 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 0.1 percentage point a year), driven by higher projected investment, which boosts productive capacity. With output in 2017 remaining slightly below potential for the advanced economies group, the cycli- cal recovery still has some room to run. This assess- ment is consistent with still elevated unemployment rates in a few countries and relatively high shares of workers who would prefer to work full time but can only obtain part-time work (Chapter 2). Medium-Term Growth in Advanced Economies  Structural Headwinds In the medium term, growth is expected to soften once gaps close (mostly expected in 2018 19) and out- put returns to growing at the same rate as its potential. Potential growth will be increasingly held back by slower growth in workforces as populations age and an increas- ing share of people enter retirement. The speed at which the aging process weighs on the labor force depends crucially on the labor force participation rates of various demographic groups. For the aggregate of advanced economies, labor force participation declined by 0.8 per- centage point between 2007 and 2016 for the adult pop- ulation, with a striking decline of 2.3 percentage points for men in contrast to a 0.7 percentage point increase for women (Box 1.1). Labor force participation rate changes differ notably across advanced economies, despite the overall similarity of demographic trends. For instance, the widely documented decline in the labor force par- ticipation rate in the United States contrasts with rising participation rates in many European countries, includ- ing Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom. Policy efforts that encourage further participation by women and reverse declines for men could postpone or soften the demographic shift s drag on potential output. Potential growth projections are also held back by the assumption that total factor productivity growth will recover only modestly from its low rate of the past few years and hence will stay well below the pace registered before the global financial crisis. Adler and others (2017) discuss in more detail the factors that can explain the decline in productivity growth over the past decade. Emerging Market Economies and Convergence Prospects The growth rate for emerging market and devel- oping economies is forecast to rise to 4.6 percent in 2017, 4.9 percent in 2018, and about 5 percent over the medium term. In per capita terms, growth rates are about 1.3 percentage points lower, but substan- tially above the per capita growth rate for advanced economies (1.4 percent, on average, during 2017 22), implying a gradual convergence in GDP per capita between the two country groups. For emerging market and developing economies, this pace of growth and convergence is slower than during the past decade, but faster than during 1995 2005. Underlying these aggregate figures is substantial heterogeneity in economic performance across emerging market and developing economies a theme explored in more detail in Box 1.3. The projected aggregate growth rate over 2017 22 is sustained by fast growth in the two  0.8  0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 USA GBR TWN CHE SWE ESP SVN SVK SGP PRT NOR NZL NLD MLT LUX LTU KOR JPN ITA ISR IRL ISL HKG GRC DEU FRA FIN EST DNKCZE CYP CAN EA AUT AUS 2017 growth surprise 2016 output gap (percent) 1. 2016 Output Gaps and 2017 Growth Surprises 2. Revisions to 2018 Output Gap and 2015  18 Growth Forecasts (Percentage points)  2  1 0 1 2 3 4  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 USA GBR TWN CHE SWE ESP SGP PRT NOR NZL NLD KOR JPN ITA ISR IRL HKG GRC DEU FRA FIN DEN CZE CAN BEL AUT AUS EA AEs Change in 2018 output gap Change in cumulative growth, 2015 18 45-degree line LVA Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: In panel 1, 2017 growth surprises are differences between current growth estimates for H1:2017 and projections in the October 2016 World Economic Outlook (WEO). In panel 2, revisions to output gap and growth forecasts are relative to the October 2016 WEO. Japan s latest  gures re ect comprehensive methodological revisions adopted in December 2016. Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. AEs = advanced economies; EA = euro area. The ongoing cyclical recovery is stronger than previously projected, with positive growth surprises in the  rst half of 2017 typically occurring in countries with output below estimated potential in 2016. Figure 1.10. Revisions to 2017 Growth and 2016 Output Gaps (Percent)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 10 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 largest countries, China and India, which account for more than 40 percent of GDP (whether measured at purchasing power parity or market rates) and more than 40 percent of the population of emerging market and developing economies.2 Indeed, the forecast for growth in GDP per capita falls below the group s aggregate fig- ure of 3.5 percent for about   of emerging market and developing economies. And for 43 economies (28 per- cent of the total), per capita growth rates are projected to be lower than for advanced economies, implying a decline in relative living standards rather than conver- gence. Box 1.3 also shows that very small economies (with populations of less than 500,000 people) and fuel exporters are overrepresented among the economies with weak projected growth. The challenges faced by very small economies, related to such factors as diseconomies of scale, lack of diversification, and the frequency of natural disasters, are well documented.3 As also highlighted in previous WEOs, many commodity exporters especially fuel exporters are still struggling to adjust to sharply lower commodity prices relative to those prevailing ear- lier in the decade. Adjustment to Terms-of-Trade Changes in Emerging Market and Developing Economies A modest cyclical recovery is at work in sev- eral emerging market and developing economies that underperformed in recent years because of terms-of-trade losses and idiosyncratic factors. The strength of the Chinese economy, as well as the broader cyclical rebound in manufacturing and trade, are providing some support to this recovery. Commodity prices have declined modestly relative to the spring, but remain generally higher than their 2016 averages. Movements in commodity terms of trade imply relatively small projected gains and losses in disposable income when compared with the very large losses for commodity exporters during 2015 16 (Figure 1.11). Many countries heavily dependent on commodity revenues still have much of the needed fiscal and external adjustment ahead of them, as also 2At market rates, GDP in China in 2016 exceeded the combined GDP of the next largest 12 emerging market and developing econo- mies ranked by size (India, Brazil, Russia, Mexico, Indonesia, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Argentina, Poland, Islamic Republic of Iran, Thailand, Nigeria). 3For instance, see IMF (2016b). Chapter 3 explores the macroeconomic implications of changes in weather patterns for low-income countries. discussed in the April 2017 Fiscal Monitor. So far, exchange rate flexibility has helped the adjustment  countries that allowed greater exchange rate flexibility have drawn less on their buffers (Box 1.4). Looking ahead, growth in commodity exporters is forecast to recover further, contributing significantly to the projected pickup in global growth between 2016 and 2022 (the last year of the WEO forecast hori- zon) (Figure 1.12, panels 2 3). Nevertheless, growth in commodity exporters is projected to remain well below its historical average and will account for only a modest share of total growth for emerging market and developing economies as a group (Figure 1.12, panel 1). In contrast, growth is projected to remain high for the group of commodity-importing countries, which account for the lion s share of global growth, with higher growth in India and other commodity importers more than offsetting a slowdown in China. A similar pattern is at play for low-income developing countries, where growth in commodity importers is forecast to exceed that in commodity exporters (Fig- ure 1.12, panel 4). The Forecast Policy and Other Assumptions Fiscal policy at the global level is projected to remain broadly neutral in 2017 and 2018. The overall neutral stance masks some variation across countries and important changes relative to the April 2017 WEO assumptions. Among advanced econo- mies, the fiscal stance (measured by the fiscal impulse) in 2017 is forecast to be broadly neutral, reflecting projected easing in Canada, Germany, Italy, and Korea; broadly neutral policy in Japan and the United States; and tightening in Spain (Figure 1.13, panels 1 and 2).4 For 2018, the forecast assumes moderate fiscal policy tightening in advanced economies, reflecting projected tightening in Japan, the United Kingdom, and to a lesser extent, the United States. The projected increase in the structural fiscal balance for the United States in 2018 in the current forecast is similar to the projection in the October 2016 WEO, but represents major tightening relative to the April 2017 assump- tions (which included a fiscal impulse of 1  percent of GDP between 2017 and 2019 on the basis of 4The fiscal impulse is defined as the change in the structural fiscal balance as a share of potential output.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 11 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 then-anticipated corporate and personal income tax reductions). In emerging market and developing econ- omies, fiscal policy is expected to be broadly neutral in both 2017 and 2018. (The projected looser fiscal pol- icy for the group in 2018 relative to the assumptions in April primarily reflects downward revisions for the structural fiscal balances of Brazil and China). On monetary policy, the forecast assumes a some- what more gradual normalization of the policy interest rate in the United States than projected in the April 2017 WEO. With US fiscal policy now set to be  2 0 2 4 6 8 USA EGY FRA TUR DEU POL ITA ESP JPN CHN IND THA PAK KOR  40  30  20  10 0 10 SAU KAZ DZA NGA IRN RUS COL MYS AUS CAN MEX BRA ARG IDN Figure 1.11. Emerging Markets: Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses 1. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Losses1 (Percent of GDP) 2. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains1 (Percent of GDP) 2015 2016 2017 18 (Apr. 2017 WEO commodity prices) 2017 18 (Oct. 2017 WEO commodity prices) 2017 18 (Apr. 2017 WEO commodity prices) 2017 18 (Oct. 2017 WEO commodity prices) 2. Terms 2015 2016 Commodity terms-of-trade shifts imply relatively small projected gains and losses in disposable income when compared with the very large losses for commodity exporters during 2015 16. Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1Gains (losses) for 2017 18 are simple averages of annual incremental gains (losses) for 2017 and 2018. The windfall is an estimate of the change in disposable income arising from commodity price changes. The windfall gain in year t for a country exporting x US dollars of commodity A and importing m US dollars of commodity B in year t   1 is de ned as ( ptAxt   1    ptBmt   1) / Yt   1, in which  ptA and  ptB are the percentage changes in the prices of A and B between year t   1 and year t, and Y is GDP in year t   1 in US dollars. See also Gruss (2014). 0 1 2 3 4 5 2016 2022 0 1 2 3 4 5 2016 2022 Noncommodity exporters excluding China, India, and Brazil Commodity exporters  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 1999 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 22  4 0 4 8 12 16 20 1999 2001 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 22 Figure 1.12. GDP Growth, 1999 2022 (Percent) 1. Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies Commodity exporters Noncommodity exporters in EMDEs excluding China China 4. Growth in Low-Income Developing Countries Nigeria Others Commodity exporters excluding Nigeria and Yemen Advanced economies India China 2. Contributions to World GDP Growth (PPP weights) 3. Contributions to World GDP Growth (Market weights) While commodity exporters are projected to grow at rates well below their historical averages, they are nevertheless expected to contribute signi cantly to the projected global growth pickup between 2016 and 2022. Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Commodity exporters includes fuel and nonfuel primary products exporters, as indicated in Table D of the Statistical Appendix, plus Brazil and Peru. EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; PPP = purchasing power parity.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 12 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 broadly neutral in 2017 and projected to tighten in 2018, monetary policy is projected to be moderately more accommodative than previously expected, given weaker projected demand and diminished inflation pressure. The US policy interest rate is projected to remain broadly unchanged at 100 125 basis points for the rest of 2017 and rise by about 75 basis points in 2018, reaching a long-term equilibrium rate of slightly less than 3 percent in 2020. In the euro area and Japan, the forecast assumes that monetary policy will remain very accommodative. Short-term rates are projected to remain negative in the euro area through 2018 and close to zero in Japan over the forecast horizon. The assumed monetary pol- icy stances across emerging market economies vary, reflecting these economies  diverse cyclical positions. Given faster-than-expected declines in inflation rates in many larger economies, such as Brazil, India, and Russia, the projected level of monetary policy inter- est rates for the group is somewhat lower than in the April 2017 WEO. Global financial conditions are assumed to remain accommodative, in line with the April projections. As discussed in Chapter 1 of the October 2017 GFSR, an easing of lending conditions in major economies is expected to offset the anticipated gradual rise in long-term interest rates, while the normalization of monetary policy in the United States and the United Kingdom is expected to proceed smoothly, without triggering large and protracted increases in financial market volatility. Except for several vulnerable econ- omies, most emerging markets are expected to face generally accommodative financial conditions, with higher policy rates partially offset by a recovery in risk appetite, as reflected in generally contained sovereign bond spreads and the uptick in most equity markets. Despite the recent decline in commodity prices, the IMF s commodity price index is expected to increase by 12.3 percent in 2017 from its average in 2016, and then fall slightly again in 2018, by 0.1 percent. After averaging $43 a barrel in 2016, oil prices are expected to average $50.3 a barrel in 2017 (down from $55.2 a barrel in the April 2017 WEO), and stay at about that level in 2018. Nonfuel commodity prices are expected to strengthen in 2017 18 from their 2016 averages because of stronger demand for metals from China, tight supply conditions for food, and a general pickup in global demand. Looking further ahead, futures markets point toward a slight rise in commodity prices by 2022.  2  1 0 1 2 Advanced economies Emerging market and developing economies 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 April 2017 WEO  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 2001 04 07 10 13 16 19 22 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 1950 60 70 80 90 2000 10 22 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1Japan's latest  gures re ect comprehensive methodological revisions adopted in December 2016. 2Data through 2000 exclude the United States. 3Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States. Figure 1.13. Fiscal Indicators (Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise) 3. Fiscal Balance 4. Gross Public Debt 1. Change in the Structural Fiscal Balance (Percentage points) World Advanced economies World Advanced economies2 Major advanced economies2,3 Emerging and developing Asia  1 0 1 2 3 United States Japan1 France, Germany, United Kingdom Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain 2. Change in the Structural Fiscal Balance (Percentage points) Latin America and the Caribbean 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 April 2017 WEO The projected overall neutral  scal policy stance for 2017 and 2018 masks variation across countries. Emerging market and developing economies Other emerging market and developing economies  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 13 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 While energy prices are expected to increase modestly because of growing demand in emerging markets, food prices are expected to fall moderately as some supply disruptions wane. Finally, against a backdrop of elevated policy uncer- tainty, the forecast rests on the assumption that major policy missteps are avoided. For instance, negotiations on the future economic relations between the United Kingdom and the European Union (EU) are assumed to proceed without raising excessive uncertainty, and the arrangements are expected to eventually settle in a manner that avoids a very large increase in eco- nomic barriers. Global Outlook for 2017 18 World growth is projected to increase from 3.2 per- cent in 2016 to 3.6 percent in 2017 and 3.7 percent in 2018 an upward revision of 0.1 percentage point for both 2017 and 2018 relative to April. Economic activity is projected to pick up speed in all country groups except for the Middle East, and forecasts of the strength of the outlook by region have changed only modestly (Table 1.1). In line with a stronger-than-expected rise in growth in advanced economies so far in 2017 (especially in the euro area), their projected growth rate has been revised upward to 2.2 percent for 2017 (from 2 percent pro- jected in April) a notable increase from 1.7 percent in 2016. The advanced economy forecast for 2018 is unchanged, with lower projected US growth (under the assumption that fiscal policy will not provide the previously envisaged boost to demand) offsetting higher projected growth in the euro area. Growth is forecast to increase strongly in emerging market and developing economies, from an upwardly revised 4.3 percent in 2016 to 4.6 percent in 2017 and 4.9 percent in 2018, a 0.1 percentage point increase for 2017 and 2018 relative to the April forecast. The upward revisions to the growth forecast primarily reflect stronger projected activity in China and in emerging Europe for 2017 and 2018. As discussed earlier, although commodity importers account for the lion s share of growth in emerging mar- ket and developing economies, the projected increase in growth from 2016 is driven primarily by stronger projected growth for commodity exporters, most notably Brazil and Russia, that experienced severe mac- roeconomic strains during 2015 16. As emphasized in previous WEO reports and in Box 1.3, prospects across emerging market and developing economies remain heterogeneous, with emerging Asian countries generally growing at a fast pace, but many countries in Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Middle East struggling with subpar performance. Growth Outlook for the Medium Term Global growth is forecast to increase marginally beyond 2018, reaching 3.8 percent by 2021. With growth in advanced economies projected to gradually decline toward potential growth rates of about 1.7 per- cent once economic slack is eliminated, this further pickup in global activity is entirely driven by emerging market and developing economies. In these countries, growth is projected to increase to 5 percent by the end of the forecast period, with their impact on global activity boosted by their rising world economic weight. This forecast assumes some strengthening of growth in commodity exporters, though to rates much more modest than in 2000 15; a gradual increase in India s growth rate resulting from implementation of import- ant structural reforms; continued strong growth in other commodity importers; and a lower but still high trend growth rate in China (Figure 1.12, panels 1 3). Growth Outlook for Individual Countries and Regions Advanced Economies   The US economy is projected to expand at 2.2 per- cent in 2017 and 2.3 percent in 2018. The projec- tion of a continuation of near-term growth that is moderately above potential reflects very supportive financial conditions and strong business and con- sumer confidence. The downward revision relative to the April WEO forecasts (of 2.3 and 2.5 percent for 2017 and 2018, respectively) reflects a major correction in US fiscal policy assumptions. Given the significant policy uncertainty, IMF staff s macro- economic forecast now uses a baseline assumption of unchanged policies, whereas the April 2017 WEO built in a fiscal stimulus from anticipated tax cuts. Over a longer horizon, US growth is expected to moderate. Potential growth is estimated at 1.8 per- cent, reflecting the assumption of continued sluggish growth in total factor productivity and diminished growth of the workforce due to population aging.   The euro area recovery is expected to gather strength this year, with growth projected to rise to 2.1 per- cent in 2017, before moderating to 1.9 percent in  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 14 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (Percent change, unless noted otherwise) 2016 Projections Difference from July 2017 WEO Update1 Difference from April 2017 WEO1 2017 2018 2017 2018 2017 2018 World Output 3.2 3.6 3.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Advanced Economies 1.7 2.2 2.0 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.0 United States 1.5 2.2 2.3 0.1 0.2  0.1  0.2 Euro Area 1.8 2.1 1.9 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.3 Germany 1.9 2.0 1.8 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.3 France 1.2 1.6 1.8 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 Italy 0.9 1.5 1.1 0.2 0.1 0.7 0.3 Spain 3.2 3.1 2.5 0.0 0.1 0.5 0.4 Japan2 1.0 1.5 0.7 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.1 United Kingdom 1.8 1.7 1.5 0.0 0.0  0.3 0.0 Canada 1.5 3.0 2.1 0.5 0.2 1.1 0.1 Other Advanced Economies3 2.2 2.6 2.5 0.3 0.1 0.3 0.1 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.3 4.6 4.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 Commonwealth of Independent States 0.4 2.1 2.1 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.0 Russia  0.2 1.8 1.6 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.2 Excluding Russia 1.9 2.9 3.3 0.4  0.2 0.4  0.2 Emerging and Developing Asia 6.4 6.5 6.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 China 6.7 6.8 6.5 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 India4 7.1 6.7 7.4  0.5  0.3  0.5  0.3 ASEAN-55 4.9 5.2 5.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe 3.1 4.5 3.5 1.0 0.3 1.5 0.2 Latin America and the Caribbean  0.9 1.2 1.9 0.2 0.0 0.1  0.1 Brazil  3.6 0.7 1.5 0.4 0.2 0.5  0.2 Mexico 2.3 2.1 1.9 0.2  0.1 0.4  0.1 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 5.0 2.6 3.5 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.1 Saudi Arabia 1.7 0.1 1.1 0.0 0.0  0.3  0.2 Sub-Saharan Africa 1.4 2.6 3.4  0.1  0.1 0.0  0.1 Nigeria  1.6 0.8 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 South Africa 0.3 0.7 1.1  0.3  0.1  0.1  0.5 Memorandum European Union 2.0 2.3 2.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 Low-Income Developing Countries 3.6 4.6 5.2 0.0 0.0  0.1  0.1 Middle East and North Africa 5.1 2.2 3.2 0.0 0.2  0.1 0.0 World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates 2.5 3.0 3.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 World Trade Volume (goods and services) 2.4 4.2 4.0 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.1 Imports Advanced Economies 2.7 4.0 3.8 0.0 0.2 0.0  0.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2.0 4.4 4.9 0.1 0.2  0.1 0.6 Exports Advanced Economies 2.2 3.8 3.6  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2.5 4.8 4.5 1.0 0.0 1.2 0.2 Commodity Prices (US dollars) Oil6  15.7 17.4  0.2  3.8  0.3  11.5 0.1 Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export weights)  1.8 7.1 0.5 1.7 1.9  1.4 1.8 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies 0.8 1.7 1.7  0.2  0.1  0.3  0.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies7 4.3 4.2 4.4  0.3  0.2  0.5 0.0 London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) On US Dollar Deposits (six month) 1.1 1.4 1.9  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.9 On Euro Deposits (three month)  0.3  0.3  0.3 0.0  0.1 0.0  0.1 On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month) 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during July 20 August 17, 2017. Economies are listed on the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.  Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2017 World Economic Outlook Update, and April 2017 World Economic Outlook forecasts. 2Japan s historical national accounts figures reflect a comprehensive revision by the national authorities, released in December 2016. The main revisions are the switch from the System of National Accounts 1993 to the System of National Accounts 2008 and the updating of the benchmark year from 2005 to 2011. 3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 4For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a base year.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 15 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table 1.1 (continued) Year-over-Year Q4-over-Q48 Projections Projections 2015 2016 2017 2018 2015 2016 2017 2018 World Output 3.4 3.2 3.6 3.7 3.2 3.2 3.7 3.7 Advanced Economies 2.2 1.7 2.2 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.2 1.9 United States 2.9 1.5 2.2 2.3 2.0 1.8 2.3 2.3 Euro Area 2.0 1.8 2.1 1.9 1.9 1.9 2.2 1.7 Germany 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.3 1.9 2.2 1.8 France 1.1 1.2 1.6 1.8 1.0 1.2 2.1 1.4 Italy 0.8 0.9 1.5 1.1 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.0 Spain 3.2 3.2 3.1 2.5 3.5 3.0 3.1 2.1 Japan2 1.1 1.0 1.5 0.7 1.1 1.7 1.4 0.5 United Kingdom 2.2 1.8 1.7 1.5 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.5 Canada 0.9 1.5 3.0 2.1 0.4 2.0 3.0 2.0 Other Advanced Economies3 2.1 2.2 2.6 2.5 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.6 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.3 4.3 4.6 4.9 4.4 4.2 5.0 5.2 Commonwealth of Independent States  2.2 0.4 2.1 2.1  2.8 0.6 1.9 2.2 Russia  2.8  0.2 1.8 1.6  3.3 0.3 1.9 2.0 Excluding Russia  0.6 1.9 2.9 3.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . Emerging and Developing Asia 6.8 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.2 6.6 6.5 China 6.9 6.7 6.8 6.5 6.8 6.8 6.5 6.5 India4 8.0 7.1 6.7 7.4 8.9 5.6 7.9 7.4 ASEAN-55 4.9 4.9 5.2 5.2 4.9 4.8 5.3 5.2 Emerging and Developing Europe 4.7 3.1 4.5 3.5 4.8 3.8 2.6 4.7 Latin America and the Caribbean 0.1  0.9 1.2 1.9  1.3  1.1 1.7 2.0 Brazil  3.8  3.6 0.7 1.5  5.8  2.5 1.9 1.8 Mexico 2.6 2.3 2.1 1.9 2.5 2.3 1.0 3.2 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 2.7 5.0 2.6 3.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . Saudi Arabia 4.1 1.7 0.1 1.1 4.3 2.2 0.6 1.4 Sub-Saharan Africa 3.4 1.4 2.6 3.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . Nigeria 2.7  1.6 0.8 1.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . South Africa 1.3 0.3 0.7 1.1 0.3 0.4 1.1 0.8 Memorandum European Union 2.3 2.0 2.3 2.1 2.3 2.1 2.2 2.0 Low-Income Developing Countries 4.7 3.6 4.6 5.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . Middle East and North Africa 2.6 5.1 2.2 3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates 2.7 2.5 3.0 3.1 2.4 2.6 3.1 3.0 World Trade Volume (goods and services) 2.8 2.4 4.2 4.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . Imports Advanced Economies 4.6 2.7 4.0 3.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . Emerging Market and Developing Economies  0.9 2.0 4.4 4.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . Exports Advanced Economies 3.8 2.2 3.8 3.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . Emerging Market and Developing Economies 1.8 2.5 4.8 4.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . Commodity Prices (US dollars) Oil6  47.2  15.7 17.4  0.2  43.4 16.2 1.4 1.1 Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export weights)  17.5  1.8 7.1 0.5  19.1 9.9 3.1 0.6 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies 0.3 0.8 1.7 1.7 0.4 1.2 1.5 1.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies7 4.7 4.3 4.2 4.4 4.6 3.7 3.9 3.7 London Interbank Offered Rate (percent) On US Dollar Deposits (six month) 0.5 1.1 1.4 1.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . On Euro Deposits (three month) 0.0  0.3  0.3  0.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month) 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . 5Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam. 6Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $42.84 in 2016; the assumed price based on futures markets is $50.28 in 2017 and $50.17 in 2018. 7Excludes Argentina and Venezuela. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 8For World Output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market and developing economies  output at purchasing-power-parity weights.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 16 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 2018 (slightly stronger than the 1.8 percent growth estimated for 2016). The forecast is 0.4 percentage point and 0.3 percentage point higher for 2017 and 2018, respectively, relative to April. The increase in growth in 2017 mostly reflects an acceleration in exports in the context of the broader pickup in global trade and continued strength in domes- tic demand growth supported by accommodative financial conditions amid diminished political risk and policy uncertainty. Growth is forecast to pick up this year and moderate next year in Germany (2.0 percent in 2017 and 1.8 percent in 2018), hold steady this year and moderate next year in Spain (3.1 percent in 2017 and 2.5 percent in 2018), rise this year and next in France (1.6 percent in 2017 and 1.8 percent in 2018), and increase this year and soften next year in Italy (1.5 percent in 2017 and 1.1 percent in 2018). The medium-term outlook for the euro area remains subdued because projected potential growth is held back by weak productivity, adverse demographics and in some countries, a public and private debt overhang.   Growth in the United Kingdom is projected to sub- side to 1.7 percent in 2017 and 1.5 percent in 2018. The 0.3 percentage point downward revision to the 2017 forecast relative to the April 2017 WEO is driven by weaker-than-expected growth outturns for the first two quarters of the year. The slowdown is driven by softer growth in private consumption as the pound s depreciation weighed on household real income. The medium-term growth outlook is highly uncertain and will depend in part on the new economic relationship with the EU and the extent of the increase in barriers to trade, migration, and cross-border financial activity.   In Japan, momentum is driven by the strengthening of global demand and policy actions to sustain a supportive fiscal stance, and is expected to con- tinue in 2017, with growth forecast at 1.5 percent. The pace of expansion is expected to weaken thereafter (to 0.7 percent in 2018), based on the assumption that fiscal support fades as currently scheduled, private consumption growth moderates, and the boost from 2020 Olympics-related private investment is offset by higher imports and slower projected growth in foreign demand. Over the medium term, a shrinking Japanese labor force will curtail GDP growth although, in per capita income terms, Japan s growth is projected to remain close to recent averages.   In most other advanced economies, the pace of activity is expected to accelerate. o o Growth in oil-exporting advanced economies is projected to recover. In 2017, it is forecast to rise to 1.4 percent in Norway, and increase (by about 1  percentage points) to 3.0 percent in Canada. This growth pickup reflects reduced drag from the adjustment to lower oil and gas prices and accommodative fiscal and monetary policies. By contrast, growth is expected to soften temporarily to 2.2 percent in Australia, where housing invest- ment and mining exports in the first half of the year were undermined by bad weather. o o A pickup in growth for 2017 is projected in Korea (to 3.0 percent), Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (to 3.5 percent), Taiwan Province of China (to 2.0 percent), and Singapore (to 2.5 percent). A common driver behind this projected pickup (which is generally stronger than projected in the April 2017 WEO) is the recovery in global trade and China s import demand. Emerging Market and Developing Economies   In China, growth is projected to notch up to 6.8 percent in 2017, and to slow to 6.5 percent in 2018. The upward revision to the 2017 fore- cast 0.2 percentage point relative to the April 2017 WEO reflects the stronger-than-expected outturn in the first half of the year underpinned by previous policy easing and supply-side reforms. For 2018, the upward revision of 0.3 percentage point mainly reflects an expectation that the authorities will maintain a sufficiently expansionary policy mix (especially through high public investment) to meet their target of doubling real GDP between 2010 and 2020. Growth rates for 2019 22 have similarly been revised upward by 0.2 percentage point, on average, reflecting the assumed delay in withdrawing stimulus. Delay comes at the cost of further large increases in debt, however, so downside risks around this baseline have also increased.   In the rest of emerging market and developing Asia, growth is expected to be vigorous and marginally higher than in the April 2017 WEO. Strong gov- ernment spending and data revisions in India led to an upward revision of 2016 growth to 7.1 percent (6.8 percent in April), with upward revisions of about 0.2 percentage point, on average, for 2014 and 2015. However, the growth projection for 2017 has been revised down to 6.7 percent (7.2 percent in  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 17 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 April), reflecting still lingering disruptions associated with the currency exchange initiative introduced in November 2016, as well as transition costs related to the launch of the national Goods and Services Tax in July 2017. The latter move, which promises the unification of India s vast domestic market, is among several key structural reforms under implementa- tion that are expected to help push growth above 8 percent in the medium term. In the ASEAN-5 economies (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thai- land, Vietnam), growth is expected to strengthen in 2017 to 5.2 percent (from 5 percent in April), partly because of stronger-than-expected external demand from China and Europe. Specifically, economic activity in 2017 is projected to expand by 5.2 per- cent in Indonesia, 5.4 percent in Malaysia, 6.6 per- cent in the Philippines, 3.7 percent in Thailand, and 6.3 percent in Vietnam.   In Latin America and the Caribbean, where GDP contracted by almost 1 percent in 2016, real GDP is projected to increase by 1.2 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018 broadly as in the April 2017 WEO. Although growth is holding up well in Cen- tral America and strengthening, on average, in the Caribbean, domestic demand continues to under- perform in much of the rest of the region, and some idiosyncratic factors are playing a key role in shaping substantially different outlooks across countries. o o In Mexico, growth is expected to soften to 2.1 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018. Despite the uncertainty related to renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement and a downward revision to economic activity in the United States, growth for 2017 has been revised upward by 0.4 percent since the April 2017 WEO, reflecting better-than-expected growth outturns for the first two quarters of the year and a recovery in financial market confidence. In the medium term, the assumed full implementation of the structural reform agenda is projected to lift growth to 2.7 percent. o o After entering positive territory in the first half of 2017, growth in Brazil is expected to reach 0.7 percent for the year and 1.5 percent in 2018. A bumper crop and a boost to consumption, including from allowing workers to draw on sav- ings accumulated in their severance accounts, led to an upward revision of half a percentage point in 2017 relative to the April forecast, but ongoing weakness in investment and an increase in polit- ical and policy uncertainty led to a downward revision of the 2018 forecast of 0.2 percentage point. A gradual restoration of confidence as key reforms to ensure fiscal sustainability are implemented over time is projected to raise growth to 2 percent in the medium term. o o In Argentina, growth is projected to rebound to 2.5 percent in 2017 from last year s recession as higher real wages boost consumption; investment picks up, supported by public works; and exports benefit from stronger external demand. Growth is expected to remain about 2  percent in 2018, as private domestic demand continues to improve gradually against the backdrop of tight macro- economic policy settings (high real interest rates required by the disinflation process and the start of the fiscal consolidation). The intensification of the political crisis in Venezuela weighs heav- ily on economic activity, which is expected to contract by more than 10 percent in 2017 as oil production declines and uncertainty rises further. In Chile, growth is projected to be 1.4 percent in 2017 amid weakness in private fixed investment, mining output, and public consumption, and to recover to 2.5 percent in 2018 amid growing confidence, higher copper prices, and interest rate cuts implemented over the past few months. In Colombia, growth is projected to be 1.7 per- cent in 2017, amid continued adjustment to lower revenues. Higher infrastructure spending, investment-friendly tax reform, and the boost in confidence from the peace agreement are expected to raise growth to about 3.5 percent in the medium term.   The outlook for the Commonwealth of Indepen- dent States continues to improve, following a deep recession in 2015 and very shallow growth in 2016, with growth projected at 2.1 percent in 2017 and 2018 an upward revision of 0.4 percentage point for 2017 relative to the April 2017 WEO. After two years of recession, economic activity in Russia is pro- jected to expand by 1.8 percent in 2017, helped by stabilizing oil prices, easing financial conditions, and improved confidence. Over the medium term, how- ever, growth is expected to remain about 1.5 per- cent, constrained by moderate oil prices, adverse demographics, and other structural impediments. Among other oil exporters, growth in Kazakhstan is projected to rise to 3.3 percent in 2017 on the back of strong oil production.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 18 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017   In emerging and developing Europe, short-term growth has been revised upward to 4.5 percent (from 3.0 percent in the April 2017 WEO). This change is driven to an important extent by the revision to Turkey s growth in 2017 to 5.1 percent (2.5 percent in April), reflecting a stronger-than-expected outturn in the first quarter of the year, driven in part by a recovery in exports after several quarters of contraction and a more expansionary fiscal stance. The outlook was also revised up for Poland (to 3.8 percent in 2017 and 3.3 percent in 2018), reflecting better-than-expected growth in the first half of 2017 and the expected pickup in EU-funded projects.   Economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa is pro- jected to reach 2.6 percent in 2017 and 3.4 percent in 2018 (broadly in line with the April forecast), with sizable differences across countries. Downside risks have risen because of idiosyncratic factors in the region s largest economies and delays in imple- menting policy adjustments. Beyond the near term, growth is expected to rise gradually, but barely above population growth, as large consolidation needs weigh on public spending. Nigeria is expected to emerge from the 2016 recession caused by low oil prices and the disruption of oil production. Growth in 2017 is projected at 0.8 percent, owing to recov- ering oil production and ongoing strength in the agricultural sector. However, concerns about policy implementation, market segmentation in a foreign exchange market that remains dependent on central bank interventions (despite initial steps to liberalize the foreign exchange market), and banking-system fragilities are expected to weigh on activity in the medium term. In South Africa, growth is pro- jected to remain subdued at 0.7 percent in 2017 and 1.1 percent in 2018, despite more favorable commodity export prices and strong agricultural production, as heightened political uncertainty saps consumer and business confidence. In Angola, growth in 2017 has been revised upward to 1.5 per- cent (1.3 percent in April) because a downward revision to oil production in 2016 has raised the extent of the expected rebound. The outlook for fuel-importing countries is generally brighter, with an aggregate growth rate of 3.9 percent in 2017, rising to 4.4 percent in 2018.   In the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, growth is projected to slow significantly in 2017 to 2.6 percent (from 5.0 percent in 2016) on the back of a slowdown in the Islamic Republic of Iran s economy after very fast growth in 2016 and cuts in oil production in oil exporters through March 2018 under the extended OPEC agreement. In 2018, growth is expected to increase to 3.5 per- cent, mostly reflecting stronger domestic demand in oil importers and a rebound of oil production in oil exporters. However, regional insecurity and geopolitical risks still weigh on the outlook. In Saudi Arabia, although non-oil growth is expected to strengthen somewhat this year, overall output is expected to be broadly flat as real oil GDP declines as a result of the commitments under the extended OPEC agreement. In 2018, growth is projected to increase to 1.1 percent, reflecting an increase in oil output associated with the expiration of the OPEC agreement. Economic prospects in Pakistan have improved, with growth expected to reach 5.3 per- cent in 2017 and 5.6 percent in 2018, benefiting from investment in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and strong private sector credit. In Egypt, growth was 4.1 percent in fiscal year 2017 according to preliminary estimates, and is forecast to reach 4.5 percent in 2018, supported by reforms aimed at correcting fiscal and external imbalances, restoring competitiveness, and creating jobs. Inflation Outlook for 2017 18 Headline inflation rates are projected to increase in both advanced and emerging market and devel- oping economies, though somewhat less briskly than anticipated in the April 2017 WEO, partly reflecting weaker-than-expected oil prices. In advanced econo- mies, inflation is forecast to pick up from 0.8 percent in 2016 to 1.7 percent in 2017, reflecting the contin- ued cyclical recovery in demand and the increase in commodity prices in the second half of 2016. Head- line inflation is expected to stay at 1.7 percent in 2018 before converging to 2 percent over the medium term. Inflation in emerging market and developing econo- mies (excluding Argentina and Venezuela) is projected to remain roughly stable in 2017 and 2018 (at 4.2 per- cent and 4.4 percent, respectively close to the 2016 estimate of 4.3 percent).   Because of weaker fuel prices and negative shocks linked to cell phone prices and prescription drugs, headline inflation in the United States is expected to increase by less than envisioned in the April 2017 WEO, though it will still increase signifi-  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 19 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 cantly. Consumer price inflation is projected to reach 2.1 percent in 2017 (2.7 percent in the April WEO), up from 1.3 percent in 2016. Core personal consumer expenditure inflation remains subdued and is projected to rise more slowly, slightly exceeding 2 percent in 2019 before returning to the medium-term objective of 2 percent targeted by the Federal Reserve.   Inflation is also projected to pick up in the euro area, from 0.2 percent in 2016 to 1.5 percent this year, mostly reflecting higher energy prices and the ongoing cyclical recovery in demand. But under- lying inflation remains stubbornly low and wage growth subdued amid still-high unemployment in some countries. Headline inflation is projected to converge to core inflation as energy price effects dissipate and gradually approach the European Cen- tral Bank s objective of below but close to 2 percent over the next few years, reaching 1.9 percent only in 2021. In the United Kingdom, the headline inflation rate is projected to peak at 2.6 percent this year, up from 0.7 percent in 2016, before gradually declining to the Bank of England s target of 2 per- cent as the temporary effect of the pound s depre- ciation wanes and inflation expectations remain well anchored.   Headline inflation rates are expected to return to positive territory in all advanced economies that experienced deflation in 2016. In particular, head- line inflation in Japan, after being slightly negative in 2016, is expected to increase to 0.4 percent in 2017 on the back of higher energy prices on a year-over-year basis and a narrowing output gap. But inflation rates are projected to remain below the Bank of Japan s target throughout the fore- cast horizon.   The modest increase in inflation rates projected for emerging market and developing economies as a group conceals sizable cross-country differences. Headline inflation in China is expected to remain tame at 1.8 percent in 2017, reflecting weakening food prices in recent months, and to pick up gradu- ally to 2.6 percent over the medium term. Inflation rates in Brazil and Russia are forecast to decline faster than projected in the April 2017 WEO, reflecting stronger effects from negative output gaps, currency appreciations, and favorable supply shocks to food prices. In Mexico, headline inflation is expected to rise to 5.9 percent this year because of the liberalization of domestic fuel prices and pass-through from the peso s depreciation through January 2017, and to fall within Banco de M xico s tolerance band of 2 4 percent in 2018. In Argen- tina, annual consumer price index inflation is pro- jected to decline sharply during 2017 and 2018 as the impacts of the large exchange rate depreciation and tariff adjustment in 2016 fade, the central bank maintains a tight monetary policy stance, and wage negotiations become more forward looking. After rising to 6.3 percent in 2016, headline inflation in South Africa is forecast to decline to 5.4 percent in 2017, which is within the target band; slowing wage growth, a widening output gap, and the easing of drought conditions are expected to more than offset the effect of higher oil prices and an increase in excise taxes. The inflation rate in Turkey has spiked, following the lira s depreciation, and is expected to remain above the 5 percent target throughout the forecast horizon. Inflation in 2017 18 is expected to remain elevated at two-digit levels in Angola and Nigeria, reflecting the persistent effects of past inflationary shocks coming from sharp currency depreciations (including of the parallel exchange rate) as well as higher electricity and fuel prices and, in the case of Nigeria, reflecting the assumption that monetary policy will remain accommodative going forward. External Sector Outlook Global trade is estimated to have grown by 2.4 per- cent in 2016 in volume terms, the slowest pace since 2009, with weak growth in both advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies. In the former, weaker trade growth was related to an investment slowdown and inventory adjustment, especially during the first part of the year. In the latter, persistent weakness in trade growth was related to a protracted trade slowdown in China and a sharp import contraction in some commodity exporters facing macroeconomic strains, notably Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Common- wealth of Independent States. As discussed earlier, global trade growth picked up meaningfully in late 2016 and early 2017, reflecting a recovery in global demand and especially capital spending. Consequently, global trade growth is projected to rebound to about 4 percent in 2017 and into the medium term, about 1 percentage point higher than GDP growth at market exchange rates.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 20 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Global current account imbalances have been broadly unchanged since 2013, with a marginal narrowing in 2016 that is projected to continue in 2017 and the following few years (Figure 1.14, panel 1). Their compo- sition has shifted, becoming more heavily concentrated in advanced economies. Among creditor countries, the cur- rent account balance is projected to show some improve- ment in oil-exporting countries, thanks to the increase in oil prices since their 2016 troughs, and to decline slightly in China as imports recover. Among debtor countries, current account deficits are expected to moderate in coun- tries in the  other advanced economies  group, including Australia and especially the United Kingdom. Although there is no normative presumption that current account deficits and surpluses should be com- pressed, the IMF s 2017 External Sector Report highlights how in 2016 current account imbalances in some of the world s largest economies were too large in relation to country-specific norms consistent with underlying funda- mentals and desirable policies. Current account balances are expected to move in a direction consistent with a narrowing of these excess imbalances, even under the assumption of constant real exchange rates underpinning the projections. The first panel of Figure 1.15 depicts on the horizontal axis the gap between the 2016 current account balance and its norm and, on the vertical axis, the projected change in the current account balance in 2017. The strong negative correlation ( 0.6) implies that current account balances are expected to begin reducing gaps relative to the 2016 current account norm. The correlation is even stronger over a five-year horizon. As panel 2 of Figure 1.15 illustrates, changes in real effective exchange rates between their 2016 average values and those in August 2017 are instead not systematically correlated with the exchange rate gaps for 2016 identified in the 2017 External Sector Report. One important factor reconciling these findings is the increase in commodity prices since their troughs in 2016, which has strengthened the real exchange rates of commodity exporters but is also expected to improve their current account balances. Despite the minor narrowing of flow imbalances, creditor and debtor positions widened in 2016 and are projected to continue widening into the medium term relative to world GDP (Figure 1.16, panel 1). On the debtor side, the increase is explained entirely by an increase in net external liabilities in the United States, where the current account deficit is projected to remain about 2.5 percent of GDP over the next few years. In contrast, net external liabilities are projected to shrink further in euro area debtor countries. Among creditor countries, the increase in net external claims primarily reflects the projected continuation of large current account surpluses in European creditor coun- tries (such as Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzer- land) and advanced Asian economies. Panel 2 of Figure 1.16 shows how creditor and debtor positions as a share of domestic GDP are projected to evolve over the next five years. It highlights further  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5  100  50 0 50 100 150 Em. Asia CEE Oil exporters Eur. creditors Afr. and ME China Japan United States Adv. Asia Lat. Am. Other adv. Eur. debtors Change in current-account-to-GDP ratio, 2016 17 Net IIP, 2016 2. International Investment Position 2016 and Change in Current Account Balance (Percent of GDP) Figure 1.14. Global Current Account Balances  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 2002 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 United States Other adv. Em. Asia Discrepancy Eur. debtors Lat. Am. CEE Afr. and ME Japan China Eur. creditors Adv. Asia Oil exporters 1. Global Current Account Balance (Percent of World GDP) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom). Global current account imbalances narrowed marginally in 2016 and are expected to further compress slightly in 2017.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 21 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 growth in creditor positions among European creditor countries and advanced economies in Asia in the range of 20 25 percentage points of GDP; among debtor coun- tries the largest reduction in net liabilities (close to 20 per- centage points of GDP) is projected for euro area debtor countries. A few debtor countries or country groups are projected to see a modest deterioration in their net inter- national investment position, with the US net external position worsening by about 3.5 percentage points of GDP. It is important to note that future exchange rate changes will affect the evolution of these positions, not only through their effect on the current account balance, but also through valuation effects.5 Most countries, 5For instance, valuation changes in 2016 were notable in the United Kingdom, where depreciation of the pound turned the coun- try into a net creditor as of 2016 by boosting the domestic-currency value of foreign-currency assets. The depreciation of the US dollar so especially advanced economies, are net creditors in foreign currency and net borrowers in domestic currency; conse- quently, an exchange rate depreciation implies improve- ment in the net external position through an increase in the domestic-currency value of net foreign-currency assets, with an appreciation having the opposite effect. far in 2017, if not reversed, would similarly contribute to reducing the United States  net external liability position. 1. 2016 Current Account Gaps and Change in Current Account Balances, 2016 17  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 SAU USA TUR GBR CAN BRA RUS ZAF AUS IND CHN IDN EA CHE POL JPN SWE MYS THA MEX KOR SGP Figure 1.15. Real Exchange Rates and Current Account Balances in Relation to Economic Fundamentals Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. EA = euro area; REER = real effective exchange rate. REER gap REER change 2016 July 2017 2. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes and Gaps (Percent)  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 ESP NLD ITA DEU FRA BEL SGP HKG CHE SWE KOR SAU CAN AUS TUR THA ZAF POL RUS MEX MYS IDN IND BRA USA GBR JPN EA CHN Change in current account-to- GDP ratio, 2016 17 Current account gap, 2016 Current account balances are expected to narrow their gaps relative to the 2016 current account norm.  20  10 0 10 20 30 40  100  50 0 50 100 150 Adv. Asia Japan Eur. creditors Afr. and ME Other adv. United States Oil exporters China CEE Em. Asia Lat. Am. Eur. debtors Projected change in IIP, 2016  22 Net IIP, 2016 2. Net International Investment Position, 2016, and Projected Changes, 2016 22 (Percent of GDP)  40  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 40 2005 07 09 11 13 15 17 19 21 22 United States Other adv. Em. Asia Eur. debtors Lat. Am. CEE 1. Global International Investment Position (Percent of world GDP) Afr. and ME Japan China Eur. creditors Adv. Asia Oil exporters Creditor and debtor international investment positions widened in 2016 and are projected to continue widening into the medium term. Figure 1.16. Net International Investment Positions Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Adv. Asia = advanced Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China); Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East (Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Morocco, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia); CEE = central and eastern Europe (Belarus, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovak Republic, Turkey, Ukraine); Em. Asia = emerging Asia (India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam); Eur. creditors = European creditors (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland); Eur. debtors = European debtors (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Slovenia); Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay); Oil exporters = Algeria, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela; Other adv. = Other advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, Iceland, New Zealand, United Kingdom).  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 22 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The shifting constellation of global macroeconomic policies and associated exchange rate movements could lead flow imbalances to widen again, further expanding stock imbalances. In the future, stronger reliance on domestic demand growth in some creditor countries, especially those with the policy space to support it, would help facilitate domestic and global rebalancing while sustaining world growth. In the United States, which already has close to full employment, fiscal policy measures designed to gradually enhance pro- ductive capacity along with demand, anchored in a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan to reverse the rising ratio of public debt to GDP, would result in more sustained growth and help contain external imbalances. Risks More Balanced, but Still to the Downside in the Medium Term In the near term, risks to the global growth forecast appear two-sided and broadly balanced. On the upside, momentum could prove to be more durable than expected amid strong consumer and business confi- dence, for instance, in the euro area and in East Asia, and near-term growth could exceed the forecast. On the downside, policy uncertainty is more of a concern than usual, reflecting, for example, difficult-to-predict US regulatory and fiscal policies, the potential adop- tion of trade restrictions, negotiation of the United Kingdom s relationship with the EU post-Brexit, and geopolitical risks. A perceived likelihood of more inward-looking policies could trigger a correction in asset valuations and an increase in financial market vol- atility from its current very low levels. In turn, a cor- rection in asset valuations and higher financial market volatility could knock down spending and confidence more generally, especially in countries with financial vulnerabilities. Finally, Hurricane Harvey creates uncertainties for the US economy in the near term; the net effect on GDP will depend on how quickly eco- nomic activity in the affected region recovers (includ- ing port activity and operations reliant on oil and gas infrastructure) and then, on the upside, how large and fast the rebuilding effort will be. Beyond the immediate term, risks are skewed to the downside and stem from a host of financial tensions, a possible inward-looking policy shift and persistently low inflation in advanced economies, and a range of noneconomic factors. Financial Tensions Financial stability risks in China: The revised growth forecast for China embeds slower rebalanc- ing of activity toward services and consumption, a higher debt trajectory, and diminished fiscal space available to respond in case of an abrupt adjustment. Unless the Chinese authorities counter the associ- ated risks by accelerating their recent encouraging efforts to curb the expansion of credit, these factors imply a heightened probability of a sharp slowdown in China s growth. Such an adjustment could be triggered, for instance, by a funding shock (in the short-term interbank market or in the funding market for wealth-management products), the imposition of trade barriers by trading partners, or a return of capital outflow pressures because of a faster-than-expected normalization of US interest rates. A growth slowdown in China would have adverse repercussions for other economies through weaker trade, commodity prices, and confidence. Tightening of global financial conditions: Continued easy monetary conditions in advanced economies can seed excesses and leave the financial system (and the economic recovery) vulnerable to an abrupt decom- pression of risk premiums. Chapter 1 of the October 2017 GFSR presents a downside scenario in which these risks materialize, entailing a sizable output cost. An eventual repricing of risk could be triggered by a multitude of shocks, including faster-than-expected normalization of US monetary policy or a rise in global risk aversion. As discussed in the October 2017 GFSR, the search for yield amid historically low interest rates has pushed investors to move beyond their traditional risk mandates and is already causing a buildup of credit and liquidity risks and increased vulnerability to market risks in some countries and market segments. For instance, in the United States, credit risks are rising, as suggested by rising leverage in parts of the non-energy corporate sector and evidence of an erosion of underwriting standards in the cor- porate bond market. Even as the strength and health of banking systems continue to improve, policies still have a vital role to play in managing risks in the non- bank financial sector. Risks of capital flow reversals: Corporate leverage has increased substantially in several emerging market economies (in addition to China) since the global financial crisis, with high levels of foreign currency  denominated corporate debt issuance. As discussed in the April 2017 GFSR, corporate leverage has started to  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 23 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 decline from peak levels in some economies, reflecting, in part, a downturn in capital expenditure in extractive industries. Against this backdrop, net financial flows to emerging market and developing economies have picked up over the past year, as the current account balances of commodity exporters have shrunk and global risk appetite has recovered. Following a period of abundant credit supply, a sudden tightening of global financial conditions could expose financial fragilities, especially where buffers may be wearing thin after a period of macroeconomic strains and financial volatility. For instance, faster-than-expected monetary policy normalization in the United States could cause reversals in capital flows to emerging markets and an appreciation of the US dollar, imposing strains on economies with high leverage, balance sheet mis- matches, or exchange rates pegged to the US dollar. At the same time, to the extent that such monetary policy tightening reflects a stronger outlook for the US econ- omy, US trading partners would benefit from positive demand spillovers. Challenges facing euro area banks: The euro area banking sector has made further progress with balance sheet cleanup since the spring, and bank credit growth to the nonfinancial private sector has been positive since mid-2015 (though below GDP growth). None- theless, nonperforming loan (NPL) ratios were still high in the first quarter of 2017, at about 5.7 per- cent for the euro area, and greater than 10 percent in six countries (including Italy, which accounts for about 30 percent of the euro area s NPL stock). Profitability also remains a challenge, with stubbornly high cost-to-asset ratios, especially for medium- and small-size banks. As discussed in Chapter 1 of the October 2017 GFSR, about one-third of global sys- temically important banks (mostly European banks) are not expected by analysts to generate sustainable returns, even by 2019. Low earnings hinder banks  ability to build cushions against unexpected losses and to raise capital in markets. Without a more concerted effort to clean up balance sheets and improve banks  cost efficiency, financial stability concerns and fears of adverse feedback loops among weak demand, prices, and balance sheets could be reignited in parts of the euro area. If political risks were to reemerge, for instance, an accompanying rise in long-term interest rates would worsen public debt dynamics, especially if inflation were to remain weak. Financial deregulation: As discussed in Box 1.2 of the April 2017 GFSR, a broad rollback of the strength- ening of financial regulation and oversight achieved since the global financial crisis both nationally and internationally could lower capital and liquidity buf- fers or weaken supervisory effectiveness, with negative repercussions for global financial stability. A Retreat from Cross-Border Economic Integration Slow growth in median incomes since the global financial crisis and a longer-term trend of worsening income distributions have contributed to disillusion- ment with globalization in advanced economies  notably in the United States and parts of Europe. Over the longer term, a failure to lift potential growth and make growth more inclusive in advanced economies could exacerbate the risk of a retreat from cross-border integration and hinder the political consensus for necessary market-friendly reforms. Greater protec- tionism could disrupt global supply chains (Yi 2003; Bems, Johnson, and Yi 2010; Koopman, Wang, and Wei 2014), reduce global productivity, and make tradable consumer goods less affordable, harming low-income households disproportionately (Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal 2016). Similarly, indiscriminate curbs on immigration would hinder a channel for alleviating labor force constraints in aging societies and reduce opportunities for skills specialization and productivity growth over the long term.6 Persistently Low Inflation in Advanced Economies In many advanced economies, steady progress toward central bank inflation targets has been elusive, reflecting in part the slow reduction of spare capac- ity in labor markets. An environment of persistently subdued inflation (which could ensue if domestic demand were to falter) can carry significant risks by leading to a belief that central banks are willing to accept below-target inflation, thereby reducing medium-term inflation expectations.7 Low inflation and interest rates would reduce central banks  capac- ity to lower real interest rates to restore full employ- ment in an economic downturn. Real wages would also be less flexible, and when demand falters, firms would be more likely to resort to laying off workers to reduce costs, amplifying the recessionary impulse. In sum, prolonged below-target inflation deepens the 6Chapter 4 of the October 2016 WEO analyzes the impact of immigration flows on productivity growth in recipient countries. 7Chapter 3 of the October 2016 WEO provides a fuller discussion.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 24 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 downside risks to advanced economies  medium-term growth prospects. Noneconomic Factors Rising geopolitical tensions and domestic polit- ical discord can hurt global market sentiment and confidence, burdening economic activity. For many countries severely affected by such factors, the base- line scenario assumes a gradual easing of tensions. However, these episodes may turn out to be more protracted, delaying recovery in these economies. Mea- sures of geopolitical risk have risen in recent months (Figure 1.17), and recent research shows that higher geopolitical tensions can weigh on global activity.8 Weak governance and large-scale corruption can also undermine confidence and popular support, taking a heavy toll on domestic activity. Other noneconomic factors weighing on growth in certain regions include the damaging effect of weather-related disasters, including the persistent effects of drought in eastern 8Caldara and Iacoviello (2017) construct an index of geopoliti- cal risk and document how increases in the index have historically been associated with negative effects on a broad set of economic activity indicators. and southern Africa. If these factors intensify, the hard- ship in directly affected countries, especially smaller developing economies, would rise commensurately. The risks discussed above are interdependent and can be mutually reinforcing. For example, a shift toward inward-looking policy approaches to cross-border trade, investment, and migration can increase geopolitical tensions and global risk aver- sion. In addition, noneconomic shocks can weigh directly on near-term economic activity and hurt longer-term confidence and market sentiment. Also, faster-than-anticipated tightening of global financial conditions or a shift toward protectionism in advanced economies could create capital outflow pressures from emerging markets. Fan Chart A fan chart analysis based on equity and com- modity market data as well as the dispersion of inflation and term spread projections of private sector forecasters yields a balance of risks that remains slightly tilted to the downside for 2017 and 2018 (Fig- ure 1.18). Despite the broadly unchanged balance of risks around the global growth forecast, the contribu- tions of selected risk factors have changed. Relative to the estimates made in October 2016, the distribution of term premiums forecasts and the prices of S&P 500 Index options now imply more upside risk to growth in 2017 and less upside risk to growth in 2018, likely reflecting less upbeat views for US fiscal stimulus over the medium term and optimistic valuations in the US stock market both of which leave less room for upward surprises. At the same time, the distribution of inflation forecasts and oil price options imply some- what more downside risk than a year ago, suggesting that analysts see greater scope for inflation and oil prices to surprise on the upside and dampen growth (an upward surprise in inflation could lead central banks to tighten monetary policy earlier than markets currently predict, while higher-than-expected oil prices would subtract from consumer disposable income). The probability of a recession over a four-quarter horizon has declined relative to the probability com- puted in March 2017 in the euro area, Japan, and the Latin America 5 group (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru), consistent with higher projected growth rates. Recession probabilities are broadly unchanged for the United States and other regions (Figure 1.19). Deflation risks as measured by the esti- 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 200001 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Aug. 17 Figure 1.17. Geopolitical Risk Index (Index) Geopolitical risks have risen in recent months. Source: Caldara and Iacoviello (2017). Note: ISIS = Islamic State. 9/11 Iraq invasion Madrid bombing London bombing Iran nuclear tensions Arab Spring: Syrian and Libyan wars Syrian civil war escalation Russian annexation of Crimea ISIS escalation Paris attacks  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 25 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 mated probability of a decline in the price level four quarters ahead have declined for the euro area and Japan, reflecting stronger projected growth in domestic demand. Deflation probabilities have increased slightly from low levels in the East Asia region, where inflation has softened in several economies in recent months, and for the Latin America 5 group, where inflation is projected to decline further over the coming year (as pass-through from earlier currency depreciations fade and negative output gaps continue to exert downward pressure on inflation in some economies). Policy Priorities The main cross-cutting policy challenges are to boost potential output and ensure that its benefits are broadly shared, and to build resilience against down- side risks. With countries now facing divergent cyclical conditions, varied monetary and fiscal policy stances remain appropriate and completing the economic recovery and adopting strategies to ensure fiscal sus- tainability are still imperatives for many economies. The urgency for structural reform is particularly high in advanced economies, where crisis legacies, demographic shifts, and continued weak productivity trends are restraining potential growth; but also in many emerging market and developing economies, many of which need to activate new sources of growth. The cyclical upswing opens an ideal window of opportunity for making progress with reforms, espe- cially those that have more powerful economic benefits when implemented in times of strong demand (such as reforms to job protection and unemployment benefits, as discussed in Chapter 2 of the April 2016 WEO). By the same token, where aggregate demand is still weak, macroeconomic policy needs to be supportive to foster reform implementation. By acting together, policymakers could amplify the beneficial effects of reforms and help reduce down- side risks to the outlook. The model simulations in Scenario Box 1 show that the IMF s macroeconomic policy advice for the Group of Twenty economies (in addition to what is already assumed in the WEO baseline) would have key global benefits, especially if implemented at the same time. The policy stimulus in countries with fiscal space would strengthen external demand for countries needing fiscal consolidation, buffering the near-term drag on activity; in advanced economies, tightening policy, the net effect on output of spillovers from abroad and domestic policy tight- 0 1 2 3 4 5 2014 15 16 17 18 0 25 50 75 100 125 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 2006 08 10 12 14 Aug. 17 Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE); Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. 1The fan chart shows the uncertainty around the October 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO) central forecast with 50, 70, and 90 percent con dence intervals. As shown, the 70 percent con dence interval includes the 50 percent interval, and the 90 percent con dence interval includes the 50 and 70 percent intervals. See Appendix 1.2 of the April 2009 WEO for details. The 90 percent intervals for the current-year and one-year-ahead forecasts from the October 2016 WEO are shown. 2The bars depict the coef cient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying variables. The values for in ation risks and oil market risks enter with the opposite sign since they represent downside risks to growth. 3GDP measures the purchasing-power-parity-weighted average dispersion of GDP growth forecasts for the Group of Seven economies (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States), Brazil, China, India, and Mexico. VIX is the CBOE Standard & Poor s (S&P) 500 Implied Volatility Index. Term spread measures the average dispersion of term spreads implicit in interest rate forecasts for Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Oil is the CBOE crude oil volatility index. Forecasts are from Consensus Economics surveys. Dashed lines represent the average values from 2000 to the present. Figure 1.18. Risks to the Global Outlook  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Term spread S&P 500 In ation risk Oil market risks 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 2006 08 10 12 14 Aug. 17 1. Prospects for World GDP Growth1 (Percent change) 50 percent con dence interval 70 percent con dence interval 90 percent con dence interval 90 percent con dence interval from October 2016 WEO 2. Balance of Risks Associated with Selected Risk Factors 2 (Coef cient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying variables) Balance of risks for Dispersion of Forecasts and Implied Volatility3 3. 4. GDP (right scale) VIX (left scale) Term spread (right scale) Oil (left scale) Current year (October 2016 WEO) Current year (October 2017 WEO) Next year (October 2016 WEO) Next year (October 2017 WEO) WEO baseline The balance of risks implied by the fan chart analysis is slightly tilted to the downside in 2017 and 2018.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 26 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 ening would be positive. Overall, implementing the recommended policies would increase global fiscal sustainability and lead to permanently higher private investment and potential output. The boost to global demand would also magnify the effects of structural reforms on potential output.9 Beyond these quantifi- able macroeconomic benefits, the recommended policy measures would also help reduce downside risks to the global growth outlook. 9Based on IMF (2017d), which presents results for a similar sce- nario incorporating, in addition, the impact of structural reforms. Policies Advanced Economies Although cyclical positions across advanced econo- mies are varied, most of the larger economies are still estimated to be operating somewhat below potential and are experiencing inflation rates below central bank targets (Figure 1.20). Potential growth faces headwinds from population aging and a widespread slowdown in productivity growth. Although income distribution has remained broadly stable in most advanced economies in recent years, ongoing advances in labor-saving technologies and cross-border competition important drivers of higher income inequality during the past few decades  suggest that inclusiveness cannot be taken for granted. Deliberate policy efforts are needed in many countries to ensure that most people see their living standards improve as national income increases. Safeguarding the Momentum and Addressing the Remaining Crisis Legacies With a lack of steady progress toward bringing infla- tion closer to target and stabilizing long-term inflation expectations around those levels, monetary policy in advanced economies should chart an accommodative course. Although wage and price pressures are likely to pick up once the recovery firms further, a tendency for core inflation to repeatedly fall short of expecta- tions calls for a cautious risk-management approach to reducing accommodation or progressing with normal- ization. A generalized perception that central banks will let inflation run below target for a prolonged period could lead to a downshift of long-term infla- tion expectations, which, in an environment of low equilibrium real interest rates, would be costlier and more difficult to reverse than a temporary overshoot in inflation. The US Federal Reserve should stay on a data-  dependent, well-communicated, and gradual path to normalization. The Bank of Japan should maintain a sustained accommodative stance, including its tar- get for long-term interest rates. And the European Central Bank should wait for concrete evidence of a steady pickup in inflation before reducing the extent of accommodation. At the same time, stretched asset valuations and increasing leverage in some financial market segments bear close monitoring, and proac- tive micro- and macroprudential supervision, where necessary, remains important to ensure that appropri- ately easy monetary conditions do not fuel financial stability risks. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 United States Euro area Japan East Asia Latin America 5 Rest of the world Figure 1.19. Recession and De ation Risks (Percent) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 United States Euro area Japan East Asia Latin America 5 Rest of the world 1. Probability of Recession, 2017:Q4 2018:Q3 2. Probability of De ation, 2018:Q41 April 2017 WEO: 2017:Q2 2018:Q1 April 2017 WEO: 2018:Q2 Relative to the spring, recession probabilities have declined for the euro area, Japan, and the Latin America 5 group and are broadly unchanged for the United States and other regions. De ation risks have declined for Japan and the euro area. Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: East Asia comprises China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand; Latin America 5 comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; Rest of the world comprises Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Israel, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela. April 2017 WEO data refer to simulations run in March 2017. WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1De ation is de ned as a fall in the price level on a year-over-year basis in the quarter indicated in the  gure.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 27 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Fiscal policy should, in principle, also be calibrated with cyclical conditions but, in many advanced economies with remaining slack, it is constrained by the need to avoid potentially destabilizing public debt dynamics or to rebuild buffers. Given the need to secure the recovery and bolster inclusiveness, the composition of spending and revenues and any con- solidation measures should be made as growth- and distribution-friendly as possible. In the United States, where output is approaching potential, the consolidation should start in 2018. And in the short term, avoiding political brinkmanship over appropriations and promptly raising the debt ceiling are essential. In the euro area, countries with very low deficits and relatively low debt should use fiscal space to support structural reforms and boost public investment to raise potential growth. For instance, a more expan- sionary stance in Germany, where tax buoyancy amid an economic recovery is adding to fiscal space, would permit a much-needed increase in public investment while generating positive spillovers to countries with deficient demand. Avoiding a re-emergence of fiscal sur- pluses would also help correct the external imbalances of Germany. Indeed, as Chapter 4 emphasizes, higher public spending designed to boost potential output can have both domestic benefits as well as positive spillovers to other economies, especially those with economic slack and monetary accommodation. By contrast, grad- ual fiscal adjustment accompanied by growth-friendly measures is appropriate for Italy and France. In view of remaining economic slack and exceptionally weak core inflation, Japan should withdraw fiscal support very gradually, including through a gradual increase in the consumption tax rate over several years to bring the primary balance to a debt-stabilizing level, while prioritizing demand-friendly structural reforms. In the United Kingdom, where uncertainty about the out- come of negotiations with the EU weighs on sentiment and investment, a gradual consolidation path remains appropriate. Strengthening resilience and securing the recov- ery in the euro area will also require accelerating the repair of bank balance sheets and durably improving banking system profitability. Only a comprehensive and proactive approach to reducing NPLs can lift the drag on credit growth and eliminate risks of an adverse feedback mechanism among weak inflation, balance sheets, investment, and productivity. Mea- sures to accelerate the reduction of NPLs can include broadening European Central Bank guidance on NPL management to smaller banks, faster modernization and harmonization of insolvency regimes, and stimu- lating distressed debt markets by facilitating national asset-management firms. To raise bank profitability sustainably, further business-model upgrading, cost rationalization, and consolidation remain critical; a proactive approach to bank resolution could help provide incentives for action in these areas. Faster progress is also needed for completing the Banking Union (with a common, effective deposit insurance scheme and common fiscal backstop) and advancing the Capital Markets Union plan. Bolstering Medium-Term Potential Output and Inclusiveness A cyclical upswing provides a golden opportunity for adopting structural reforms and will amplify and accelerate their beneficial effects. Policymakers can safeguard and improve prospects for potential output through measures to expand labor supply and create an environment conducive to stronger productivity growth. Many of these reforms would also help raise the inclusiveness of income gains, and some would broaden economic opportunities across the skills spec- trum. Reform priorities vary across countries, depend-  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 AUS FRA ITA KOR JPN CHE ESP TWN CAN GBR BEL USA NLD DEU SWE Figure 1.20. Advanced Economy Output Gaps, 2017 (Percent of potential GDP) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. PPP = purchasing power parity. PPP GDP-weighted average Most large advanced economies are estimated to be operating below potential.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 28 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 ing on the key impediments to potential output, but generally fall into the following areas:   Distribution-friendly fiscal policies: As discussed in depth in the October 2017 Fiscal Monitor, govern- ments seeking to improve equity in incomes and opportunities can rely on fiscal policy as a powerful redistributive tool. For many advanced economies with high public debt, limited fiscal space, and high tax and spending levels, fiscal and redistributive objectives should be achieved through revenue-neutral increases in tax progressivity, spending reallocations, and improved spending efficiency. In advanced econ- omies where tax progressivity has declined in the past few decades, raising the top marginal tax rates and reducing opportunities for tax avoidance and evasion, especially for high-income earners, could improve the distribution of income. Many advanced economies also have room to significantly increase the taxation of immobile capital and wealth.   Investment in human capital: Ensuring broad-based access to high-quality education promotes produc- tivity and a more equitable distribution of income over the long term. It also raises the adaptability of the workforce to structural transformation, includ- ing a persistent shift in work and employment relations (with a greater incidence of part-time work in many advanced economies and a greater share of workers on temporary contracts), as highlighted in Chapter 2. Short-term measures to help households through economic downturns or technology- and trade-related displacement include active labor mar- ket policies (that help workers find jobs in expand- ing sectors) and social safety nets (to smooth the effects of temporary income loss and keep workers attached to the labor force). In the longer term, attaining inclusive and sustainable growth amid continued structural change will require adequate education, skills building and retraining, and pol- icies (such as credit access) to facilitate geographic mobility. In the United States, policy priorities include supporting early childhood education and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics programs, and rethinking the financing model for public schools and funding for tertiary education to improve outcomes for youth from lower- and middle-income households. Apprenticeship and vocational programs have worked well in some countries to offer attractive careers (for example, in Germany) and can be upgraded in many countries, for instance, in France and the United States.   Investment in physical infrastructure: Empirical evidence from advanced economies suggests that, if done right, infrastructure investment brings both short- and long-term benefits: an increase in public investment of 1 percent of GDP can raise the level of output by 1  percent over the medium term (Abiad, Furceri, and Topalova 2016). After three decades of almost continuous decline, public investment in infrastructure and the stock of public capital as a share of output are near historic lows in advanced economies. Many countries could take advantage of the favorable funding environment to improve the quality of the existing infrastructure stock and implement new projects (see Chapter 3 of the October 2014 WEO). Countries with deficits in infrastructure include Australia, Canada, Ger- many, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Priorities vary but, in most cases, include upgrading surface transportation and improving infrastructure technologies (in high-speed rail, ports, telecommu- nications, broadband), as well as green investments.   Fostering greater labor supply: Population aging will exert downward pressure on labor force participation rates in most advanced economies in the coming years, with growth in the workforce projected to decline from about 0.8 percent a year in 1995 2015 to about half that rate by 2022 (based on October 2017 WEO forecasts). To counter this decline, policymakers could raise the statutory retirement age (where doing so would help close funding gaps in pension systems) and take measures to accelerate the narrowing of gender gaps in labor force participa- tion. Gender gaps could be narrowed by eliminating tax provisions that discourage second earners in households (Italy, Japan, United States), ensuring the availability of affordable child care (Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States), fostering flexible work arrangements (Can- ada, Japan), and offering family-friendly benefits such as parental leave (Canada, United States). In aging societies, ensuring the affordability of elderly care is also crucial, given that, if care is too expen- sive, it would typically be the secondary earners in households typically women who shoulder the burden of unpaid work at home. Immigration reform could also help expand the labor force, limit the increase in dependency ratios, and raise pro- ductivity and labor force growth in some countries (through, for example, skills-based immigration reform in the United States, continued targeted  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 29 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 immigration policy in Canada, and allowing more use of foreign workers in Japan). In Europe, integration of refugees into the workforce should be facilitated through swift processing of asylum applications, language training, job search assistance, better recognition of migrants  skills through creden- tial systems, and support for entrepreneurship.   Product and labor market reforms: Persistently sluggish productivity in some countries has led to greater emphasis on product and labor market reforms, especially given the scarcity of fiscal space. These reforms have been found to raise productivity and employment and to improve resilience to shocks.10 Priorities include lower barriers to entry into profes- sional services, certain network industries, or retail trade (for example, Australia, Greece, Italy, Japan, Spain); employment protection legislation reforms to reduce labor market duality, such as easing hiring and dismissal regulations for regular workers (for example, France, Portugal, Spain); reform of unemployment insurance and strengthening of active labor market policies and professional training and apprentice- ship systems (for example, France); cutting of labor tax wedges (France, Germany, Italy); and reform of wage bargaining frameworks to ease the realignment of wages with productivity (Italy, France). Some countries also have scope to improve the business cli- mate and the quality of public administration (Italy, Portugal). At a central level, the EU has room to provide better incentives for reforms at the national level with targeted funds from the EU budget and outcome-based benchmarking of reforms. Efforts to deepen single market integration especially in the digital services, transport, and energy sectors would also help raise productivity in EU members. Policies Emerging Market Economies A critical challenge facing many emerging market economies is to preserve and extend the improvements in living standards achieved in recent decades. Prior- ities vary greatly, reflecting heterogeneity in cyclical positions and in the main impediments or risks to attaining strong medium-term growth. Navigating Cyclical Conditions Cyclical conditions are even more diverse in emerging market and developing economies than in 10A review can be found in Banerji and others (2017). advanced economies, but output gaps are estimated to be negative in most of the larger countries in the group (Figure 1.21). The scope for easing fiscal policy to sup- port economic activity is constrained, however, given that most countries have limited fiscal buffers and need to return their public finances to a sustainable footing. In several cases, the limited fiscal space reflects the incomplete withdrawal of the stimulus injected during the global recession, or a continued loosening in fiscal policy in recent years. In Brazil, tackling the unsustainable expenditure mandates, including through reform of the pension system, is of first-order importance for restoring stronger confidence and fostering sustained growth in private investment. Should the economy recover faster than expected, a more front-loaded fiscal adjustment than envisaged in the budget would be warranted. Mexico s gradual fiscal consolidation strategy remains appropriate, given the resilience of the economy and the desirability of setting public debt on a downward slope. Meanwhile, with its economy emerging from recession after an adjustment period, Argentina should accelerate its fiscal consolidation in 2018.  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 BRA EGY IND MEX RUS IDN CHN THA TUR IRN Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. PPP = purchasing power parity. Figure 1.21. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Output Gaps, 2017 (Percent of potential GDP) Cyclical conditions are diverse in emerging market and developing economies. PPP GDP-weighted average  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 30 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 In China, the composition of fiscal policy should favor the rebalancing of the economy, and the aug- mented deficit should be gradually lowered to a debt-stabilizing level. The pace of deficit reduction planned in Russia would appropriately entail a steady adjustment to lower oil prices, but should be built on more permanent and better-targeted measures than currently envisaged. In Saudi Arabia, a gradual but sustained fiscal con- solidation to eliminate the budget deficit over several years would strike the right balance between safeguard- ing activity and preserving fiscal buffers. As currencies have stabilized or gained against the US dollar since the spring, inflation has continued to decline in many emerging market economies, more recently helped by the decline in oil prices. Disin- flation has been more rapid than expected in some countries, such as Brazil, India, and Russia, which has allowed monetary policy easing in recent months. Monetary policy will need to stay tight in countries where inflation rates remain well above central bank targets, such as in Argentina and Turkey. In China, where monetary accommodation should be gradually reduced, the monetary policy framework could be made more effective by phasing out monetary targets, resuming progress toward a more flexible exchange rate, and improving communications. Exchange rate flexibility has served many emerging market and developing economies well in recent years. It has helped support capital inflows where domestic and external financial conditions have tightened, and helped safeguard growth and limit the drawdown of fiscal and reserve buffers following terms-of-trade declines in commodity exporters. Wherever possible, exchange rates should be used as the main buffer against external shocks. Strengthening financial resilience is an overarch- ing priority for emerging market and developing economies. In China, minimizing the risk of a sharp economic slowdown will require intensification of the authorities  current efforts to tighten supervision, rein in the expansion of credit, and tackle the underlying stock of bad assets. Many other emerging market and developing econ- omies with open capital accounts need to be mindful of a possible buildup of financial stability risks in an environment of easy global monetary conditions, and be aware of the risks from volatility as the US Federal Reserve gradually withdraws stimulus. Net capital inflow pressures for emerging market economies are likely to persist so long as monetary policy settings remain broadly accommodative and equilibrium real interest rates remain low in advanced economies. Countries receiving buoyant capital inflows may need to step up efforts in financial sector supervision and regulation to manage vulnerabilities, deter excessive borrowing, and help ensure that financing flows to projects that contrib- ute to raising aggregate productivity. Where an important share of external borrowing is undertaken directly by the corporate sector, curtailing any tax preferences for debt (over equity finance) could help keep the risk of overborrowing in check. Ensuring efficient corporate insolvency and restructuring frame- works would also help achieve faster and less costly resolution of problems should repayment difficulties arise as global financing conditions gradually become less accommodative. Bolstering Medium-Term Potential Output and Inclusiveness Safeguarding and furthering past gains in per capita incomes and living standards is imperative across emerging market and developing economies in light of the sizable development needs of most countries. Some countries that are projected to maintain strong growth rates in the baseline forecast will need to keep the main downside risks in check (for instance, in China, where it would be advisable to deemphasize near-term growth targets and focus on reforms that would enhance the sustainability of growth). Countries with modest medium-term growth prospects will urgently need to tackle the most binding structural impediments to growth. Priorities vary, but, in many countries, include improving the quality of infrastructure and education, strengthening governance, enhancing the business climate, and facilitating greater female labor market participation, as well as a host of product and labor market reforms and further trade integration.   Inclusiveness: As discussed in the Fiscal Monitor, emerg- ing market and developing economies generally have higher levels of inequality than advanced economies but, in many cases, their lower administrative capacity and limited fiscal space restrict the fiscal tools available for redistribution. For countries with low adminis- trative capacity and larger informal sectors, setting a relatively high tax-exempt threshold for the personal income tax and gradually decreasing it as adminis- trative capacity improves would help increase com- pliance as well as progressivity over time. Reducing opportunities for tax avoidance and evasion, especially  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 31 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 for high-income earners, is also important. Indirect taxation (such as a value-added tax or a consumption tax) has still the potential to be progressive, if revenues are used to finance progressive spending and if com- plemented by excise taxes on luxury goods. Improving access to quality education and health care for the disadvantaged is also crucial for improving equity. In education, efforts should be focused on eliminating enrollment gaps in primary and secondary education, especially for the disadvantaged, and expanding the role of private financing and student loans for higher education. In the area of health care, the priority is to achieve universal health coverage with a broad package of essential health services. Improving efficiency of social spending is also crucial.   Infrastructure: In emerging market economies and low-income countries, infrastructure provision per capita is still a fraction of that in advanced econo- mies. Inadequate infrastructure is widely judged a key barrier to growth and development, especially in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. Selecting public infrastructure projects with diffused pro- ductivity gains and raising the efficiency of public infrastructure spending are principal challenges for many economies. In Brazil, ongoing efforts to make the infrastructure concessions program more attrac- tive to investors while improving the standards of governance and program design would help alleviate key supply-side bottlenecks and support near-term demand. In Colombia, implementation of the authorities  infrastructure agenda would help reduce a historical infrastructure gap, foster private invest- ment, and help exporters access markets.   Institutions: Many emerging market and developing economies have substantial scope to improve the cli- mate for business and investment. Decisive actions to enhance governance and the rule of law would help rein in corruption, strengthening business confidence and providing a boost to investment in some countries (for example, Brazil, Mexico, Peru). Strengthening institutions can also help reduce country risk perceptions and act as a countervailing force against a possible tightening of global financial conditions. Many countries could simplify regula- tions and administrative procedures for starting a business, increase the efficiency of the legal system, and reduce regulatory uncertainty (for example, Turkey, South Africa).   Unleashing greater labor supply: Labor force par- ticipation rates for women are much lower than those for men in emerging market and developing economies (the average gap is close to 30 percentage points for emerging market economies of the Group of Twenty). Gender gaps in labor force participa- tion not only hold back potential output, but also limit women s economic and social opportunities, harming inclusiveness. Priority reforms include eliminating legal barriers that prevent women from working, improving infrastructure, and enhancing gender equality in accessing social services, finance, and education (for example, India).   Product and labor market regulations and trade policies: Fostering greater competition in domes- tic product and service markets, simplifying labor market regulations, and removing barriers to trade are also important broad reform areas for many economies, and involve a varied set of priorities. In South Africa, for example, further progress is needed to facilitate entry by new firms into power genera- tion, transportation, and telecommunications, which would reduce the cost of key business inputs and thereby foster growth and job creation. The recent agreement to introduce a national minimum wage, combined with a code of good practice for collective bargaining, has the potential to raise living standards for those below the poverty line. At the same time, its employment impact will need to be carefully monitored, with the government standing ready to introduce complementary measures for vulnerable sectors, such as small and medium-sized enter- prises. Further labor market reforms are advisable to ensure that wages are determined by firm-specific conditions. In India, simplifying and easing labor market regulations and land acquisition procedures are long-standing requirements for improving the business climate. Expanding the role of market forces in the economy is a priority in China and will entail removing barriers to entry in the highly closed services sector and allowing state-owned enterprises to face harder budget constraints. Productivity could be fostered by reducing tariff and nontariff barriers to international trade (for instance, Brazil, China, and India). Policies Low-Income Developing Countries As with the broader group of emerging market and developing economies, low-income developing countries dependent on commodity exports continue to face weaker economic prospects than those countries  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 32 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 with more diversified export bases (Figure 1.22).11 With policy adjustments to lower oil revenues delayed, fiscal deficits in some commodity-exporting low-income countries remain large, external posi- tions are weaker, and financial sector vulnerabilities are emerging. Although GDP is set to grow in most commodity-exporting low-income countries in 2017, fuel exporters are projected to do worse than nonfuel commodity exporters. By contrast, countries with more diversified export bases have recorded relatively strong growth, which is expected to continue at a rapid clip, in part, with the benefit of lower oil bills. Robust growth, however, has not always translated into improved fiscal and external current account positions, reflecting limited progress in adopting countercyclical policies and higher public sector spending. Total public debt and debt service have therefore risen sharply across low-income developing countries, with about one-third at  high  risk of external debt 11Classifications of low-income countries according to commodity dependence can be found in IMF (2015). distress or already in debt distress, and one-third at  moderate  risk.12 Many low-income developing countries continue to experience conflict and secu- rity disruptions (Afghanistan, Chad, Somalia, South Sudan, Yemen, a few parts of Nigeria), whereas parts of sub-Saharan Africa face food insecurity related to droughts (The Gambia, South Sudan, Somalia). With divergent prospects, policy priorities continue to differ across low-income developing countries.   Prospects for commodity exporters are heavily influ- enced by the process of adjustment to lower com- modity prices. The adjustment needs to continue and, in some cases, accelerate, based on comprehen- sive and internally consistent sets of policies. Fiscal policy needs to be better calibrated to contain debt accumulation while protecting outlays key to growth prospects, such as priority capital expenditures and social spending. In many countries, improvements in domestic revenue mobilization and continued rationalization of spending needs, along with concessional financing, are necessary to underpin successful adjustment processes. Allowing greater exchange rate flexibility where an option could act as a shock absorber and facilitate adjustment, supported by monetary policy settings to contain the inflation pressures that may result from cur- rency depreciations. Financial stability needs to be maintained through enhanced financial sector regu- lation and supervision and by addressing emerging financial sector vulnerabilities, including increased domestic arrears and NPLs. Countries in or at high risk of debt distress need to accelerate the adjust- ment and limit nonconcessional external borrowing.   Policy priorities for diversified low-income develop- ing countries vary. However, an overarching goal for these economies should be to strike a better balance between spending for development and social needs and improving public debt sustainability by rebuild- ing fiscal positions and foreign reserves holdings while growth is strong. Across all low-income countries, better debt manage- ment would also help those exposed to global financial markets cope with volatility in capital inflows, balance sheet currency exposures, and the prospect of monetary policy normalization in the United States. Over the long term, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop- 12Based on the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries, as described in IMF (2013b). Figure 1.22. Per Capita Real GDP Growth across Low-Income Developing Countries (Percent) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Bars denote PPP GDP weighted averages; red markers indicate the medians; and black markers denote the top and bottom deciles of per capita GDP growth in the country groups. Country groups are de ned in IMF (2015).  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 Diversi ed exporters Oil exporters Non-oil commodity exporters 1995 2005 2006 16 2017 22 Low-income developing economies dependent on commodity exports continue to face weaker economic prospects than those with more diversi ed export bases.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 33 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 ment identifies a broad range of issues that will require action to deliver durable and inclusive growth. Within this framework, generating sustainable and resilient growth will require steps to promote diversification and structural transformation and bridge infrastructure gaps. In particular, efforts to boost domestic revenue mobi- lization, strengthen debt management, and ensure that public spending is efficient and well targeted would con- tribute to scaling up infrastructure investment without endangering public debt sustainability. To make growth more inclusive and resilient, policies should be oriented toward creating jobs and encouraging gender equality, promoting environmental sustainability, boosting access to financial services, and strengthening the redistributive role of fiscal policy to protect the most vulnerable. Multilateral Policies Strong, sustainable, balanced, and inclusive growth requires a well-functioning, cooperative, multilat- eral framework for international economic relations. Because national policies create spillovers across countries, all countries are better served when policy- makers engage in regular dialogue and work within agreed mechanisms to resolve disagreements. At the same time, the international community continuously needs to adapt the multilateral system to the changing global economy. Active dialogue and cooperation will help improve and modernize rules while addressing individual countries  valid concerns. This process will ensure continued mutual benefits and evenhanded- ness and, together with strong domestic policies, help avoid a broad withdrawal from multilateralism, either through widespread protectionism or competitive races to the bottom in taxation and financial and regula- tory oversight. Multilateral cooperation is also vital for addressing important longer-term challenges in the global economy, including providing support to low-income countries for meeting development goals and mitigating and adapting to climate change. Maintaining Rules-Based, Open Multilateral Trade with Broadly Shared Gains Cross-border economic integration through trade openness has been a critical source of productivity growth and resilience over the past several decades for countries at all income levels.13 Hundreds of mil- 13A body of research has documented that economic integration together with technological progress has increased the efficient use lions were lifted out of poverty in emerging market and developing economies during a period of rapid cross-border integration, helping reduce global income inequality. However, global trade has slowed dramat- ically in recent years, mostly reflecting weakness in aggregate demand, but also the slower pace of new trade reforms and an uptick in protectionist measures. And trade rules have not kept pace with the evolving global economy; for example, integrated global pro- duction structures require more coherent rules across several policy areas, such as goods trade, services trade, investment policy, and intellectual property. Rolling back temporary barriers to trade introduced since the global financial crisis and reducing trade costs would support the nascent recovery in trade, reigniting an important driver of global productivity growth. To that end, pressing ahead with an ambitious trade agenda is crucial. A global trading system with strong, well-enforced rules that continue to adjust to promote competition and a level playing field  remains critical (IMF, World Bank, and WTO 2017). Addressing tariff barriers in sectors where they remain high, such as agriculture, and implementing commit- ments under the Trade Facilitation Agreement, which came into effect in February 2017, can significantly reduce trade costs in traditional areas. Advancing trade reforms in services and in other areas, such as digital trade, and improving cooperation in investment pol- icies can make positive contributions to cross-border trade flows and global growth; although progress is best made at the global level, ambitious, broad-based regional agreements that address these  frontier  areas of trade policy can also be helpful. As discussed in Chapter 1 of the April 2017 WEO, open trade policies should be complemented by comprehensive policy approaches at national levels to reduce adjustment pains and provide opportunities for all. Cooperation for Maintaining Global Financial Stability Maintaining robust national financial regulatory regimes, including in countries and regions with systemic financial systems, such as China, Europe, and the United States, and recapitalizing institutions and cleaning up balance sheets where necessary pro- duces positive spillovers for global financial stability. of global resources, boosted incomes, and expanded access to goods and services. For a recent summary, see Baldwin (2016). See also Wacziarg and Welch (2008); Costinot and Rodr guez-Clare (2013); and Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016).  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 34 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 In addition, there is an urgent need to finalize the international financial regulatory reform agenda by tackling outstanding challenges, such as the regulation and oversight of financial institutions, including non- banks; ensuring regulators can resolve globally systemic financial institutions effectively; and strengthening the resilience of central counterparty clearing for deriva- tives. Coordinated and collective action is needed to manage risks to financial stability from cyberattacks, money laundering, and terrorism financing. Closer cross-border regulatory cooperation is also needed to address the pressures that several countries have expe- rienced in correspondent banking relationships, which play a key role in facilitating global trade, remittances, and economic activity. As shown in Box 1.5, remit- tances have grown in global importance and are a key mechanism for sustaining consumption in the face of income shocks. Last, the high degree of international financial interconnectedness and vulnerability in some regions calls for a closely coordinated and adequately resourced global financial safety net as well as stronger frame- works for the prevention and resolution of debt crises. Cooperation on International Taxation Issues As increased capital mobility across borders has fueled international tax competition, governments have found it more challenging to finance their budgets without increasing taxes on labor income or imposing regressive consumption taxes. International corporate income tax evasion and avoidance through, for exam- ple, profit shifting to lower tax jurisdictions, could further erode popular support for international trade and investment integration. Policymakers can make more meaningful progress toward equitable tax systems (that prevent an increasing share of after-tax income from accruing to owners of capital) if their national efforts to safeguard revenues are backed by multilateral cooperation. Noneconomic Challenges Multilateral cooperation is also indispensable for addressing important medium-term global challenges, such as meeting the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, and providing financial support to vulnerable economies and fragile states that face the greatest development needs and, in many cases, deep eco- nomic and security challenges. The international community will have a key role to play in fostering and coordinating financial and other types of support for countries most vulnerable to climate change. As discussed in Chapter 3, increases in temperature have vastly unequal effects across the world, with the brunt of adverse consequences borne by those who can least afford it and those who have contributed the least to the rising threat of climate change. Low-income countries will likely suffer disproportionately from further global warming, which is expected to trigger more severe droughts, storms, and epidemics. Coupled with rising sea levels, these effects could feed social unrest and refugee flows, with important cross-border implications. A concerted multilateral effort to help vulnerable economies cope with the consequences of climate change and stem the man-made causes of global warming is amply justified from both equity and efficiency perspectives.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 35 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The IMF s G20 Model (G20MOD) is used here to estimate the global impact of implementing the IMF s Article IV monetary and fiscal policy advice to the Group of Twenty (G20) countries that is in addition to what is assumed in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) baseline.1 A qualitative indicator of the recommended policy measures relative the WEO baseline is presented in Scenario Table 1. Less than half of G20 advanced and emerging market economies ease policy. For advanced economies, fiscal policy is eased in Germany, Japan, and Korea, and monetary policy accommodates that easing. In emerging market economies, fiscal policy is eased in the near term in Saudi Arabia, while additional monetary stimulus is provided in Mexico and Russia. Many remaining G20 countries tighten policy. Fiscal policy is tightened in France, Italy, Spain, the United States, Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, and Turkey. Monetary policy is also tightened in China and Turkey. Several G20 countries Australia, Canada, South Africa, and the United Kingdom along with non-G20 countries have no discretionary changes in monetary or fiscal policy stances relative to the WEO baseline. However, recommendations for many G20 countries include budget-neutral increases in infrastructure spending that on balance act to stimulate activity owing to the resulting positive impact on productivity and thus private investment and real incomes. The net impact over the WEO horizon is to raise global GDP (Scenario Figure 1). GDP is higher in all groups of countries except emerging market economies that are tightening policy. The positive spillovers from easing countries more than offset the own impacts in advanced economies that are tightening policy. However, the magnitude of the dampening impact of tighter policy in emerging market economies is too large to be offset by the policy easing elsewhere and largely reflects the relative importance of China and the magnitude of the policy tightening there.2 The mix of recommended policies has several bene- fits at the global level. The policy stimulus in countries with fiscal space strengthens external demand for those countries needing fiscal consolidations. This buffers the 1The quantification of the fiscal and monetary policy advice is based on IMF (2017d). 2Part of the tightening in fiscal policy in China is related to restructuring of state-owned enterprises to facilitate product mar- ket reforms, the benefits of which accrue over the medium term and are not included here, but can be found in IMF (2017d).  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 2016 18 20 22  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2016 18 20 22  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2016 18 20 22 6. EMs with Policy Tightening  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 2016 18 20 22 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: AEs = advanced economies. EMs = Emerging market economies. Scenario Figure 1. Group of Twenty Macro Scenario (Percent difference from baseline) 1. Global 2. Countries with No Policy Change  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2016 18 20 22  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2016 18 20 22 5. EMs with Policy Easing 4. AEs with Policy Tightening  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 2016 18 20 22  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 2016 18 20 22 10. Emerging De cit Countries 9. Emerging Surplus Countries Real GDP  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 2016 18 20 22  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 2016 18 20 22 8. Advanced De cit Countries 7. Advanced Surplus Countries 3. AEs with Policy Easing Current Account/GDP Scenario Box 1. Impact of Recommended Policies in the Group of Twenty Economies  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 36 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 near-term negative impact on activity while increasing overall global fiscal sustainability. In the medium term, lower global public debt reduces global real interest rates, leading to permanently higher private invest- ment and potential output. External imbalances also improve, but not everywhere. For advanced economies where external imbalances have recently widened, these policy measures yield an improvement, with current accounts falling in surplus countries and rising in deficit countries. For emerging market economies, however, external imbalances rise modestly. In large part, this reflects the scale of adjustment in China and its impact on domestic demand and thus imports.3 In addition to these quantifiable macroeconomic benefits, the recommended policy measures also help to reduce risks to the outlook, lowering the probability of sharp adjustments down the road and raising medium-term sustainable growth. 3It is worth noting that IMF Article IV policy advice also includes structural and other reform measures that are not included here and those measures, particularly for China, will help to reduce external imbalances. Scenario Table 1. Assumed Policy Actions Relative to the WEO Baseline Color Key: Ease substantially Ease moderately Accommodate Tighten moderately Tighten substantially No change Monetary Fiscal1 Near term Long term Advanced Economies Easing Policy Germany Japan Korea Advanced Economies Tightening Policy France Italy Spain United States Emerging Market Economies Easing Policy Mexico Russia Saudi Arabia Emerging Market Economies Tightening Policy Argentina Brazil China India Indonesia Turkey No Policy Changes Australia Canada South Africa United Kingdom Other euro area Non-Group of Twenty Source: IMF staff compilation. 1Defined as the difference between the projected and recommended level of the cyclically adjusted primary balance. Scenario Box 1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 37 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 In advanced economies, fewer people in the adult population (those 15 and older) have been working or actively looking for work since the turn of the centu- ry.1 This mild downturn in the labor force participa- tion rate began around 2000, appears to have picked up since 2007, and is generally projected to continue and eventually gather pace as populations age. Population aging generally puts downward pressure on the overall participation rate. In advanced econo- mies, the population shares of young (age 15 24) and prime-age workers (age 25 54) have been declining, while those of the 54 64 and 65+ age groups have been rising (Figure 1.1.1). Given that the 54 64 and especially the 65+ age groups have lower participation rates than the prime-age group, these shifts tend to lower the overall participation rate. But beneath the headline figures, the variations in how participation rates within various age and gender groups have changed are striking, with remarkable gains in the participation rates of women in some countries. If such gains continue and broaden, the demographic transition may not immediately translate into a slowdown in the growth of the labor force. This heterogeneity (as well as some evidence of convergence in participation rates) also suggests that there is scope for policies to postpone the adverse effects of the demo- graphic transition on the growth rate of the workforce. Age Groups For the adult population of advanced economies as a whole, labor force participation rates declined by 0.8 percentage point since 2007.2 Participation rates declined for the young (age 15 24 the group with the largest cross-country dispersion in participation rates), in part because more people stay in school for Prepared by Zs ka K cz n, with research assistance from Ava Hong. 1Unless stated otherwise, the figures for advanced economies in this box refer to the combined workforces and working-age populations of 31 advanced economies, which account for about 95 percent of the total population of countries classified as advanced economies in the World Economic Outlook (WEO). 2The total labor force participation rate can be written as the population-share weighted average of the participation rates of different age groups:  LFPR  t  =   i = 1  4    LFPR  t  i     pop  t  i  ____  pop  t   . Here, i refers to the following age groups: 15 24, 25 54, 55 64, 65+. Results are robust to using a finer breakdown of age groups into five- or 10-year intervals. longer.3 For the 25 54 age group, where participation remains the highest, rates have been mostly flat in total, though with starkly divergent paths for men and women, with men s participation rate declining and women s increasing. Participation rates of both men and women in the 55 64 age group showed a sharp rise, and the 65+ participation rates also rose for both genders, especially after 2007 (Figure 1.1.2).4 3As discussed, for instance, by Balleer, G mez-Salvador, and Turunen (2009); Aaronson and others (2014); Council of Eco- nomic Advisors (2014); Canon, Kudlyak, and Liu (2015); and Dvorkin and Shell (2015). 4Declining participation rates of the young and prime-age men are highlighted by Balleer, G mez-Salvador, and Turunen  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 2000 2007 2016 2000 2007 2016 2000 2007 2016 2000 2007 2016 15 24 25 54 55 64 65+ 15 24 25 54 55 64 65+ Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure shows population-weighted averages across 31 advanced economies. Figure 1.1.1. Population Shares by Age Group and Gender 1. Population Shares (Percent) 2. Changes in Population Shares, 2007 16 (Percentage points) Total Female Male Box 1.1. Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 38 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Shifting population shares have tended to push overall participation rates down, while rising partic- ipation rates within some age groups have tended to increase them. This effect can be documented using a shift-share decomposition, as illustrated in Fig- ure 1.1.3. The figure decomposes changes in overall (2009), Dvorkin and Shell (2015), Council of Economic Advisors (2016), and Krause and Sawhill (2017). In European economies, this stands in contrast with rising female labor force participation, which has been declining in the United States (for example, Krause and Sawhill 2017). Balleer and others (2009) examine the drivers of the increase in labor force participation rates during the precrisis period in the euro area and predict a fall in participation rates over the following years based on an age and cohort analysis. participation rates into changes in participation rates within each age group while holding their population shares fixed ( within changes ), a shift in the relative sizes of age groups while holding participation rates fixed ( between changes ), and an interaction term:   LFPR  t  =   i = 1  4  (     LFPR  t  i   PS  0  i   +  LFPR  0  i     PS  t  i       LFPR  t  i    PS  t  i )  where  PS  t  i  =    pop  t  i  ____  pop  t    is the population share and t = 0 refers to year 2007, the initial year. The contribution of the interaction term (combining changes in partic- ipation rates and changes in group sizes) is typically very small and is included in the  between change  in Figure 1.1.3. This decomposition suggests that the decline in overall participation rates was driven by aging  captured by  between changes while  within changes  would have acted to increase participation rates: the contribution of the decline in the partic- ipation rates of the young is more than offset by the increase in participation rates of the age 25 and 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2000 07 16 2000 07 16 2000 07 16 2000 07 16 2000 07 16  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 Total Total Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure shows population-weighted averages across 31 advanced economies. Figure 1.1.2. Labor Force Participation Rates by Age Group and Gender 1. Labor Force Participation Rates (Percent) 2. Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates, 2007 16 (Percentage points) Total Female Male 15 24 25 54 55 64 65+ 15 24 25 54 55 64 65+  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 Total Within Between Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Total population across 31 economies normalized to 1. Within and between changes are based on, respectively, population and labor force participation rates held constant at 2007 levels. Between changes include the small interaction effect. Figure 1.1.3. Decomposition of Change in Labor Force Participation Rate, 2007 16 Age 15 24 Age 55 64 Total Age 25 54 Age 65+ Box 1.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 39 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 older groups.5 This finding reflects a continuation of precrisis trends; at the same time, the drags from shifts toward the older age groups and from the decline in the participation rates of the young were more pro- nounced after 2007. This broad pattern aging weighing on participa- tion rates, and rising participation of older workers more than offsetting the falling rates of younger workers holds across most of the large European economies. Their net effect is positive in Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom (Figure 1.1.4).6 In the United States, the decline in the participation rate of prime-age workers (ages 25 54) has compounded the effects of aging. Because of the decline in the partici- pation rate of US prime-age workers, the United States makes a sizable contribution to the decline in the over- all sample of advanced economies. In fact, the overall labor force participation rate of the remaining 30 countries increased by 0.4 percentage point between 2007 and 2016. Gender The 0.8 percentage point decline in participation between 2007 and 2016 masks a striking divergence between men and women: men s participation rate fell by 2.3 percentage points during this period, while that of women increased 0.7 percentage point. A shift-share decomposition similar to that shown in Figure 1.1.3, but further splitting age groups by gender, confirms such differences for the 25 54 age group in particular, where participation rates of men have been falling but those of women have been rising.7 This pattern became more pronounced after the global financial crisis (Figure 1.1.5): in the precrisis years male participation rates in this group still increased in Germany and Italy (and showed only a very small drop in France and the United Kingdom), so that the overall contribution of the 25 54 age group to participation rates was positive, while postcrisis the declining rates for men more 5This is in line with the findings of Aaronson and others (2014), who examine the causes of the decline in participation rates in the United States and highlight the role of structural forces, such as aging. 6As expected, the effects of aging are most pronounced in Japan. The increase in participation rates of the 55 64 group is largest in continental Europe. 7Changes in the participation rates of other age groups and the effects of aging act in the same direction for males and females. than offset the effects of rising rates for women. The United States again stands out from other large advanced economies, with declining participation rates of prime-age women, and, to a greater extent, of men.8 Over time, there has been some convergence of participation rates, especially of female participa- 8Council of Economic Advisors (2016) documents the trend of declining prime-age male labor force participation in the United States over the past half century and examines a number of potential explanations. The analysis suggests that reductions in the demand for labor, especially for lower-skilled men, appear to be an important component of the decline in prime-age male labor force participation. Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Within and between changes are based on, respectively, population and labor force participation rates held constant at 2007 levels. Between changes include the small interaction effect. Labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. Figure 1.1.4. Changes in Labor Force Participation, Select Advanced Economies, 2007 16 (Percentage points)  4  2 0 2 4 6 FRA DEU ITA JPN ESP GBR USA 2. Decomposition of Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates Within Between Total  20  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 20 25 FRA DEU ITA JPN ESP GBR USA 15 24 25 54 55 64 65+ Total 1. Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates by Age Group Box 1.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 40 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 tion rates: countries where participation rates were lower in 2000 tended to see larger increases, while those with the highest rates saw smaller increases or outright declines (Figure 1.1.6).9 9Blau and Kahn (2013) examine the drivers of this conver- gence and find that the expansion of family-friendly policies (including parental leave and part-time work entitlements) in other Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop- ment countries can explain close to 30 percent of the relative decrease in US women s labor force participation. However, they note that these policies also appear to encourage part-time work and employment in lower-level positions: in the United States, women are more likely than in other countries to have full-time jobs and to work as managers or professionals. Outlook and Policy Implications Looking ahead, demographics are likely to con- tinue to play a prominent role in determining the path of the aggregate labor force participation rate. Over the longer term, the downward influence of aging on the aggregate labor force participation rate is likely to dominate. This will restrain growth in the  potential labor force  (affected by the size and age composition of the working-age population and the participation rates of the demographic groups) and hence potential output, as noted in Chapter 3 of the April 2015 WEO. Policies to raise participation would help slow the decline in the labor force growth rate, in turn slowing the rise of the dependency ratio and thereby supporting fiscal sustainability. Eliminating poli- cies that discourage second earners in households, ensuring the availability of affordable child care and elderly care, fostering flexible work arrange- ments, and offering family-friendly benefits, such as parental leave, would generally be beneficial.  2 0 2 4 6 FRA DEU ITA JPN ESP GBR USA Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Note: Labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. Figure 1.1.5. Changes in Labor Force Participation Rates for the 25 54 Age Group by Gender, Select Advanced Economies (Percentage points) Male Female 1. 2000 06  2 0 2 4 6 FRA DEU ITA JPN ESP GBR USA 1. 2007 16  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 30 40 50 60 70 80 NLD ESP LVA NOR SWE FIN CAN IRL SVK ISR FRA AUT GRC JPN CYP NZL KOR AUS PRT DNK CZE LTU ISL SVN GBR BEL EST CHE USA DEU ITA Change in female labor force participation rate, 2000 16 (percentage points) Female labor force participation rate, 2000 (percent) Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Note: Labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. Figure 1.1.6. Convergence in Female Labor Force Participation Rates y =  0.18x + 13.04 R 2 = 0.21 Box 1.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 41 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 However, given the divergent paths in participation rates across the countries highlighted above, policy priorities vary with country-specific circumstances. In the United States, where both male and female prime-age participation rates have been declining, more targeted measures may be needed (see IMF 2017a). Immigration reform would also raise the size of the labor force and boost participation rates and could largely offset further declines in participation caused by aging. Box 1.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 42 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Capital flows to emerging markets slumped to a multidecade low in 2015, prompting concerns that outflow pressures could trigger a broader economic downturn and lead to crises in those economies (see Chapter 2 of the April 2016 World Economic Outlook). A useful measure for illustrating the unusual downturn is nonresident capital inflows, which are defined as the net acquisition of emerging market assets by foreign investors (also referred to as gross inflows). As a share of emerging market GDP, nonresident inflows fell to 1.6 percent in 2015, the lowest level since 1990 (Figure 1.2.1, panel 1). Another useful measure is net capital flows, which is defined as nonresident inflows less net outward investment by emerging market econ- omy residents excluding official reserves accumulation. Net capital flows turned negative in 2015 for the first time in at least 35 years, reaching  1.0 percent of emerging market GDP, and remained negative the following year. In recent quarters, however, capital inflows to emerging markets have revived. Total nonresident capital inflows to emerging markets are estimated to have averaged $200 billion in the first two quarters of 2017, up from a quarterly average of $120 billion in 2015 16 (Figure 1.2.1, panel 2). Net capital flows have also turned up in recent quarters, reaching $115 billion in the first half of 2017. The sharp downturn and the recent revival in both measures of capital flows can be attributed to two main developments the evolution of China s financial account and a rollercoaster ride in portfolio flows to emerging markets. Stabilization of External Pressures in China China experienced a sharp decline in nonresident capital inflows between the third quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of 2016. During this period, concerns about the possibility of a sharp depreciation of the Chinese renminbi prompted the repayment of dollar debt by Chinese firms. In addition, foreign investors sought to reduce their exposures to renminbi assets, especially offshore bank deposits. Because those funds had been on-lent by Chinese banks  foreign affiliates to banks domiciled on the mainland, the mainland banks had to repay those loans, thus further reducing total external debt (see McCaulay and Shu 2016). External pressures prompted large reserves interventions by the The author of this box is Robin Koepke, with research assis- tance from Gavin Asdorian. central bank, which kept renminbi depreciation in check (Figure 1.2.2, panel 1). Initially, the capital flows reversal was driven primar- ily by a reduction in Chinese liabilities to the rest of the world, while resident outward investment continued to grow broadly in line with previous trends (Figure 1.2.2, panel 2). Nonresident inflows recovered in the second quarter of 2016, but at that point domestic investors began to move more and more money out of the coun- try by acquiring foreign assets. Since the beginning of 2017, resident outflow pressures have abated follow- ing tighter enforcement of capital flow management measures, weakening in the US dollar, and a pickup in growth momentum. Net capital outflows (including  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 1990 94 98 2002 06 10 14 16 Nonresident in ows Net  ows Figure 1.2.1. Capital Flows to Emerging Market and Developing Economies Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. Note: Afr. and ME = Africa and the Middle East; Em. Asia = emerging Asia; Em. Eur. = emerging Europe; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; Lat. Am. = Latin America. US recessions  100 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17: Q1 2. Nonresident Capital In ows to EMDEs (Billions of US dollars) Lat. Am. Em. Eur. Afr. and ME Total China Em. Asia excluding China 1. EMDEs Capital Flows (Percent of GDP) Box 1.2. Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 43 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 errors and omissions) eased to about $20 billion in the second quarter of 2017 (from a peak of $210 billion in the third quarter of 2016), which also marked the first quarter of central bank reserves accumulation in China since the second quarter of 2015. A Rollercoaster Ride in Emerging Market Portfolio Flows The second development behind the recent slump and revival of capital flows to emerging markets was a rollercoaster ride in portfolio inflows that began with the taper tantrum in mid-2013 (Figure 1.2.3, panel 1). During that episode, investors reacted strongly to signals from the US Federal Reserve that it would start tapering purchases of bonds sooner than previously expected. Rising US market interest rates weighed on emerging market asset prices as foreign investors began to pare their emerging market exposures. In mid-2015, portfolio equity and debt inflows again came under significant pressure when concerns about possible renminbi devaluation intensified. From the third quarter of 2015 to the first quarter of 2016 global investors sold a net $52 billion in emerging market stocks and bonds, exceeding outflows of an estimated $32 billion during the taper tantrum. The episode was a stark illustration of China s growing importance for global financial markets and the world economy, and for other emerging market economies in particular. After a modest recovery in 2016, portfolio flows were hit by renewed repricing of US bonds after the US election in November 2016. This time, the jump in US bond yields was driven by expectations of fiscal expansion and deregulation that would support growth and prompt faster monetary tightening. Similar to the taper tantrum episode, investors responded by Figure 1.2.2. China: Reserves and Capital Flows Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.  200  150  100  50 0 50 100 150 200 250 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 17: Q2 1. China: Accumulation of Of cial Reserves (Billions of US dollars)  300  200  100 0 100 200 300 2012 13 14 15 16 17: Q1 2. China: Breakdown of Quarterly Capital Flows (Billions of US dollars) Net errors and omissions Total Nonresident in ows Resident out ows Figure 1.2.3. Latest Capital Flows Trends and Prospects Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates. Note: EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; RMB = renminbi.  80  60  40  20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 2013 14 15 16 Aug. 17 1. Nonresident Portfolio Flows to EMDEs (Billions of US dollars; three-month rolling sum) Portfolio debt Portfolio equity Taper tantrum RMB shock US election 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18 Nonresident in ows (percent of GDP) EMDEs growth (percent) 2. EMDEs Capital Flows and GDP Growth US recessions Box 1.2 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 44 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 curtailing their emerging market positions, reflected in a reversal, albeit short-lived, of portfolio flows. Starting in early 2017, portfolio flows to emerging markets recovered as investor sentiment about the global economy improved and financial conditions eased. Against the backdrop of a rally in global stock markets, foreign purchases of emerging market stocks and bonds rose to an estimated $205 billion year-to-date through August, more than twice the total for 2015 16. Other Factors Aside from these two explanatory factors, a number of other developments have shaped capital flow dynamics in recent years. An important idiosyncratic shock was Russia s sharp reversal of nonresident capital inflows beginning in 2014, when its conflict with Ukraine escalated. Since then, annual nonresident inflows to Russia have averaged $120 billion (0.4 per- cent of emerging market GDP) less than in 2011 13. A mitigating factor for the slowdown in net capi- tal flows to emerging market economies in 2015 16 was reduced resident outward investment from most emerging market economies (with the notable exception of China). Resident investment abroad by emerging market economies excluding China averaged $171 bil- lion less annually in 2015 16 than in the three previous years, reflected in reduced outward direct investment ($72 billion), portfolio investment ($51 billion), and other investment ($48 billion). The decline in resident outward investment itself seems to have been driven primarily by reduced foreign inflows, reflecting the two-way nature of capital flows. In particular, an influx of foreign capital into local markets may, directly or indirectly, provide funding for domestic investors to acquire foreign assets. The fact that local investors in emerging markets did not seek to take more money abroad during this period may also indicate, with the benefit of hindsight, that rapid asset sales by foreign investors were exaggerated relative to changes in funda- mentals of emerging market economies. Capital Flows Outlook Looking ahead, capital flows are expected to continue to recover at a moderate pace. Nonresident inflows to emerging market economies are projected at 3 per- cent of GDP in 2017, up from 2.6 percent in 2016 (Figure 1.2.3, panel 2). A robust economic outlook should help emerging market economies attract solid inflows, with aggregate real GDP growth projected to rise to 4.6 percent and 4.9 percent in 2017 and 2018, respectively, from 4.3 percent in 2015 and 2016.1 Strong growth should benefit all components of capital flows, but would be expected to boost inflows of foreign direct investment particularly, given that such inflows are relatively more dependent on domestic factors (see Koepke 2015 for a literature survey). However, the external environment could turn less favorable in the coming years, given the prospect of monetary policy normalization in the major advanced economies. Rising interest rates and a gradual unwind- ing of central bank asset purchases under the baseline forecast are likely to exert some drag on portfolio flows and bank-related inflows to emerging markets. Debt flows are generally most sensitive to changes in exter- nal interest rates, suggesting that foreign purchases of emerging market bonds and cross-border bank lending could see some retrenchment in the years ahead. Moreover, downside risks to capital flows remain significant. For example, the major central banks could tighten monetary policy faster than currently expected, which could cause risk appetite toward emerging market assets to suffer a setback from the buoyant con- ditions that have prevailed during the past six months, triggering sizable outflows from emerging markets (see Chapter 1 of the October 2017 Global Financial Stability Report). 1The analysis in Chapter 2 of the April 2016 World Economic Outlook finds that slowing emerging market growth contrib- uted to the deceleration in capital flows to emerging markets in recent years. Box 1.2 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 45 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Per capita real GDP growth in emerging mar- ket and developing economies is projected to pick up from 3.2 percent in 2017 to 3.6 percent in 2019 and stay at about 3.7 percent in 2020 22 (Figure 1.3.1). The growth differential relative to advanced economies, where real per capita growth is projected to average 1.4 percent between 2017 and 2022, suggests some catching up between the two groups. However, the headline growth figures for emerging market and developing economies are heavily influenced by the largest economies in the group and conceal substantial differences The author of this box is Francesco Grigoli. across countries.1 Zooming in on countries  growth prospects reveals that they are not as favorable for some economies in the group as the headline figures would suggest. Heterogeneity In general, there are sizable differences in emerg- ing market and developing economy growth rates 1Per capita real income for each group is calculated by sum- ming real GDP at purchasing power parities and dividing by total population for the group. Figure 1.3.1. Per Capita Real GDP Growth across Country Groups (Percent)  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 AEs EMDEs China Fuel exporters Nonfuel exporters excluding China 1995 2005 2006 16 2017 22 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Bars denote PPP (purchasing power parity) GDP weighted averages; red markers indicate the medians; and black markers denote the top and bottom deciles of per capita GDP growth in the country groups. The fuel and nonfuel exporter subgroups are de ned in Table D of the Statistical Appendix and cover EMDEs only. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies. Figure 1.3.2. Per Capita Real GDP Growth, Emerging Market and Developing Economies, by Region (Percent) 1995 2005 2006 16 2017 22  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 LAC MENAP EMDE Asia excluding China EMDE Europe SSA CIS Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Bars denote PPP (purchasing power parity) GDP weighted averages; red markers indicate the medians; and black markers denote the top and bottom deciles of per capita GDP growth in the country groups. CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States; EMDE = emerging market and developing economies; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENAP = Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa. Box 1.3. Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence over the Forecast Horizon  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 46 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 across regions (Figure 1.3.2). Per capita growth in Asian emerging market and developing economies is significantly higher than in other regions. Likewise, the emerging market economies of Europe, followed by those in the Commonwealth of Independent States, are generally experiencing stronger per capita growth than those in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East and North Africa, and Latin America and the Caribbean. The fast pace of per capita income growth in Asia is driven to an important extent by China (as suggested by Figure 1.3.1) as well as India. Differences in median growth rates across regions are more modest. An even starker difference in per capita growth rates exists between fuel-exporting and fuel-importing emerging market and developing economies. The median growth rate for fuel exporters was lower than that for fuel importers in 1995 2005 and especially in 2006 16, and is forecast to diverge further in 2017 22 (as shown by the red markers in Figure 1.3.1). Regres- sion analysis of the average projected growth rates over the 2017 22 period on a set of indicator variables and controls confirms dependence on fuel exports and population size as the most important factors underlying the diversity in countries  growth forecasts (Table 1.3.1). Fuel exporters  projected growth rates are almost 2 percentage points lower, on average, over the 2017 22 period, reflecting an ongoing adjustment to persistently lower oil prices, which, in some cases, involves reforms expected to deliver growth dividends only in the medium and long term.2 The results also indicate that small countries (defined here as those with populations of less than half a million people) are projected to experience 1  percentage points lower growth, on average, than other countries, suggesting the importance of such factors as diseconomies of scale, lack of diversification, and vulnerability to natu- ral disasters. Once dummy variables for fuel exporters and small countries are included in the regressions, the regional dummies are no longer significant.3 Even within the fuel-exporter and importer groups, however, there is significant heterogeneity. Among fuel importers, for example, China, India, Vietnam, and Bangladesh have grown, on average, by almost 6 per- cent annually from 1995 to 2016; their growth rates are projected to moderate slightly to 5.8 percent over 2017 22. For the median fuel importer, the annual per capita growth rates are 2.4 percent and 2.8 per- cent, respectively, over those periods. Among export- ers, Angola, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan registered per capita growth rates, on average, of about 6 percent during 1995 2016, while the median fuel-exporter country grew by 1.7 percent a year over the same period. 2Substituting a commodity-exporter dummy for the fuel-exporter dummy returns insignificant results, suggesting that nonfuel commodity exporters are projected to perform relatively better than fuel exporters in per capita real GDP growth. 3The results are generally robust to including historical growth calculated over different periods (as opposed to 2012 16 as in the regression presented in Table 1.3.1), as well as to estimating the regressions by weighted least squares. Running the same regressions with October 2016 WEO data yields similar results for the fuel-exporter dummy, albeit with a smaller coefficient. Dropping large countries, such as China and India, does not affect the results. Table 1.3.1. Correlates of Growth Projections, EMDEs, 2017 221 Fuel Exporters  1.977*** (0.398) Sub-Saharan Africa 0.116 (0.522) EMDE Asia 0.754 (0.595) EMDE Europe 0.562 (0.433) Latin America and the Caribbean 0.315 (0.459) Commonwealth of Independent States 0.826* (0.449) Small Countries2  1.210*** (0.408) Ln per Capita Real GDP in 2011 (PPP) 0.132 (0.218) Per Capita Real GDP Growth (2012 16) 0.376*** (0.089) Real GDP Growth in Trading Partners (2017 22) 0.019 (0.178) Constant 0.535 (2.260) Observations 147 R 2 0.495 Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; PPP = purchasing power parity. 1 Dependent variable in the regression is projected growth in per capita real GDP averaged over 2017 22. The sample of EMDEs excludes Libya, Yemen, and Venezuela, whose forecasts are affected by idiosyncratic factors. 2 Defined here as countries with a population of less than half a million. Box 1.3 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 47 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Convergence toward Advanced Economy Income Levels Even though the aggregated figures suggest some convergence toward advanced economy income levels over the forecast horizon, the picture is less bright for a sizable fraction of emerging market and developing economies.4 Under current WEO projections, slightly less than three-quarters of the economies in the group are expected to experience per capita income growth rates higher than those of advanced economies over 2017 22. The rest 43 economies representing about 14 percent of the emerging market and developing 4For an analysis of emerging market and developing econ- omies  growth performance compared with that of advanced economies over the past four decades, see Chapter 2 of the April 2017 WEO. economy population are projected to lag further behind advanced economies in terms of GDP per capita (Figure 1.3.4).5 In general, emerging market and developing economies with faster per capita income growth than 5The existence of convergence groups or clubs has been widely discussed and tested in the literature on income convergence (Durlauf and Johnson 1995; Desdoigts 1999; Durlauf and Quah 1999; Canova 2004).  10  5 0 5 10 15  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 20 Per capita real GDP growth differential 2017 22 Per capita real GDP growth differential 1995 2016 Historical divergence and projected convergence Continuing convergence No convergence Historical convergence and current divergence Figure 1.3.3. EMDEs  per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials vis- -vis Advanced Economies: 1995 2016 versus 2017 22 (Percentage points) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: The  gure depicts countries  per capita real GDP growth rates averaged over 1995 2016 (x-axis) against their projected growth rates averaged over 2017 22 (y-axis), in both cases expressed as a deviation from the per capita real GDP growth rate for advanced economies averaged over the same period. EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35  5 [ 5, 4] [ 4, 3] [ 3, 2] [ 2, 1] [ 1,0] [0,1] [1,2] [2,3] [3,4] [4,5]  5 1. 1995 2016 Figure 1.3.4. Distribution of EMDE per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect to Advanced Economies (Number of countries) Growth differential with respect to AEs (percentage points) Zero growth differential with respect to AEs, 1995 2016 (1.5 percent) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45  5 [ 5, 4] [ 4, 3] [ 3, 2] [ 2, 1] [ 1,0] [0,1] [1,2] [2,3] [3,4] [4,5]  5 2. 2017 22 Growth differential with AEs (percentage points) Zero growth differential with respect to AEs, 2017 22 (1.4 percent) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: The  gure depicts the number of countries with growth rates (in deviation from the advanced economy growth rate over the same period) in the intervals shown in the x-axis. AEs = advanced economies; EMDE = emerging market and developing economy. Box 1.3 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 48 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 advanced economies over the past two decades are projected to continue to grow faster, as shown by the strong overlap between those countries that exhibited convergence in 1995 2016 and those that are pro- jected to converge over the forecast horizon (that is, with most of the countries falling into the upper right quadrant in Figure 1.3.3). Convergence is expected to be led by fuel importers, especially those in emerging market and developing Asia and sub-Saharan Africa (Figure 1.3.5), and by countries with larger popula- tions, that is, China and India (Figure 1.3.6). It is dis- appointing that almost 18 percent of emerging market and developing economies failed to converge toward advanced economy income levels in 1995 2016 and are not projected to do so in the next five years; and 9 percent of countries were converging in 1995 2016, 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45  5 [ 5, 4] [ 4, 3] [ 3, 2] [ 2, 1] [ 1,0] [0,1] [1,2] [2,3] [3,4] [4,5]  5 1. 2017 22, by Type of Export Earnings Figure 1.3.5. Distribution of EMDE per Capita Real GDP Growth Differentials with Respect to Advanced Economies, by Type of Export Earnings and Region (Number of countries) Growth differential with respect to AEs (percentage points) Zero growth differential with respect to AEs, 1995 2016 (1.4 percent) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45  5 [ 5, 4] [ 4, 3] [ 3, 2] [ 2, 1] [ 1,0] [0,1] [1,2] [2,3] [3,4] [4,5]  5 2. 2017 22, by Region Growth differential with respect to AEs (percentage points) Zero growth differential with respect to AEs, 2017 22 (1.4 percent) Fuel Nonfuel LAC MENAP EMDE Asia EMDE Eur. SSA CIS Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: The  gure depicts the number of countries with growth rates (in deviation from the advanced economy growth rate over the same period) in the intervals shown in the x-axis. AEs = advanced economies; CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States; EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENAP = Middle East, North Africa, and Pakistan; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa. 0 5 10 15 20 25  -5 [-5,-4] [-4,-3] [-3,-2] [-2,-1] [-1,0] [0,1] [1,2] [2,3] [3,4] [4,5]  5 1. 1995 2016 Figure 1.3.6. Distribution of EMDE Population by per Capita Real GDP Growth Rate (Population shares) Growth differential with respect to AEs (percentage points) Zero growth differential with respect to AEs, 1995 2016 (1.5 percent) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45  5 [ 5, 4] [ 4, 3] [ 3, 2] [ 2, 1] [ 1,0] [0,1] [1,2] [2,3] [3,4] [4,5]  5 2. 2017 22 Growth differential with respect to AEs (percentage points) Zero growth differential with respect to AEs, 2017 22 (1.4 percent) India China Other EMDEs India China Other EMDEs Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: The  gures depict the share of the total EMDE population in countries with growth rates in the intervals shown on the x-axis. AEs = advanced economies; EMDE = emerging market and developing economy. Box 1.3 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 49 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 but are projected to increasingly fall behind advanced economy income levels over the projection period. On the brighter side, about 19 percent of emerging market and developing economies were not converg- ing in 1995 2016, but are now projected to do so (Figure 1.3.3). Growth projections for emerging market and devel- oping economies do not indicate income convergence within the group. Per capita real GDP growth rates among emerging market and developing economies in 2017 22 are not projected to be significantly higher (at 5 percent significance level) in countries with relatively low incomes (Figure 1.3.7).6 By contrast, per capita real GDP growth forecasts for advanced economies display a negative and significant relation- ship (at 5 percent significance level) with income levels in 2011, indicating further income convergence within the advanced economy group over the forecast hori- zon, despite more homogeneous income levels. Finally, a country s growth rate does not always fore- tell matching gains in income for the majority of the population. In China and India, for example, where real per capita GDP grew by 9.6 percent and 4.9 per- cent a year, respectively, in 1993 2007, the median household income is estimated to have grown less by 7.3 percent a year in China and only 1.5 percent a year in India.7 6The lack of a significant correlation (at 5 percent significance level) between levels of 2011 per capita real GDP and projected growth rates holds even when countries growing more slowly than advanced economies are excluded from the sample. 7Based on data from the World Panel Income Distribution database of Lakner and Milanovic (2015).  10  5 0 5 10 15 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Per capita real GDP growth 2017 22 2011 ln per capita real GDP (PPP) Figure 1.3.7. Projected per Capita Real GDP Growth Rates and 2011 Real Income Levels, AEs and EMDEs AEs EMDEs y =  0.32x + 5.07, R 2 = 0.02 (0.18) y =  2.03x + 23.27, R 2 = 0.46 (0.38) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: The blue and red lines are  tted based on regressions of projected growth rates (averaged over 2017 22) on real per capita real GDP levels in 2011 (at purchasing power parity) on AE and EMDE samples, respectively. The number in parentheses in the regression equation is the standard error of the estimated coef cient on real per capita real GDP levels in 2011. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; PPP = purchasing power parity. Box 1.3 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 50 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Commodity prices have fallen dramatically in recent years, with food and metal products losing about 20 percent in value since 2012 13, and oil prices halving over the past three years (Figure 1.4.1). Commodity prices have not rebounded in the past three years to their peak levels, and medium-term fore- casts suggest that they are unlikely to do so. This box documents the significant macroeconomic adjustments under way in many commodity-exporting emerging market and developing economies in the wake of these price shocks. The analysis is based on a sample of 48 commodity- exporting emerging market and developing economies, about half of which are low-income countries. The economies are grouped by their main commodity exports (fuel, metals, or food) and exchange rate regime during 2013 17.1 As shown in Figure 1.4.2, many commodity-exporting emerging market and devel- oping economies maintain either currency pegs  predominantly relative to the US dollar, but in some cases to currencies such as the euro or flexible exchange rate regimes. Nevertheless, almost half of the commodity exporters with pegs in 2013 have subsequently adjusted their exchange rate regimes ( regime adjustment  in the figure), typically moving to either a more flexible regime or devalu- ing the currency in response to a large commodity terms-of-trade decline. A significant number of fuel-exporting countries have abandoned pegs (Fig- ure 1.4.2, panel 1). In general, terms-of-trade losses were largest for countries with pegs to the US dollar (Figure 1.4.3). The authors of this box are JaeBin Ahn, Eugenio Cerutti, and Ksenia Koloskova. 1As in Chapter 2 of the October 2015 World Economic Outlook, a country is defined as a commodity exporter if it meets the following two criteria: (1) commodities constituted at least 35 percent of the country s total exports, on average, between 1962 and 2014; and (2) net commodity exports accounted for at least 5 percent of its gross trade (exports plus imports), on aver- age, between 1962 and 2014. From the sample of 52 countries, which satisfy these criteria, Libya, Syria, Venezuela, and Yemen are omitted due to data constraints. The classification by type of main export is derived using World Bank World Development Indicators data, based on the shares of different types of com- modity exports in total merchandise exports for 1999 2015. External Adjustment Countries with flexible exchange rates have seen sizable nominal depreciations since 2013, which trans- lated into real depreciations, making them the only group whose real effective exchange rates adjusted to the commodity-price shock (Figure 1.4.4). Countries with currencies fixed to the US dollar, by contrast, experienced appreciation in nominal and real effective terms (with the nominal appreciation reflecting the general strengthening of the US dollar vis- -vis other currencies). Exchange rates fixed to other currencies  mostly the euro saw a depreciation in nominal terms vis- -vis the dollar, which induced some real effective exchange rate adjustment. Finally, the largest nominal depreciations were observed among the economies that adjusted their regimes but, in most cases, this nominal depreciation did not translate into sizable deprecia- tions in real effective terms because inflation increased in tandem.2 2Analysis in this box does not consider parallel/black market exchange rates. 20 40 60 80 100 120 2012 13 14 15 16 17 Oil (APSP) Food Metal Figure 1.4.1. Commodity Prices (Index; January 1, 2013 = 100) Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and IMF staff calculations. Note: APSP = average petroleum spot price. Box 1.4. Macroeconomic Adjustment In Emerging Market Commodity Exporters  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 51 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 In response to terms-of-trade shocks that directly affect the external balance, net export volume could adjust, partly offsetting the initial impacts of the shocks. The change in real exchange rates in response to the terms-of-trade shock facilitates this exter- nal adjustment through the expenditure-switching channel. Such real effective exchange rate adjust- ment and the associated switch in expenditures are expected to be more pronounced in countries with a flexible exchange rate regime (Adler, Magud, and Werner 2017; IMF 2017b). Panel 1 of Figure 1.4.5 confirms this notion and shows that, despite facing bigger terms-of-trade shocks, countries with fixed exchange rates experienced the smallest adjustment in net exports, whereas those with flexible exchange rate regimes saw strong net export adjustments, which more than offset their terms-of-trade shocks. Export volumes did not react much, on average, across the different exchange rate regimes, likely reflecting the insensitivity of commodity exports to the exchange rate as well as these countries  limited export diver- 0 2 4 6 8 10 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment Figure 1.4.2. Exchange Rate Regimes of Commodity-Exporting Emerging Market and Developing Economies (Number of countries) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Regime adjustment covers  xed exchange rate regimes that devalued their parity or changed the exchange rate regime toward more  exibility during 2013 17. 1. Commodity Fuel Exporters 0 2 4 6 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment 2. Commodity Metal Exporters 0 2 4 6 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment 3. Commodity Food Exporters 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 Jun. 17 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment Figure 1.4.3. Commodity Terms of Trade (Index; June 2012 = 100; PPP weighted) Source: Gruss 2014. Note: PPP = purchasing power parity. Box 1.4 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 52 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment Figure 1.4.4. Evolution of Exchange Rates (Index; 2010 = 100; PPP weighted) Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Yearly average for 2010 16; as of June for 2017. PPP = purchasing power parity. 1. Real Effective Exchange Rate 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2. Nominal Effective Exchange Rate 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 3. US Dollar per National Currency  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 20 25  40  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 40 Import volume compression REER appreciation (percent)  40  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 40  40  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 40 Export volume expansion REER appreciation (percent) Figure 1.4.5. Net Export Adjustment, 2013 16 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: REER = real effective exchange rate; ToT = terms of trade. 2. Export Response, 2013 16 (Percent of GDP)  30  25  20  15  10  5 0 5 10 Fixed Flexible Regime adjustment Import volume compression Export volume expansion ToT income shock Changes in trade balance 1. Net Export Adjustment, 2013 16 (Percent of GDP) Fixed Flexible Regime adjustment 3. Import Response, 2013 16 (Percent of GDP) Fixed Flexible Regime adjustment Box 1.4 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 53 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 sification (Figure 1.4.5, panel 2). The stark contrast in the behavior of net exports stems mainly from the extent of import contraction. In turn, this could be attributed to expenditure-switching effects in flexible regime countries (and lack thereof in fixed regime countries) (Figure 1.4.5, panel 3) as well as the varying extent to which countries used their fiscal buffers, as discussed next. Fiscal and Macroeconomic Adjustments In the aftermath of the shock, countries with fixed exchange rates used their fiscal and external buffers to a greater extent than did those with more flexible exchange rates. As shown in Figure 1.4.6, countries with currency pegs incurred large fiscal deficits in the aftermath of the commodity price decline, which were heavily financed with higher borrowing, decreasing reserves, and/or other past savings (such as deposits in sovereign wealth funds). Countries that have had a regime adjustment also increased their borrowing  but less than did countries that maintained pegs. They have also relied much less on reserves, likely due to their low initial levels (which may have contributed to the regime change in many cases). Those countries with flexible exchange rates managed to keep budgets balanced throughout 2013 16 and avoided the deple- tion of reserves. Assessing whether flexible exchange rates have helped safeguard GDP growth is more challeng- ing. Countries with pegs to the dollar had greater terms-of-trade losses than the others to begin with (Figure 1.4.3), so they would be expected to see weaker growth if they were not utilizing buffers. Zooming in on the subsample of fuel exporters (which experienced terms of trade losses at the same time), Figure 1.4.7, panel 1 shows that the decline in growth rates were generally comparable across countries with different types of exchange rate regimes (with the exception of those with pegs to currencies other than the US dollar, which is a small group). All in all, countries with dollar pegs shored up their GDP growth rate to keep it on par with growth in the countries with flexible exchange rates despite experi- encing larger terms-of-trade losses but with a greater reliance on buffers.  20  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment Figure 1.4.6. Fiscal Indicators (Percent of GDP; PPP weighted) Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: PPP = purchasing power parity. 1. Primary Net Lending or Borrowing 0 10 20 30 40 50 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2. Government Debt 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 3. Reserves Box 1.4 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 54 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Turning to inflation rates, countries that experienced large depreciations/devaluations those with flexible exchange rates and those that have adjusted regimes  saw, on average, a larger increase in consumer price inflation because of exchange rate pass-through (although the increase was relatively contained  between 1 percent and 3 percent for most countries, conditional on their commodity terms-of-trade shocks) (Figure 1.4.7, panel 2).  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment1  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 Fixed dollar Fixed nondollar Flexible Regime adjustment Figure 1.4.7. Change in per Capita GDP Growth and In ation in Fuel Exporters, Conditional on CToT (Percent; average 2014 16 versus average 2011 13) 1. Change in per Capita GDP Growth 2. Change in CPI In ation Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The horizontal line inside each box represents the median; the upper and lower edges of each box show the top and bottom quartiles; and the red markers denote the maximum and minimum. CPI = consumer price index; CToT = commodity terms of trade. 1Minimum value excludes outlier value for the Islamic Republic of Iran ( 16.3). Box 1.4 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 55 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The number of people living outside their coun- try of birth increased by nearly 60 percent over 1990 2015 to about 250 million, or 3 percent of the world s population. Migrants typically maintain strong ties with their home countries, remitting part of their labor income earned in their destination country to their families staying behind. The recorded US dollar value of remittances to emerging market and developing economies increased fivefold during 1990 2015, nearly three times the value of official development assistance. By 2015, 98 countries received remittance inflows greater than 1.5 percent of GDP, with nearly one-third receiving inflows exceeding 10 percent of GDP (Figure 1.5.1). While some significant  remittance corridors  are entirely between emerging market and developing economies, about 45 percent of remittances flow from advanced economies to emerging market and develop- ing economies. As such, remittances have the potential to be an increasingly important mechanism for sharing income risks on a global scale. Although remittances play a positive long-term role in economic and social development, this box focuses on an arguably no-less-critical role that of mitigating cyclical risks to household consumption The authors of this box are Kimberly Beaton, Luis Cat o, and Zs ka K cz n. stemming from major macroeconomic shocks that often hit emerging market and developing econo- mies, particularly the poorer ones.1,2 In principle, deep integration into the global financial system can smooth the effects of such idiosyncratic income shocks on household consumption through bor- rowing and lending in capital markets.3 However, poorer countries are known to face a host of fric- 1For instance, by promoting financial deepening, reducing pov- erty, and increasing fiscal resources see Adams and Page (2005); Jongwanich (2007); and Giuliano and Ruiz-Arranz (2009). While other research has also pointed to possible negative effects of remit- tances on growth for instance, associated with losses in external competitiveness due to exchange rate appreciations brought about by higher remittances, Rajan and Subramanian (2005) find that such Dutch Disease effects often associated with foreign aid do not appear to extend to private remittances. 2Ratha (2003); Hadzi-Vaskov (2006); Bugamelli and Paterno (2009); Chami, Hakura, and Montiel (2009); Combes and Ebeke (2011); De and others (2016); and Beaton and others (2017) consider the importance of remittances as a risk-sharing arrangement to smooth consumption in developing countries generally. Beaton, Cevik, and Yousefi (2017) explicitly consider the importance of remittances in smoothing consumption under fiscal shocks. Few studies have focused on the role of remittances in smoothing commodity price shocks. 3Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2009) define consumption smoothing as delinking fluctuations in idiosyncratic consump- tion growth from fluctuations in income, to maintain a steady pace of household consumption over time. Figure 1.5.1. Net Remittances as a Share of Output, 2015 (Percent) Less than  1 5 to 10  1 to 0 More than 10 0 to 5 No data Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, Migration and Remittances database; and IMF staff calculations. Box 1.5. Remittances and Consumption Smoothing  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 56 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 tions that limit international financial integration (Figure 1.5.2); these impediments can, in turn, greatly constrict the effectiveness of the textbook capital-market-based mechanism for smoothing con- sumption. The main questions addressed in this box, therefore, is the extent to which remittances help overcome this financial imperfection and whether their effectiveness varies across types of shocks and characteristics of sending and receiving countries. A first stab at answering this question is to note that remittances are the least volatile component of balance of payments flows (Figure 1.5.3, panel 1). Their vola- tility is even lower than that of foreign direct invest- ment flows, which are well known to be less volatile than equity and portfolio financial flows. Remittances are also significantly less positively correlated with GDP than foreign portfolio investment and foreign direct investment flows.4 The stabilizing role of remit- tances also stands out when comparing the volatility of the current account including remittances to that excluding remittances: if remittances had little effect on current account volatility, one would expect to see a cluster of points (one for each country) along a 45-degree line in the second panel of Figure 1.5.3. Instead, a far larger cluster of points is observed above the line, suggesting that remittances help stabilize the current account, particularly in countries where the value of remittances is sizable relative to GDP. While remittances appear to help stabilize the current account and are typically less correlated with GDP than other external financing flows, what mat- ters directly for societal welfare is the extent to which household consumption is stabilized following shocks to domestic income. Consumption growth tends to be far more volatile in many, if not all, emerging market and developing economies than in advanced econo- mies. A much-touted benefit of international financial integration would be the elimination of this  imper- fection  in international risk sharing; yet that goal remains elusive for most countries (see Prasad and oth- ers 2003; and Kose, Prasad, and Terrones 2009). The question is whether greater international labor market integration can help mitigate such financial market imperfections through remittance flows and, if so, under what circumstances and country characteristics. This question can be examined in a standard econometric model of risk sharing. Defining country-  specific (that is, idiosyncratic) household consump- tion and output growth in country i at time t as      c      it  =    c  it           c  t  and    y      it  =    y  it           y  t , where        c  t  is global household consumption growth and        y  t  is global GDP per capita growth, the relevant regression model can be written as:    c      it  =   1     y      it  +   2   R  it     y      it  +   3   FI  it     y      it  +    REER  it  +   t  +   i  +   it ,  ( 1.5 . 1 )  where   t  and   i  denote time and country fixed effects and   it  is the error term.  R  it  and  FI  it  are, respectively, 4This is true for both gross and net flows, as well as for correlations in levels and in first differences in a broad cross-country panel spanning 1990 2015. Looking at bilateral remittance flows, Frankel (2011) finds that remittances are mostly countercyclical for the recipient country. Yet, in some cases, remittances sent primarily for investment motives can be procyclical, even if to a lesser extent than portfolio or foreign direct investment flows. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 All High remittance LICs EMDEs AEs Source: IMF staff calculations. Note:  High remittance  refers to those countries with remittance in ows greater than the median of 1.5 percent of GDP over 1990 2014. Financial integration refers to de facto  nancial integration measured by the sum of external assets and liabilities (as a share of GDP) from the data set by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2017) in 2014. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies; LICs = low-income countries. Figure 1.5.2. Financial Integration (Percent of GDP) Box 1.5 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 57 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 the remittances-to-GDP ratio and the sum of gross foreign assets and liabilities as a share of GDP (the usual de facto measure of international financial inte- gration; see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2017).5 If financial markets were perfect, consumption risk would be shared equally across countries and relative income growth would not matter for consumption, so   1  =   2   R  it  =   3   FI  it  = 0 . At the other extreme  absent all risk sharing through foreign borrowing and investment  1  +   2   R  it  +   3   FI  it  should be equal to one. Given financial market imperfections,   1 is never zero; yet greater financial and labor market integration should help reduce the overall correlation between idiosyncratic consumption and output growth, imply- ing that the coefficients on the interaction terms,   2  and   3 , are expected to be negative. Results of the estimation of equation (1.5.1) confirm that remittances facilitate consumption smoothing. Estimates of equation (1.5.1) indicate that the expected negative signs on the coefficients are typically observed and, more crucially, that   2  is statistically significant that is, remittances reduce the dependence of consumption on the home country GDP and thus improve risk sharing.6 On a broad cross-country basis (which includes countries receiving both high and low remittances as well as more and less financially integrated countries), about 27 percent 5Except for the second and third terms on the right-hand side of equation (1.5.1), this regression specification has been standard in the macro literature on international risk sharing (for example, Obstfeld 1993; Lewis 1996; Kalemli-Ozcan, Sorensen, and Yosha 2003; Kose, Prasad, and Terrones 2009). It was first expanded to consider the financial integration interaction term by Sorensen and others (2005) and then augmented to include the remittances interaction term by De and others (2016) and later by Beaton, Cevik, and Yousefi (2017) and Beaton and others (2017). Cat o and Chang (2017) show how the micro foundations of the standard risk-sharing equation emanate from a model of costly financial transfers at the household level, implying that the coefficient on the relative income term is effectively a measure of financial frictions; and that under these circumstances, the coefficient   on the real effective exchange rate (defined as appreciation, denoting a rise in the index) can take either a positive or a negative sign (as with frictionless finan- cial markets). They also show that that coefficient is influenced by country-specific pricing structures in goods markets, and so is bound to display considerable cross-country heterogeneity and be less precisely estimated in pooled regressions. Underlying econo- metric work for this box supports that prior, so that coefficient is unimportant in the present context. 6This result is consistent with De and others (2016); Beaton and others (2017); and Beaton, Cevik, and Yousefi (2017). of variation in income that is smoothed is due to remittances (Figure 1.5.4, panel 1, first bar). In other words, for any extra dollar of income lost (for what- ever reason) in the home country, consumption falls by only 63 cents, all else constant. The quantitative importance of remittances also far exceeds that yielded by the financial integration term (as measured by   3    FI  it  in equation (1.5.1)). Subsequent bars in panel 1 of Figure 1.5.4 show that the effects can be somewhat larger (as a proportion of the total smoothed com- ponent) for high-remittance countries, during major country-specific financial shocks (financial crises), 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 Volatility of the current account without remittances Volatility of the current account Figure 1.5.3. Smoothing Effects of Remittances Sources: World Bank Remittances database; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Total in ows refers to total capital in ows to a country; other in ows refers to  ows other than foreign direct investment, portfolio, equity, derivatives, or reserves. Volatility refers to the standard deviation. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies. 2. Current Account Volatility with and without Remittances (Percent of GDP) 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 High remittance receivers EMDEs AEs World Remittances Foreign direct investment Total in ows Other in ows 1. Volatility of In ows (Standard deviation of  ows as a percent of GDP) High remittance receivers Others Box 1.5 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 58 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 and during cyclical contractions in the commodity terms of trade. Breaking the sample up by country characteristics reveals that, if the receiving country is a commodity exporter, the contribution of remittances to consump- tion smoothing is higher than that for noncommodity exporters (Figure 1.5.4, panel 2, first two bars). If the country is a high-remittance receiver and a commodity exporter (third bar), the contribution is overwhelming. Finally, the source country of remittances also matters: if the source country is a noncommodity exporter, the percentage contribution to total consumption smooth- ing is higher than if the host country is a commodity exporter (comparing the relative portions in the last bar of Figure 1.5.4, panel 2, to that of the second bar of panel 1).7 These findings indicate that remittances have played a significant role in consumption smoothing in less financially integrated emerging market and developing economies, particularly during peri- ods of local financial crises and falling commodity prices. The results also indicate that the main desti- nation country of the migrant pool matters: if the remittances-receiving country is a commodity exporter and the remittances-sending country is not, the risks to consumption are more effectively shared. The overarching conclusion is that international labor market integration can help fill at least some of the consumption smoothing gap caused by the limited role of financial market integration, particularly in poorer countries. Considering such benefits, policy measures that help reduce the cost of remittances (such as those aimed at preserving correspondent banking relationships) and foster international labor market integration so that remittances can play a fuller role in transferring resources during asymmetric shocks to receiving countries can significantly enhance world- wide sharing of consumption risk. 7Through converse reasoning, the contribution of remittances to risk sharing should also be higher than average if the sending country is a commodity exporter and the receiving country is a net commodity importer: in this case, booming commodity prices should increase remittances out of the sending country, mitigat- ing the negative effects of lower income in the receiving country caused by adverse terms of trade (and vice versa). Unfortunately, the remittances data sample for this subcase is small and estimates are bound to be less precise and are therefore not reported. 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Commodity exporters Noncommodity exporters Commodity exporter and high remittances Noncommodity exporter and high remittances High remittances: main source of remittances, noncommodity exporter Figure 1.5.4. Contribution of Remittances to Consumption Risk Sharing Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Estimates of the portion of total risks shared are based on coef cients from panel regressions of idiosyncratic consumption growth on idiosyncratic output growth and its interactions with indicators for remittances and  nancial integration (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2017). High remittance countries refers to those countries with remittance in ows greater than the median of 1.5 percent of GDP over 1990  2014. A  nancial crisis is de ned as either a banking crisis as measured by the interval between the start and the end of a banking crisis from the banking crises database by Laeven and Valencia (2008, 2010, 2012) or an external crisis as de ned by Cat o and Milesi-Ferretti (2014). A negative commodity terms-of-trade shock is de ned as a negative value of the detrended component of a country s commodity terms of trade based on Gruss (2014). 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 Full sample High remittances Financial crises Commodity terms of trade shock Remittances Other 1. Portion of Total Risks Shared Remittances Other 2. Portion of Total Risks Shared Box 1.5 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 59 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts Commodity prices have decreased since the release of the April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO). Despite the extension of the production agreement by the Orga- nization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), oil prices declined amid stronger-than-expected shale production in the United States. After declining earlier this year, metal prices have bounced back since June, in line with the improvement in macroeconomic sentiment. Agricultural prices declined on account of large supplies, but weather contributed to volatility in grain markets. The IMF s Primary Commodities Price Index declined 5.0 percent between February 2017 and August 2017, the reference periods for the April 2017 and cur- rent WEO forecasts, respectively (Figure 1. SF.1, panel 1). While energy and food prices declined substantially, by 6.5 percent and 4.3 percent, respectively, metal prices increased modestly, by 0.8 percent. Oil prices declined amid strong crude oil production in the United States. Natural gas prices fell because of lower demand. Coal prices increased, and remained high. Oil Market: Eyes on US Production On May 25, 2017, OPEC agreed to extend to March 2018 the production agreement in place since January this year. The agreement entails a cut of 1.2 million barrels a day (mbd) from October 2016 production. Russia and other non-OPEC countries agreed to stick to current production, implying addi- tional cuts of about 0.6 mbd from the October 2016 level (bringing the total cuts to 1.8 mbd). Notwithstanding efforts by the oil exporters participating in the production agreement, oil prices had fallen to less than $44 a barrel by late June, the lowest since November 2016, right before the initial production cuts were announced. The main drivers were stronger-than-expected US shale production and stronger-than-expected production recovery in Libya and Nigeria, which are exempt from production cuts. In addition, exports from OPEC countries appeared to be sustained at relatively high levels, even with lower production. The authors of this feature are Christian Bogmans (team leader), Rachel Yuting Fan, and Akito Matsumoto, with research assistance from Lama Kiyasseh. 0 40 80 120 160 200 2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Futures 68 percent con dence interval 86 percent con dence interval 95 percent con dence interval 3. Brent Price Prospects2 (US dollars a barrel) 20 60 100 140 180 220 260 300 2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Aug. 17 Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Thomson Reuters Datastream; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; and IMF staff estimates. Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook. 1 WEO future prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO and derived from future prices. October 2017 WEO prices are based on August 15, 2017, closing. 2 Derived from prices of futures options on August 15, 2017. Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments 1. Commodity Price Indices (2005 = 100) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Apr. 2016 Dec. 17 Aug. 19 Apr. 21 2. Brent Futures Curves1 (US dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis) October 2017 WEO April 2017 WEO October 2016 WEO April 2016 WEO All commodities Energy Food Metals 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 Jan. 2014 July 14 Jan. 15 July 15 Jan. 16 July 16 Jan. 17 Jul. 17 4. Metal Price Indices (Jan. 2, 2014 = 100) Aluminum Copper Iron Ore Nickel Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 60 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Since then, oil prices have rebounded, to about $50 a barrel as of late August, in response to signs of a slowdown in US production growth. US inventories increased dramatically in June 2017, but declined sharply in July and August. The US Energy Informa- tion Administration expects US crude production in 2018 to reach 9.9 mbd, exceeding the previous high of 9.6 mbd recorded in 1970. The International Energy Agency expects demand growth to increase from 1.3 mbd in 2016 to 1.6 mbd in 2017 and then to soften to 1.4 mbd in 2018. Hurricane Harvey impacted US refinery capacity in late August and spot gasoline prices increased sharply. However, crude oil prices and medium-term gasoline futures reacted much less, partially because crude inventories were large, and reduced production of refined oil translates into weaker demand for crude oil. The natural gas price index an average for Europe, Japan, and the United States decreased by 9.6 per- cent between February 2017 and August 2017, reflecting seasonal factors and firm supply from the United States and Russia.1 Lower oil prices add extra downward pressures in countries where oil-linked pric- ing is more common. Markets were relatively unfazed when Saudi Arabia and a coalition of countries severed diplomatic ties with Qatar, the world s largest LNG exporter, as exports from Qatar continue. The coal price index an average of Australian and South African prices increased by 16.5 percent from February 2017 to August 2017. This increase follows an initial decline caused by the end of the disruption to coal transportation in Australia due to Cyclone Debbie on March 28, 2017. However, strong demand from China helped prices recover. In addition, sporadic labor disputes in Australian mines provided additional support, while import restrictions by China put downward pressure on prices, especially for lower-  quality coals. Oil futures contracts point to a gradual increase of prices to about $53 a barrel in 2022 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 2). Baseline assumptions for the IMF s average petroleum spot prices, based on futures prices, suggest 1The IMF s natural gas price index is a weighted average of US Henry Hub prices, Netherland s Title Transfer Facility prices, and Argus Northeast Asia liquefied natural gas (LNG) prices. Up to December 2016, the index is the average of US Henry Hub, Ger- man border prices from Russia (long-term contract), and Japanese LNG import prices from Indonesia (Japanese Custom-cleared Crude indexed). The update reflects the increased importance of spot markets. average annual prices of $50.3 a barrel in 2017 an increase of 17.4 percent from the 2016 average and $50.2 a barrel in 2018 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 3). Uncertainty remains around the baseline assump- tions for oil prices, although risks are balanced. Upside risks include unscheduled outages and geopolitical events, especially in the Middle East and Latin Amer- ica as the United States put additional sanctions on Venezuela. Although these development could cause oil market disruptions, high inventories including drilled but uncompleted wells and the rapid response by shale producers should prevent sharp price rises in the near future. As oil markets focus on the US produc- tion/inventory figure, Hurricane Harvey may influence crude markets significantly if it turns out that physical damages to infrastructure or labor force dislocation are larger than initially assessed. Natural gas markets face additional uncertainty due to the Qatar crisis and renewed tensions between Russia and the United States after the United States approved new sanctions against Russia. Metals: China in the Mix Metal prices have increased by 0.8 percent between February and August 2017, with considerable variation across commodities. By June the metal price index had reached its lowest point in eight months due to slower demand growth in China and the United States. How- ever, prices rebounded since and continued to do so into August with the improvement in macroeconomic sentiment, especially in China. Iron ore prices dropped by 35 percent between February and June 2017, mainly driven by expansion of production by big producers in Australia and Brazil attempting to increase market share. Iron ore invento- ries at Chinese ports reached an all-time high of more than 140 million tons by late June, up 40 percent from the year before, according to data from Thomson Reuters Datastream. With steel prices in China soaring again, however, China s steel producers increased output to a record high of 74 million tons in July. This, in turn, drove up demand for the key ingredient in steelmaking, especially for higher-grade ores that increase the efficiency of steel mills and help lower air pollution. As a result, the price of iron ore rallied by 29 percent from its low in June, reaching an average of $74.6 per ton in August. Copper prices tumbled between February and early May, after strikes at major mines in Chile and Peru  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 61 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 SPECIAL FEATURE Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts ended, and the export ban in Indonesia was tempo- rarily lifted. However, with supply from Chile again disrupted and larger-than-expected demand, cop- per prices rebounded since June. In August, further boosted by China s possible ban by the end of 2018 on imports of scrap metals, copper stood 9.2 percent higher than in February, reaching its highest level since November 2014. The partial resumption of ore exports from Indonesia had also put downward pressure on nickel prices in the first half of 2017. Then, buoyed by solid demand for stainless steel, particularly in China s construction sector, the price of nickel experienced a strong recovery through July and was up by 2.3 per- cent in August compared with February. Aluminum prices increased by 9.1 percent from February 2017 to August 2017, supported by a global shortage outside of China that, according to data from the World Bureau of Metal Statistics, began in the fall of 2016. By mid-August 2017, London Metal Exchange warehouse inventories of aluminum were 44 percent lower than in mid-January, hitting their lowest point since 2008. On top of the increase so far, futures prices are pointing to a sharp rise in prices, likely fueled by expectations that China will cut its production capacity because of environmental con- cerns. Zinc rallied by 4.8 percent between February and August to a near 10-year high, following stock reductions, tight supplies and strong demand for steel galvanization, especially from Chinese infrastructure development. The IMF metal price index is projected to rise briefly in the second half of 2017, followed by a gentle decline. The annual index for 2017 is expected to increase by 20.6 percent from its 2016 level, reflecting the earlier surge this year, while futures are pointing to a slight decline throughout 2018, with the current projection for the fourth quarter of 2018 0.4 percent below the level for the third quarter of 2017. Downside risks to the outlook for metal prices include credit tightening and a slowing down of Chi- na s property market, which consumes more than half of the world s metal production. However, the Caixin Manufacturing Purchasing Managers  Index increased to 51.6 in August, indicating further expansion of the world s biggest manufacturing sector in the near term. Upside risks also include vigorous capacity cuts in China and the possibility of greater restrictions on international trade, such as those potentially aris- ing from the US Section 232 investigations for steel and aluminum. Price Swings in Agricultural Markets The IMF s agricultural price index decreased by 4.9 percent from February 2017 to August 2017, with the sub-indices of food, beverages, and agricultural raw materials decreasing by 4.3 percent, 4.3 percent, and 6.9 percent, respectively. The decline has been fairly uniform across different food groups as well; the indi- ces for cereals lost 4.0 percent, sugar 27.5 percent, veg- etable oils 6.5 percent, and beverages 4.3 percent, with only the index for meat seeing gains, of 6.3 percent. Wheat prices decreased by 5.6 percent from Febru- ary 2017 to August 2017. As hot, dry weather on the US Great Plains and in France raised doubts about yields in the Northern Hemisphere, prices increased sharply in June. The price rally was followed, how- ever, by a 20.3 percent decline, month-on-month, in August, after the United States Department of Agriculture unexpectedly raised its forecast of grain stocks at the end of the 2017 18 season for reasons that include prospects of a record upcoming Black Sea harvest of wheat. Maize prices declined too, by 8.8 percent. Weather in the corn-growing regions of the United States did not affect prices much, and corn supplies, includ- ing from other major producing countries in South America, remain abundant. Soybean prices trended downward from February because supply from South America remains plentiful following a record harvest in Brazil, even though a stronger real discourages farmers from selling their produce. Prospects of a relatively large upcoming US soybean crop increased on good weather conditions in the critical growing month of August, also putting downward pressure on prices. Palm oil prices fell by 12.0 percent from February 2017 to August 2017, as production in Malaysia and Indonesia continued to rebound from the 2015 16 El Ni o, and are expected to increase further, partly because of seasonal factors. Indeed, palm oil future curves remain in  backwardation,  indicating that sup- ply is expected to be relatively more abundant in the future. With China continuing to sell off its reserves, and the upcoming US crop not severely affected by Hurricane Harvey, cotton prices declined by 6.8 per- cent between February 2017 and August 2017. Fur- thermore, output in the 2017 18 season is expected to be buoyant in major producers, including China, India, Pakistan, and the United States. Pork prices increased substantially up to July amid stronger demand and tighter supplies. Following increases in global supplies, prices have slumped,  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 62 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 although they still stood 10.1 percent higher in August compared to February this year (based on monthly averages). While supplies are expected to increase further in the second half of 2017, strong global demand implies that markets are expected to clear at higher year-over-year prices. Similarly, the price of beef climbed steadily, by 2.4 percent, because export demand for red meat was stronger than expected and leaner cattle contributed to weaker US supply growth. As the number of cattle on US feedlots has increased unexpectedly during summer, prices are expected to soften in the second half of this year. Projections for grain prices have been revised sub- stantially downward because concerns over hot, dry weather that sparked a rally in grain markets in June this year have waned, and forecasts for grain stocks at the end of the 2017 18 season increased in August. Annual food prices are now expected to increase by 3.6 percent in 2017 and an additional 1.1 per- cent in 2018. Food prices are expected to decline slightly again for the years thereafter for reasons that include potentially better supply conditions for some commodities. Weather disruptions and variability are an upside risk to the forecast for agricultural prices. As of September 2017, there is an increasing chance (about 55 percent to 60 percent) of a La Ni a onset during the Northern Hemisphere fall and winter of 2017 18. The increased use by governments of agricultural support policies is another upside risk. Downside risks may arise if China sells more than anticipated from its large reserves of grains, sugar, and cotton.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 63 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 Europe 2.1 2.5 2.2 0.9 2.5 2.4 2.2 2.4 2.3 . . . . . . . . . Advanced Europe 1.8 2.1 1.9 0.4 1.6 1.6 2.7 2.9 2.9 8.7 7.9 7.6 Euro Area4,5 1.8 2.1 1.9 0.2 1.5 1.4 3.5 3.1 3.0 10.0 9.2 8.7 Germany 1.9 2.0 1.8 0.4 1.6 1.5 8.3 8.1 7.7 4.2 3.8 3.7 France 1.2 1.6 1.8 0.3 1.2 1.3  1.0  1.1  0.8 10.0 9.5 9.0 Italy 0.9 1.5 1.1  0.1 1.4 1.2 2.6 2.7 2.3 11.7 11.4 11.0 Spain 3.2 3.1 2.5  0.2 2.0 1.5 1.9 1.9 2.0 19.6 17.1 15.6 Netherlands 2.2 3.1 2.6 0.1 1.3 1.4 8.5 10.0 10.0 5.9 5.1 4.9 Belgium 1.2 1.6 1.6 1.8 2.2 1.5  0.4  0.3 0.0 7.9 7.5 7.3 Austria 1.5 2.3 1.9 1.0 1.6 1.8 1.7 2.1 2.2 6.0 5.4 5.3 Greece 0.0 1.8 2.6 0.0 1.2 1.3  0.6  0.2  0.1 23.6 22.3 20.7 Portugal 1.4 2.5 2.0 0.6 1.6 2.0 0.7 0.4 0.3 11.1 9.7 9.0 Ireland 5.1 4.1 3.4  0.2 0.4 1.5 3.3 3.4 3.5 7.9 6.4 5.9 Finland 1.9 2.8 2.3 0.4 0.8 1.2  1.1 0.4 0.4 8.8 8.7 8.1 Slovak Republic 3.3 3.3 3.7  0.5 1.2 1.4  0.7 0.3 0.2 9.6 8.1 7.5 Lithuania 2.3 3.5 3.5 0.7 3.5 2.0  0.9  1.6  1.4 7.9 7.0 6.5 Slovenia 3.1 4.0 2.5  0.1 1.6 1.8 5.2 5.0 4.9 8.0 6.8 6.4 Luxembourg 4.2 3.9 3.6 0.0 1.2 1.3 4.7 4.7 4.9 6.4 5.9 5.5 Latvia 2.0 3.8 3.9 0.1 3.0 3.0 1.5  0.3  1.5 9.6 9.0 8.7 Estonia 2.1 4.0 3.7 0.8 3.8 3.4 1.9 1.8 1.4 6.8 8.4 9.0 Cyprus 2.8 3.4 2.6  1.2 0.8 0.7  5.3  3.8  2.7 13.0 11.8 10.7 Malta 5.5 5.1 4.4 0.9 1.3 1.6 7.9 8.9 8.8 4.7 4.4 4.5 United Kingdom5 1.8 1.7 1.5 0.7 2.6 2.6  4.4  3.6  3.3 4.9 4.4 4.4 Switzerland 1.4 1.0 1.3  0.4 0.5 0.6 10.5 9.9 9.4 3.3 3.0 3.0 Sweden 3.2 3.1 2.4 1.1 1.6 1.6 4.5 3.9 3.7 7.0 6.6 6.3 Norway 1.1 1.4 1.6 3.6 2.1 2.0 5.0 5.5 5.7 4.7 4.0 3.8 Czech Republic 2.6 3.5 2.6 0.7 2.3 1.8 1.1 0.6 0.1 4.0 2.8 3.0 Denmark 1.7 1.9 1.8 0.3 1.0 1.4 7.9 7.3 7.0 6.2 5.8 5.8 Iceland 7.2 5.5 3.3 1.7 1.8 2.6 7.9 6.2 6.1 3.0 2.8 3.2 San Marino 1.0 1.2 1.3 0.6 0.9 1.0 . . . . . . . . . 8.6 8.0 7.4 Emerging and Developing Europe6 3.1 4.5 3.5 3.3 6.0 5.7  1.8  2.4  2.5 . . . . . . . . . Turkey 3.2 5.1 3.5 7.8 10.9 9.3  3.8  4.6  4.6 10.9 11.2 10.7 Poland 2.6 3.8 3.3  0.6 1.9 2.3  0.2  1.0  1.2 6.2 4.8 4.0 Romania 4.8 5.5 4.4  1.6 1.1 3.3  2.3  3.0  2.9 5.9 5.3 5.2 Hungary 2.0 3.2 3.4 0.4 2.5 3.2 5.5 4.8 4.2 5.1 4.4 4.3 Bulgaria5 3.4 3.6 3.2  1.3 1.1 1.4 4.2 2.5 1.9 7.7 6.6 6.4 Serbia 2.8 3.0 3.5 1.1 3.4 3.0  4.0  4.0  3.9 15.9 16.0 15.6 Croatia 3.0 2.9 2.7  1.1 1.1 1.2 2.6 3.8 3.0 15.0 13.9 13.5 Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 5Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices except for Slovenia. 6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia, and Montenegro.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 64 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 Asia 5.4 5.6 5.5 2.3 2.3 2.8 2.5 2.1 1.9 . . . . . . . . . Advanced Asia 1.7 2.2 1.7 0.5 1.0 1.2 4.5 4.3 4.2 3.6 3.4 3.4 Japan 1.0 1.5 0.7  0.1 0.4 0.5 3.8 3.6 3.8 3.1 2.9 2.9 Korea 2.8 3.0 3.0 1.0 1.9 1.9 7.0 5.6 5.4 3.7 3.8 3.6 Australia 2.5 2.2 2.9 1.3 2.0 2.2  2.6  1.6  2.4 5.7 5.6 5.4 Taiwan Province of China 1.5 2.0 1.9 1.4 1.0 1.4 14.0 13.8 13.9 3.9 3.8 3.8 Singapore 2.0 2.5 2.6  0.5 0.9 1.3 19.0 19.6 19.5 2.1 2.2 2.1 Hong Kong SAR 2.0 3.5 2.7 2.6 2.0 2.2 4.6 3.0 3.1 2.7 2.6 2.6 New Zealand 3.6 3.5 3.0 0.6 2.2 2.0  2.8  3.6  3.8 5.1 4.9 4.6 Macao SAR  2.1 13.4 7.0 2.4 1.5 2.2 27.4 33.0 34.5 1.9 2.0 2.0 Emerging and Developing Asia 6.4 6.5 6.5 2.8 2.6 3.2 1.4 0.9 0.7 . . . . . . . . . China 6.7 6.8 6.5 2.0 1.8 2.4 1.7 1.4 1.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 India4 7.1 6.7 7.4 4.5 3.8 4.9  0.7  1.4  1.5 . . . . . . . . . ASEAN-5 4.9 5.2 5.2 2.4 3.3 3.1 2.1 1.6 1.1 . . . . . . . . . Indonesia 5.0 5.2 5.3 3.5 4.0 3.9  1.8  1.7  1.8 5.6 5.4 5.2 Thailand 3.2 3.7 3.5 0.2 0.6 1.0 11.5 10.1 8.1 0.8 0.7 0.7 Malaysia 4.2 5.4 4.8 2.1 3.8 2.9 2.4 2.4 2.2 3.5 3.4 3.2 Philippines 6.9 6.6 6.7 1.8 3.1 3.0 0.2  0.1  0.3 5.5 6.0 5.5 Vietnam 6.2 6.3 6.3 2.7 4.4 4.0 4.1 1.3 1.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 Other Emerging and Developing Asia5 5.6 6.3 6.3 5.2 5.5 5.4  0.9  1.9  2.5 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Emerging Asia6 6.5 6.5 6.5 2.7 2.5 3.1 1.5 1.0 0.8 . . . . . . . . . Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4See country-specific notes for India in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Mon- golia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. 6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) economies, China, and India.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 65 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 North America 1.5 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.4 2.3  2.5  2.4  2.6 . . . . . . . . . United States 1.5 2.2 2.3 1.3 2.1 2.1  2.4  2.4  2.6 4.9 4.4 4.1 Canada 1.5 3.0 2.1 1.4 1.6 1.8  3.3  3.4  2.9 7.0 6.5 6.3 Mexico 2.3 2.1 1.9 2.8 5.9 3.8  2.2  1.7  2.0 3.9 3.6 3.7 Puerto Rico4  2.6  2.8  2.5  0.3 1.1 0.9 . . . . . . . . . 11.8 11.5 11.6 South America5  2.6 0.6 1.6 . . . . . . . . .  1.8  1.9  2.3 . . . . . . . . . Brazil  3.6 0.7 1.5 8.7 3.7 4.0  1.3  1.4  1.8 11.3 13.1 11.8 Argentina  2.2 2.5 2.5 . . . 26.9 17.8  2.7  3.6  3.7 8.5 8.1 7.7 Colombia 2.0 1.7 2.8 7.5 4.3 3.3  4.3  3.8  3.6 9.2 9.3 9.2 Venezuela  16.5  12.0  6.0 254.4 652.7 2,349.3  1.6  0.4  1.3 20.6 26.4 29.8 Chile 1.6 1.4 2.5 3.8 2.3 2.7  1.4  2.3  2.8 6.5 7.0 6.8 Peru 4.0 2.7 3.8 3.6 3.2 2.3  2.7  1.5  1.6 6.7 6.7 6.7 Ecuador  1.5 0.2 0.6 1.7 0.7 0.7 1.4  0.7  1.6 5.2 5.1 5.3 Bolivia 4.3 4.2 4.0 3.6 3.2 5.1  5.7  4.7  4.8 4.0 4.0 4.0 Uruguay 1.5 3.5 3.1 9.6 6.1 6.3  0.1  0.4  0.8 7.9 7.3 7.3 Paraguay 4.1 3.9 4.0 4.1 3.5 4.0 1.7 1.1 0.4 6.0 6.5 6.2 Central America6 3.7 3.8 3.9 2.1 2.8 3.2  2.9  2.9  2.8 . . . . . . . . . Caribbean7 3.4 2.8 4.4 2.6 3.8 3.8  4.1  4.1  4.3 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Latin America and the Caribbean8  0.9 1.2 1.9 5.6 4.2 3.6  2.0  2.0  2.3 . . . . . . . . . East Caribbean Currency Union9 2.6 2.6 2.8  0.7 1.3 1.4  5.4  6.6  7.4 . . . . . . . . . Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis. 5Includes Guyana and Suriname. Data for Argentina s and Venezuela s consumer prices are excluded. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 6Central America comprises Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama. 7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago. 8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. Data for Argentina s and Venezuela s consumer prices are excluded. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as Anguilla and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 66 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 Commonwealth of Independent States4 0.4 2.1 2.1 8.3 5.8 5.2 0.0 0.9 1.3 . . . . . . . . . Net Energy Exporters 0.3 2.1 2.0 7.9 5.2 4.7 0.5 1.6 2.0 . . . . . . . . . Russia  0.2 1.8 1.6 7.0 4.2 3.9 2.0 2.8 3.2 5.5 5.5 5.5 Kazakhstan 1.1 3.3 2.8 14.6 7.3 6.5  6.4  5.3  3.8 5.0 5.0 5.0 Uzbekistan 7.8 6.0 6.0 8.0 13.0 12.7 0.7 0.9 0.3 . . . . . . . . . Azerbaijan  3.1  1.0 1.3 12.4 12.0 8.0  3.6 1.9 2.5 6.0 6.0 6.0 Turkmenistan 6.2 6.5 6.3 3.6 6.0 6.2  21.0  15.4  14.3 . . . . . . . . . Net Energy Importers 1.2 2.1 2.7 11.0 10.0 8.3  4.7  4.9  4.5 . . . . . . . . . Ukraine 2.3 2.0 3.2 13.9 12.8 10.0  4.1  3.3  3.0 9.3 9.5 9.3 Belarus  2.6 0.7 0.7 11.8 8.0 7.5  3.6  5.3  4.6 1.0 1.0 1.0 Georgia 2.7 4.0 4.2 2.1 6.0 3.0  13.3  11.9  10.7 11.8 . . . . . . Armenia 0.2 3.5 2.9  1.4 1.9 3.5  2.3  3.6  3.2 18.8 18.9 18.9 Tajikistan 6.9 4.5 4.0 5.9 8.9 8.0  3.8  6.3  6.2 . . . . . . . . . Kyrgyz Republic 3.8 3.5 3.8 0.4 3.8 5.1  9.7  11.6  12.0 7.5 7.4 7.3 Moldova 4.3 4.0 3.7 6.4 6.5 5.3  3.8  4.0  4.0 4.2 4.3 4.2 Memorandum Caucasus and Central Asia5 2.5 3.6 3.7 10.4 8.8 7.8  6.4  4.9  4.2 . . . . . . . . . Low-Income CIS Countries6 6.1 5.2 5.2 5.8 10.0 9.6  2.5  2.7  3.1 . . . . . . . . . Net Energy Exporters Excluding Russia 2.4 3.5 3.7 11.6 9.3 8.2  6.2  4.4  3.6 . . . . . . . . . Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 5Caucasus and Central Asia comprises Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. 6Low-Income CIS countries comprise Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 67 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North African Economies, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 5.0 2.6 3.5 5.1 6.8 7.7  4.1  1.9  1.6 . . . . . . . . . Oil Exporters4 5.6 1.7 3.0 4.6 4.3 6.0  3.6  0.4  0.2 . . . . . . . . . Saudi Arabia 1.7 0.1 1.1 3.5  0.2 5.0  4.3 0.6 0.4 5.6 . . . . . . Iran 12.5 3.5 3.8 9.0 10.5 10.1 4.1 5.1 5.9 12.5 12.4 12.4 United Arab Emirates 3.0 1.3 3.4 1.8 2.1 2.9 2.4 2.1 2.1 . . . . . . . . . Algeria 3.3 1.5 0.8 6.4 5.5 4.4  16.5  13.0  10.8 10.5 11.7 13.2 Iraq 11.0  0.4 2.9 0.4 2.0 2.0  8.7  6.3  6.7 . . . . . . . . . Qatar 2.2 2.5 3.1 2.7 0.9 4.8  4.9 2.3 1.0 . . . . . . . . . Kuwait 2.5  2.1 4.1 3.5 2.5 2.7  4.5  0.6  1.4 2.1 2.1 2.1 Oil Importers5 3.6 4.3 4.4 6.2 12.1 11.2  5.3  5.3  4.8 . . . . . . . . . Egypt 4.3 4.1 4.5 10.2 23.5 21.3  6.0  5.9  3.8 12.7 12.2 11.5 Pakistan 4.5 5.3 5.6 2.9 4.1 4.8  1.7  4.0  4.9 6.0 6.0 6.1 Morocco 1.2 4.8 3.0 1.6 0.9 1.6  4.4  4.0  2.9 9.4 9.3 9.5 Sudan 3.0 3.7 3.6 17.8 26.9 19.0  5.6  1.9  2.0 20.6 19.6 18.6 Tunisia 1.0 2.3 3.0 3.7 4.5 4.4  9.0  8.7  8.4 14.0 13.0 12.0 Lebanon 1.0 1.5 2.0  0.8 3.1 2.5  18.6  18.0  16.8 . . . . . . . . . Jordan 2.0 2.3 2.5  0.8 3.3 1.5  9.3  8.4  8.3 15.3 . . . . . . Memorandum Middle East and North Africa 5.1 2.2 3.2 5.4 7.1 8.1  4.4  1.7  1.3 . . . . . . . . . Israel6 4.0 3.1 3.4  0.5 0.2 0.5 3.6 4.1 3.1 4.8 4.3 4.5 Maghreb7 2.2 5.4 3.8 5.4 5.4 5.4  12.1  8.5  5.6 . . . . . . . . . Mashreq8 3.9 3.8 4.2 8.7 20.7 18.7  7.8  8.2  6.4 . . . . . . . . . Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Includes Bahrain, Libya, Oman, and Yemen. 5Includes Afghanistan, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation. 6Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates. 7The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia. 8The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 68 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment (Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise) Real GDP Consumer Prices1 Current Account Balance2 Unemployment3 Projections Projections Projections Projections 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 Sub-Saharan Africa 1.4 2.6 3.4 11.3 11.0 9.5  4.2  3.4  3.6 . . . . . . . . . Oil Exporters4  1.9 0.6 1.6 18.8 18.1 14.7  2.0  0.3  0.6 . . . . . . . . . Nigeria  1.6 0.8 1.9 15.7 16.3 14.8 0.7 1.9 1.0 13.4 . . . . . . Angola  0.7 1.5 1.6 32.4 30.9 20.6  5.1  4.8  4.5 . . . . . . . . . Gabon 2.1 1.0 2.7 2.1 2.5 2.5  10.2  9.3  6.7 . . . . . . . . . Chad  6.4 0.6 2.4  1.1 0.2 1.9  9.2  2.0  2.8 . . . . . . . . . Republic of Congo  2.8  3.6 2.8 3.6  0.4  1.1  70.1  15.9 2.5 . . . . . . . . . Middle-Income Countries5 2.0 2.5 3.2 6.8 5.3 5.1  3.4  3.2  3.5 . . . . . . . . . South Africa 0.3 0.7 1.1 6.3 5.4 5.3  3.3  2.9  3.3 26.7 27.6 28.3 Ghana 3.5 5.9 8.9 17.5 11.8 9.0  6.7  5.8  5.4 . . . . . . . . . C te d Ivoire 7.7 7.6 7.3 0.7 1.0 2.0  1.1  2.9  2.8 . . . . . . . . . Cameroon 4.7 4.0 4.6 0.9 0.7 1.1  3.6  3.6  3.5 . . . . . . . . . Zambia 3.4 4.0 4.5 17.9 6.8 7.4  4.4  3.6  2.8 . . . . . . . . . Senegal 6.7 6.8 7.0 0.9 2.1 2.2  5.3  5.1  5.2 . . . . . . . . . Low-Income Countries6 5.3 5.6 5.9 6.6 8.8 8.2  8.3  7.9  8.3 . . . . . . . . . Ethiopia 8.0 8.5 8.5 7.3 8.1 8.0  9.9  8.3  7.4 . . . . . . . . . Kenya 5.8 5.0 5.5 6.3 8.0 5.2  5.2  6.1  7.0 . . . . . . . . . Tanzania 7.0 6.5 6.8 5.2 5.4 5.0  5.6  5.6  6.5 . . . . . . . . . Uganda 2.3 4.4 5.2 5.5 5.8 5.6  4.3  5.6  7.2 . . . . . . . . . Madagascar 4.2 4.3 5.3 6.7 7.8 6.8 0.8  4.7  5.3 . . . . . . . . . Democratic Republic of the Congo 2.4 2.8 3.0 18.2 41.7 44.0  3.4  4.6  2.1 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Sub-Saharan Africa Excluding South Sudan 1.5 2.7 3.4 10.4 10.5 9.3  4.2  3.4  3.6 . . . . . . . . . Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix. 2Percent of GDP. 3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 4Includes Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan. 5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, and Swaziland. 6Includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, S o Tom  and Pr ncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 69 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 1.1.7. Summary of World Real per Capita Output (Annual percent change; purchasing power parity) Average Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 World Output 2.7  1.6 4.0 3.0 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.1 1.9 2.3 2.5 2.5 Advanced Economies 1.8  4.0 2.5 1.1 0.7 0.8 1.6 1.7 1.1 1.7 1.6 1.3 United States 1.5  3.6 1.7 0.9 1.5 1.0 1.8 2.1 0.8 1.5 1.7 1.1 Euro Area1 1.7  4.9 1.8 1.3  1.1  0.5 1.1 1.6 1.4 2.0 1.8 1.4 Germany 1.7  5.2 4.2 3.7 0.5 0.3 1.5 0.6 0.9 1.9 1.7 1.3 France 1.4  3.5 1.5 1.6  0.3 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.4 Italy 0.9  6.1 1.2 0.2  3.2  2.3  0.3 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.1 0.9 Spain 2.1  4.4  0.4  1.4  3.0  1.3 1.7 3.3 3.3 3.2 2.7 1.8 Japan 0.9  5.3 4.2  0.3 1.7 2.2 0.5 1.2 1.0 1.7 0.9 1.0 United Kingdom 2.0  5.0 1.1 0.7 0.6 1.3 2.3 1.4 1.0 1.1 0.8 1.1 Canada 1.9  4.1 1.9 2.1 0.6 1.3 1.4 0.0 0.3 1.9 1.1 0.7 Other Advanced Economies2 3.3  1.9 5.0 2.5 1.2 1.6 2.1 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.7 1.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.5 1.1 5.9 4.9 3.7 3.7 3.2 2.8 2.8 3.2 3.5 3.6 Commonwealth of Independent States 7.2  6.9 4.3 4.9 3.2 2.0 1.5  2.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 2.1 Russia 7.2  7.8 4.5 5.0 3.6 1.7 0.7  2.8  0.2 1.8 1.7 1.7 Excluding Russia 7.6  3.9 4.4 5.1 2.6 3.4 2.7  1.6 1.2 2.2 2.6 3.6 Emerging and Developing Asia 6.7 6.4 8.5 6.7 5.9 5.9 5.8 5.7 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.2 China 9.4 8.7 10.1 9.0 7.4 7.3 6.7 6.4 6.1 6.1 5.9 5.1 India3 5.2 6.9 8.7 5.2 4.1 5.0 6.1 6.6 5.7 5.3 6.0 6.8 ASEAN-54 3.6 1.0 5.5 3.2 4.7 3.7 3.2 3.5 3.6 3.9 3.9 4.0 Emerging and Developing Europe 3.8  3.5 4.0 6.0 2.0 4.3 3.4 4.2 2.7 4.1 3.1 2.8 Latin America and the Caribbean 1.9  3.1 4.7 3.4 1.8 1.8 0.1  1.1  2.1 0.1 0.8 1.7 Brazil 2.1  1.2 6.5 3.0 1.0 2.1  0.4  4.6  4.4 0.0 0.7 1.4 Mexico 1.4  6.0 3.8 2.8 2.8 0.2 1.1 1.6 1.2 1.1 0.9 1.8 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 1.9  1.2 2.4 4.0 1.0 0.3 0.1 0.5 2.7 0.0 1.5 1.9 Saudi Arabia 0.4  5.3 1.3 7.1 2.5  0.1 1.1 3.3  0.6  1.8  0.9 0.0 Sub-Saharan Africa 2.6 1.1 4.2 2.5 1.2 2.6 2.4 0.7  1.3 0.0 0.7 1.2 Nigeria 4.6 5.5 8.3 2.1 1.5 2.6 3.5  0.1  4.2  1.9  0.8  1.0 South Africa 2.7  2.9 1.6 1.8 0.7 1.0 0.2  0.3  1.3  0.9  0.5 0.6 Memorandum European Union 2.1  4.6 1.9 1.5  0.6 0.1 1.5 1.9 1.6 2.1 1.9 1.5 Low-Income Developing Countries 3.4 3.5 5.2 3.7 2.4 3.8 3.7 2.2 1.2 2.2 3.0 3.1 Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 1Data calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries. 2Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 3See country-specific notes for India in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 70 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014.  Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall. Abiad, Abdul D., Davide Furceri, and Petia Topalova. 2016.  The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment: Evidence from Advanced Economies.  Journal of Macroeconomics 50 (C): 224 40. Adams, Richard, and John Page. 2005.  Do International Migration and Remittances Reduce Poverty in Developing Countries?  World Development 33 (10): 1645 69. Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem K l   elik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2017.  Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.  IMF Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Adler, Gustavo, Nicolas Magud, and Alejandro Werner. 2017.  Terms-of-Trade Cycles and External Adjustment.  IMF Working Paper 17/29, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Aiyar, Shekhar, Christian Ebeke, and Xiaobo Shao. 2016.  The Impact of Workforce Aging on European Productivity.  IMF Working Paper 16/238, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Baldwin, Richard. 2016.  The Great Convergence: Information Technology and the New Globalization.  Cambridge, MA, Belknap Press. Balleer, Almut, Ram n G mez-Salvador, and Jarkko Turunen. 2009.  Labor Force Participation in the Euro Area: A Cohort Based Analysis.  European Central Bank Working Paper 1049, European Central Bank, Frankfurt. Banerji, Angana, Valerio Crispolti, Era Dabla-Norris, Romain A. Duval, Christian H. Ebeke, Davide Furceri, Takuji Komat- suzaki, and Tigran Poghosyan. 2017.  Labor and Product Market Reforms in Advanced Economies: Fiscal Costs, Gains, and Support.  IMF Staff Discussion Note 17/03, Interna- tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Beaton, Kimberly, Serhan Cevik, and Reza Yousefi. 2017.  Smooth Operator: Remittances and Fiscal Shocks.  IMF Working Paper 17/165, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Beaton, Kimberly, Svetlana Cerovic, Misael Galdamez, Metodij Hadzi-Vaskov, Franz Loyola, Zsoka Koczan, Bogdan Lissovo- lik, Jan Martijn, Yulia Ustyugova, and Joyce Wong. 2017.  Migration and Remittances in Latin America and the Carib- bean: Engines of Growth and Macroeconomic Stabilizers?  IMF Working Paper 17/144, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2010.  Demand Spillovers and the Collapse of Trade in the Global Recession.  IMF Economic Review 58 (2): 295 326. Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2013.  Female Labor Supply: Why is the US Falling Behind?  Institute of Labor Economics, Discussion Paper 7140. Bugamelli, Matteo, and Francesco Paterno. 2009.  Output Growth Volatility and Remittances,  Economica, (78) 480 500. Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello. 2017.  Measuring Geopolitical Risk.  Working Paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC. Canon, Maria, Marianna Kudlyak, and Yang Liu. 2015.  Youth Labor Force Participation Continues to Fall, but It Might Be for a Good Reason.  Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Regional Economist, January. Canova, Fabio. 2004.  Testing for Convergence Clubs in Income Per Capita: A Predictive Density Approach.  International Economic Review 45 (1): 49 77. Cat o, Luis, and Gian M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2014.  External Liabili- ties and Crises.  Journal of International Economics (94) 18 32. Cat o, Luis, and Roberto Chang. 2017.  Financial Frictions and Risk Sharing in Small Open Economies.  Unpublished. Chami, Ralph, Dalia S. Hakura, and Peter Montiel. 2009.  Remittances: An Automatic Output Stabilizer?  IMF Working Paper 09/91, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Combes, Jean-Louis, and Christian Ebeke. 2011.  Remittances and Household Consumption Instability in Developing Countries.  World Development 39 (7): 1076 89. Costinot, Arnaud, and Andr s Rodr guez-Clare. 2013.  Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization.  NBER Working Paper 18896, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Council of Economic Advisors. 2014.  The Labor Force Par- ticipation Rate since 2007: Causes and Policy Implications.  Council of Economic Advisors, Washington, DC.  . 2016.  The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation.  Council of Economic Advisors, Washington, DC. Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, and Joseph Pedtke, 2017.  The Good News on Wage Growth.  San Francisco Fed Blog, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. De, Supriyo, Ergys Islamaj, Ayhan Kose, and S. Reza Yousefi. 2016.  Remittances over the Business Cycle: Theory and Evi- dence.  World Bank KNOMAD Working Paper 11, World Bank, Washington, DC. Desdoigts, Alain. 1999.  Patterns of Economic Development and the Formation of Clubs.  Journal of Economic Growth 4 (3): 305 30. Durlauf, Steven N., and Paul Johnson. 1995.  Multiple Regimes and Cross-Country Growth Behavior.  Journal of Applied Econometrics 10 (4): 365 84. Durlauf, Steven N., and Danny T. Quah. 1999.  The New Empirics of Economic Growth.  In Handbook of Macroeco- nomics (1A) edited by John Taylor and Michael Woodford. Amsterdam, North-Holland. Dvorkin, Maximiliano, and Hannah Shell. 2015.  A Cross-Country Comparison of Labor Force Participation.  Economic Synopses 17 (3 4). Fajgelbaum, Pablo, and Amit Khandelwal. 2016.  Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3): 1113 80.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 71 CHAPTER 1 Global Prospects and Policies International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Feyrer, James. 2007.  Demographics and Productivity.  Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (1): 100 09. Frankel, Jeffrey. 2011.  Are Bilateral Remittances Countercycli- cal?  Open Economies Review 22 (1):1 16. Giuliano, Paola, and Marta Ruiz-Arranz. 2009.  Remittances, Financial Development, and Growth.  Journal of Development Economics 90 (1): 144 52. Gruss, Bertrand. 2014.  After the Boom Commodity Prices and Economic Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.  IMF Working Paper 14/154, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Hadzi-Vaskov, Metodij. 2006.  Workers  Remittances and International Risk-Sharing.  Tjalling C. Koopmans Research Institute Discussion Paper 06 19, Univer- sity of Utrecht. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2013a.  Macroeconomic Issues in Small States: Implications for Fund Engagement.  Washington, DC.  . 2013b.  Staff Guidance Note on the Application of the Joint Bank-Fund Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries.  Washington, DC.  . 2014.  Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Mac- roeconomic Effects of Public Investment.  Chapter 3 of the October World Economic Outlook, Washington, DC.  . 2014.  Macroeconomic Developments in Low-  Income Developing Countries.  IMF Policy Paper, Washington, DC.  . 2016a.  External Sector Report.  Washington, DC.  . 2016b.  Small States  Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change Role of the IMF.  IMF Policy Paper, Washington, DC.  . 2017a.  Article IV Consultation with the United States of America.  Concluding Statement of the IMF Mission, Washington, DC.  . 2017b.  External Adjustment to Terms-of-Trade Shifts.  Chapter 3 of the Western Hemisphere Regional Economic Out- look. April, Washington, DC.  . 2017c.  External Sector Report.  Washington, DC.  . 2017d. Forthcoming.  G20 Report on Strong, Sustain- able, and Balanced Growth.  Washington, DC.  , World Bank, and World Trade Organization. 2017.  Making Trade an Engine of Growth for All.  Policy Papers, Washington, DC. Jongwanich, Juthathip. 2007.  Workers  Remittances, Eco- nomic Growth and Poverty in Developing Asia and the Pacific Countries.  UNESCAP Working Paper 07/01, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok. Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent E. Sorensen, and Oved Yosha. 2003.  Risk Sharing and Industrial Specialization: Regional and International Evidence.  American Economic Review 93 (3): 903 18. Koepke, Robin. 2015.  What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical Literature.  IIF Working Paper, Institute of International Finance, Washington, DC. Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2014.  Trac- ing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross Exports.  American Economic Review 104 (2): 459 94. Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones. 2009.  Does Financial Globalization Promote Risk Sharing?  Jour- nal of Development Economics 89 (2): 258 70. Krause, Eleanor, and Isabel Sawhill. 2017.  What We Know and Don t Know about Declining Labor Force Participation: A Review.  Center on Children and Families at Brookings, The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2008.  Systemic Banking Crises: A New Database.  IMF Working Paper 08/224, Inter- national Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.  . 2010.  Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly.  IMF Working Paper 10/44, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.  . 2012.  Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update.  IMF Working Paper 12/163, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Lakner, Christoph, and Branko Milanovic. 2015.  Global Income Distribution: From the Fall of the Berlin Wall to the Great Recession.  World Bank Economic Review 30 (2): 203 32. Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2017.  Inter- national Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.  IMF Working Paper 17/115, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Lewis, Karen. 1996.  What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption Risk Sharing?  Journal of Political Economy 104 (2): 267 97. McCauley, Robert N., and Chang Shu. 2016.  Dollars and Renminbi Flowed out of China.  Bank for International Settle- ments Quarterly Review, March 2016. Obstfeld, Maurice. 1993.  Are Industrial-Country Consumption Risks Globally Diversified?  NBER Working Paper 4308, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose. 2003.  Effects of Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.  IMF Occasional Paper 220, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian. 2005.  What Undermines Aid s Impact on Growth?  IMF Working Paper 05/126, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Ratha, Dilip. 2003.  Workers  Remittances: An Important and Stable Source of External Development Finance.  In Global Development Finance 2003: Striving for Stability in Develop- ment Finance. Washington, DC: World Bank. Sorensen, Bent, Yi-Tsung Wu, Oved Yosha, and Yu Zhu. 2005.  Home Bias and International Risk Sharing: Twin Puzzles Separated at Birth.  CEPR Discussion Paper 5113, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 72 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Wacziarg, Romain, and Karen Horn Welch. 2008.  Trade Liberalization and Growth: New Evidence.  NBER Work- ing Paper 10152, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003.  Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth in World Trade?  Journal of Political Economy 111 (1): 52 102.  . 2010.  Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?  American Economic Review 100 (1): 364 93.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 73 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Nominal wage growth in most advanced economies remains markedly lower than it was before the Great Recession of 2008 09. This chapter finds that the bulk of the wage slowdown can be explained by labor market slack (both headline unemployment and underutili- zation of labor in the form of involuntary part-time employment), inflation expectations, and trend produc- tivity growth. While involuntary part-time employment may have helped support labor force participation and facilitated stronger engagement with the workplace than the alternative of unemployment, it also appears to have weakened wage growth. This is the case even in economies where measured slack appears low (that is, headline unemployment rates are now at, or below, their averages in the years leading up to the recession). Common factors beyond slack, productivity, and price inflation have also exerted downward pressure on wages in recent years, suggesting that the synchronized nature of excess capacity across countries may have amplified its effects. While accommodative policies can help lift demand and lower headline unemployment rates, wage growth may continue to remain subdued until involuntary part-time employment diminishes or trend productivity growth picks up. Inflation rates will also likely remain low unless wage growth accelerates beyond productiv- ity growth in a sustained manner. Assessing the true degree of slack beyond measured headline unemployment rates will be important when judging the appropriate pace of exit from accommodative monetary policies. Introduction Close to a decade after the Great Recession of 2008 09, nominal wage growth in most advanced economies remains markedly lower than it was before the recession. This is the case even in countries where unemployment rates are now at, or even below, their averages in the years leading up to the recession. In some instances, recent wage dynamics may reflect a correction from The authors of this chapter are Gee Hee Hong, Zs ka K cz n, Weicheng Lian, and Malhar Nabar (team leader), with support from Benjamin Hilgenstock and Jungjin Lee. unsustainably high wage growth prior to the Great Recession. The pattern, however, is more widespread. Nominal wage dynamics, in general, are related to underlying changes in a  real  component physical output created by labor together with other inputs into production as well as inflation pressure in the economy. Viewed through this lens, subdued nominal wage growth is, in principle, consistent with a widely recognized slowdown in labor productivity, which can weigh on underlying real wage dynamics, and generally low inflation across advanced economies.1 Subdued nominal wage growth has also generally coincided with a reduction in hours per worker and, in some cases, a higher rate of involuntary part-time employment and an increased share of temporary employment contracts. Headline unemployment measures are therefore not as indicative of labor market slack, given this increase in part-time employment and temporary contracts. These developments may also point to persistent changes in the nature of employ- ment relationships between firms and workers in response to technological change and remaining labor market rigidities in some countries that deter employ- ers from hiring on standard, full-time contracts.2 From a macroeconomic perspective, shedding light on the forces shaping nominal wage developments could inform the debate on the extent of slack in the economy and the appropriate pace of exit from accommodative monetary policies. As noted in Chap- ter 1, core inflation rates in most advanced economies remain below targets and have not shown a steady upswing even as growth has generally picked up over the past year. With wages being the largest compo- nent of most firms  production costs, the upswing in wages in response to falling unemployment is the main reason core inflation typically picks up as aggregate demand strengthens and excess capacity in the econ- 1On the productivity slowdown, see Fernald (2014); Byrne, Fer- nald, and Reinsdorf (2016); and Adler and others (2017). On weak inflation rates in advanced economies, see Chapter 3 of the October 2016 World Economic Outlook (WEO). 2See Bentolila and others (2012) for a discussion of labor market rigidities and the use of temporary contracts. RECENT WAGE DYNAMICS IN ADVANCED ECONOMIES: DRIVERS AND IMPLICATIONS 2 CHAPTER  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 74 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 omy shrinks.3 Core inflation in advanced economies is thus unlikely to recover in a sustained manner before labor market tightening spurs higher wage inflation. In sum, a better understanding of the forces that weigh on wage growth is important for assessing the appro- priate course of monetary policy. Insights into the drivers of wage dynamics and the role of part-time employment and temporary contracts may also offer perspective on prospects for income inequality and possible policy actions to address the income security of workers with part-time jobs or temporary contracts. The latter could include tackling slack, supporting retraining and reskilling, addressing remaining labor market and structural rigidities, and ensuring fairness of treatment across employees under various types of contracts. Accordingly, the chapter addresses the following main questions:   Drivers: How well do aggregate macroeconomic factors such as labor market slack, inflation expec- tations, and trend labor productivity growth account for nominal wage dynamics observed across advanced economies since the Great Recession? How has the evolving mix of full-time versus involuntary part-time employment and open-ended versus tem- porary work contracts affected labor market slack and hence wage dynamics?   Underlying changes: How have changes in firms  incentives and constraints in recent years (for example, related to changing expectations about medium-term growth prospects, technology, and global production processes) affected nominal wage setting and part-time employment? What impact have shifts in bargaining power (arising, for exam- ple, from changes in employment regulations, unionization, and degree of import competition) had on wages and part-time employment? These are the main findings of the chapter:   Macroeconomic factors such as labor market slack (both headline unemployment and underutiliza- tion of labor in the form of involuntary part-time employment), inflation expectations, and trend productivity growth can account for the bulk of the variation in nominal wage growth at the country level in recent years. The analysis also 3As noted in Chapter 1, the part of the wage-inflation weakening attributable to lower productivity growth would not translate into weaker price inflation, given that the changes would have no net effect on cost pressures (proxied by unit labor costs). suggests that common factors have been exerting increasing downward pressure on wage inflation in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and especially during 2014 16. For a number of euro area economies with large precrisis current account deficits, this may reflect policy measures to slow wage growth and improve competitiveness in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and euro area sovereign debt crisis.4 More broadly, the finding of sizable common factors behind wage weakness could indicate the growing effect on wage setting in any given economy of labor market conditions in other countries (in the context of stronger cross-border economic integration). It could also point to the role of broad-based and synchronized demand weak- ness across many countries and heightened concern about job losses, which may have hindered wage growth in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and the euro area sovereign debt crisis.   The relative roles of labor market slack and produc- tivity growth vary across countries. In economies where unemployment rates are still appreciably above their averages before the Great Recession, conventional measures of labor market slack can explain about half of the slowdown in nominal wage growth since 2007, with involuntary part-time employment acting as a further significant drag on wages. Productivity growth is in turn relatively less important because these economies had generally lower productivity growth to begin with, and less of a slowdown.   In economies where unemployment rates are below their averages before the Great Recession, slow productivity growth can account for most about two-thirds of the slowdown in nominal wage growth since 2007. However, even here, involun- tary part-time employment appears to be weighing on wage growth, suggesting greater slack in the labor market than captured by headline unem- ployment rates.   Involuntary part-time employment has risen more in countries where output is estimated to fall short of its potential. Once the influence of slack is taken into account, involuntary part-time employment has increased more where medium-term growth expec- tations have fallen more, automation has progressed faster, and the importance of services in the econ- omy has increased. 4Also see Kang and Shambaugh (2014).  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 75 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017   The analysis suggests that while accommodative policies can help lift demand and lower headline unemployment rates, wage growth may continue to remain subdued until involuntary part-time employ- ment diminishes or trend productivity growth picks up. Inflation rates will also likely remain low unless wage growth accelerates beyond productivity growth in a sustained manner. Assessing the true degree of slack beyond measured headline unemployment rates will be important when judging the appro- priate pace of exit from accommodative mone- tary policies. The next section presents a primer on the deter- minants of wage growth to help set the stage for the empirical analysis. The chapter then takes stock of changes in the labor markets of advanced economies over recent years. In subsequent sections, the forces shaping nominal wage dynamics and employment outcomes at the aggregate level are assessed. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the main policy implications to be drawn from the analysis. Wage Determination A Primer Nominal wages are determined by the interaction between labor demand and supply, which are both subject to multiple, interrelated influences. It is useful to categorize these as influences related to the business cycle and forces that are slower moving (secular). Over the business cycle, aggregate demand for final output translates into labor demand. In the expansionary phase, employers increase labor input to meet rising final demand. Rising demand for labor can result in a combination of more hours (including overtime), a decline in involuntary part-time employ- ment, and an increase in the number of employed workers. Eventually, as demand continues to rise, the pool of jobseekers (a combination of unemployed plus currently employed workers who are searching for more attractive employment) shrinks relative to vacancies, and employers pay more to attract work- ers or to retain those on the payroll. To the extent that nominal wages are indexed to consumer price inflation and influenced by the expected path of infla- tion, rising price pressures in the expansionary phase of the cycle can also boost average nominal wage growth. The opposite happens when final demand weakens and the business cycle turns. Firms may initially hoard labor and, once the slump deepens, lay off workers. Average wage growth would then also weaken, and weakening inflation pressure would transmit back to weaker nominal wage growth. Thus, two key cyclical factors associated with wages are the degree of slack in the economy and inflation expectations. During the past decade with a deep and pro- longed recession, and fewer and fewer workers working full-time other dimensions of labor underutilization beyond the standard slack measure of the unemploy- ment rate also appear to have had a bearing on wages.5 Recent studies have found, for example, evidence of a negative impact of discouraged workers, or a rising share of part-time employment, on wages (Blanch- flower and Posen 2014; Smith 2014).6 In addition to the business cycle, a key force shap- ing average wage growth is trend labor productivity growth increases in the output produced by each hour of labor input in combination with other factors of production. From a firm s perspective, as trend labor productivity growth accelerates, the value of hiring addi- tional workers increases relative to the cost of expanding the payroll.7 Greater demand for labor translates into rising vacancies relative to jobseekers, and therefore rising pressure on wages. Conversely, as productivity growth weakens, all else equal, profitability declines, along with firms  ability to accommodate wage increases for their existing workers or their willingness to attract new workers with high wages. Thus, wage growth tends to weaken as productivity growth slows. Wage rigidities 5See Trigari (2014). 6Altig and Higgins (2014) note the negative impact on wages of people working part-time for economic reasons. Other studies look at whether the long-term unemployed affect wage dynamics as much as the short-term unemployed (Stock 2011; Gordon 2013; Council of Economic Advisers 2014; Krueger, Cramer, and Cho 2014; Rudebusch and Williams 2014; Watson 2014), partly motivated by the fact that both price and wage inflation rates in the early aftermath of the Great Recession appeared more robust than would be predicted based on conventional price and wage Phillips curves. These studies have generally noted a greater impact of short-term than of long-term unemployment. Others have noted, however, that in the United States, for example, the long- and short-term unem- ployment rates evolved closely together in the few decades preceding the Great Recession, and hence it can be difficult to disentangle their impacts (Kiley 2014; Smith 2014). 7The acceleration in labor productivity growth can occur through a combination of capital deepening (or an increase in the machinery and equipment each worker operates), improvements in human cap- ital and the average skill composition of the workforce, and a faster pace of technology diffusion that complements the skills of a typical worker. The effects on particular types of workers may vary, depend- ing on the complementarity of technological change with their skills and the tasks they perform, as discussed further below.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 76 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 (Hall 2005; Taylor 2016) mean that changes in labor productivity may not translate one-for-one into wages immediately; wage growth is thus linked more to the trend of productivity growth (Dew-Becker and Gordon 2005; Yellen 2005).8,9 As long as workers are able to bargain for a stable share of the economy s value added, wage growth is generally in line with trend labor productivity growth (Mortensen and Pissarides 1999; Hall 2005). But the strength of the association may waver.10 When workers  bargaining power improves over the medium term, more trend productivity growth increments are transmitted to wage growth. Workers  bargaining power is a function of inter- related drivers.11 These include institutional factors, such as union density, the coverage of collective bargaining agreements, and the degree of centraliza- tion of such agreements (for example, sectoral versus firm-level). Labor laws and employment regulations that circumscribe firms  flexibility in laying off workers can have an impact on hiring, wage setting, and terms of employment.12 As mentioned earlier, technological changes can also have varying impacts on bargaining power, depending on the complementarity between new technologies and the mix of tasks performed on the job and workers  skills. At one extreme, automation can substitute for some low- or middle-skilled work- ers whose jobs mostly call for routine inputs imple- mented under precise instructions (Autor and Dorn 2013; Goos, Manning, and Salomons 2014). This 8A one-for-one relationship between real wages and average labor productivity over the long term would require an elasticity of substi- tution between capital and labor of one. The elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is important in determining how the labor share in national income responds to changes in the relative costs of labor and capital. 9Of course, this link between wages and productivity may not strictly hold at the sectoral level (as illustrated by the Balassa-Samuelson effect). 10During the two decades before the Great Recession, for example, the share of value added going to workers had been trending down across advanced economies (Chapter 3 of the April 2017 WEO). 11The interrelated nature of these drivers is examined, for example, by Kramarz (2017), who studies the relationship between union strength, offshoring, wages, and employment. 12Previous studies show that deregulation of the labor market may temporarily cause an increase in unemployment, but eventu- ally translate into long-term welfare gains (Blanchard and Giavazzi 2003). Chapter 3 of the April 2016 WEO and OECD (2017) show that labor market deregulation has positive effects on employment and output in good times, but can become contractionary in peri- ods of slack. would weaken the bargaining power of such workers and lead to less attractive terms of employment, pos- sibly in lower-skill occupations (for example, weaker wage growth, fewer hours, or an increase in the share of part-time employment). At the other extreme, advances in design technology can be highly comple- mentary for high-skilled workers, such as engineers and architects whose jobs call for complex problem solving, boosting their productivity and ability to command higher wages. Workers  bargaining power can also be influenced by exposure to international competition. This may arise through trade and firms  participation in global supply chains, but it could also stem from the threat of production facilities relocating to economies where costs overall are lower. Automation and increased competition can in turn weaken unionization. From a firm s perspective, uncertainty about growth over the medium term can also influence hiring decisions and the resulting wage dynamics. At times of greater optimism and certainty about future revenue, firms may be more willing to hire full-time workers, create jobs with open-ended contracts, and pay better wages to retain workers or improve the quality of the match in the labor market. During times of dimin- ished growth expectations, perceptions of downside risks, or uncertainty about the future, firms may be less willing to lock themselves into potentially costly employment arrangements and prefer instead to hire labor part time, or on temporary contracts, with less favorable wages and benefits. Such growth expectations could incorporate both demand and supply compo- nents, including future demand and expected produc- tivity growth. The next section examines the evolution of key labor market indicators in recent years. Advanced Economy Labor Markets: Surface Healing Masks Deeper Changes Headline Employment and Wages Employment As shown in panel 1 of Figure 2.1, unemployment rates have been generally declining since 2013, but remain elevated in about three-quarters of advanced economies relative to their 2007 levels. These declines are mostly reflective of job creation, not artifacts of working-age members of the population dropping out of the labor force. In fact, as panel 2 of Figure 2.1  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 77 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 shows, labor force participation has risen in more than half of advanced economies relative to 2007 levels, generally reflecting higher participation by workers older than 54 and women in these countries (analyzed in detail in Box 1.1).13,14 Higher unemployment rates, combined with higher labor force participation rates, leave employment ratios (employed workers as a share of the age 15+ population) very close to or above their pre Great Recession peak (2007) in about half of advanced economies.15 Wages Panel 1 of Figure 2.2 shows that for virtually all advanced economies, nominal wage growth (measured as nominal compensation per hour, and comparable across countries) remains below pre Great Recession ranges.16 This is particularly notable for economies where unemployment rates have declined relatively rapidly and are now close to or below pre Great Recession averages (Figure 2.2, panel 2). Even in economies where nominal wage growth in 2016 was higher than before the Great Recession, such as Ger- many and Japan, the gains have been from low bases: a period of wage moderation in Germany intensified by the Hartz labor market reforms and in the midst of Japan s decade-long deflation and shrinking nomi- nal wages.17 13As noted in Box 1.1, the decline in the population-weighted average labor force participation rate in advanced economies since 2007 is driven by a large decline in the United States. 14As highlighted in Chapter 1 of the October 2015 and October 2016 WEO, forecasts in the postcrisis period have generally under- predicted employment growth. 15The United States is a notable exception, where a decline of 3 percentage points in the participation rate since 2007 has resulted in a lower employment ratio than before the crisis, despite the decline in the unemployment rate to below its precrisis average. 16Growth rates for real wages in about three-quarters of advanced economies are below what they were before the Great Reces- sion, whether viewed as  consumption real wages  (that is, nominal wages deflated by headline consumer price inflation, which influ- ences living standards and labor supply decisions) or as  product real wages  (that is, nominal wages deflated by the GDP deflator, which influences firms  profitability and hiring decisions). See Annex 2.1 for more details on the wage measures and Annex Figure 2.2.1 on the dynamics of real wages. 17See Burda and Seele (2016) for a discussion of the effects of the Hartz reforms on the German labor market and Aoyagi and Ganelli (2015) on Japan s labor market outcomes during the 2000s.  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Figure 2.1. Distribution of Labor Market Indicators (Percentage-point difference relative to 2007)  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1. Unemployment Rate 2. Labor Force Participation Rate 3. Total Employment, Share of Population Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles. Unemployment rates have been generally declining since 2013 but remain elevated in about three-quarters of advanced economies relative to their 2007 levels. These declines are mostly re ective of job creation and not a result of working-age members of the population dropping out of the labor force. In fact, labor force participation has risen in more than half of advanced economies.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 78 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Involuntary Part-Time Employment, Temporary Contracts, Hours A more complete picture of the labor market emerges by considering additional indicators that sug- gest greater slack in the labor market than captured by headline unemployment rates, and possibly weaker job security than prior to the Great Recession. Involuntary Part-Time Employment Panel 1 of Figure 2.3 documents that involuntary part-time employment (workers employed fewer than 30 hours a week who report they would like longer hours) increased across virtually the entire sample in 2009 and remains above the 2007 level in more than three-quarters of countries. In the United States, the share increased from 0.8 percent in 2007 to 1.3 percent in 2016, while in the United Kingdom it rose from 2.4 per- cent to 3.9 percent, and in France from 5.3 percent to 7.8 percent. Germany is an exception, although its 2016 involuntary part-time employment share (3.1 percent) was above the 2.7 percent average for 2000 07. As panel 2 of Figure 2.3 shows, the largest increases in involuntary part-time employment occurred in econ- omies with unemployment rates above their 2000 07 averages. But even for economies with rates now close to their 2000 07 averages (points clustered around the vertical axis), the involuntary part-time share of employ- ment is higher than it was before the crisis. Temporary Contracts Along with involuntary part-time employment, the incidence of temporary contractual arrangements has attracted attention in recent years (see Aoyagi and Ganelli 2015; Brainard 2016). These contracts can help reduce unemployment spells, allow workers to avoid gaps in their employment history, and maintain their engagement in the labor force. However, they typically offer briefer employment than do open-ended contracts, less opportunity for workers to develop skills and expand responsibilities, and sometimes weaker benefits. By 2016, in just over half the economies, the temporary contract share was higher than in 2007 (Figure 2.4, panel 1). Temporary contracts are more common now than in 2000 07 for most advanced economies (Figure 2.4, panel 2).18 Hours A third category of job attributes, which in part reflects worker preferences, is hours worked per worker. In more than half of the economies, hours per worker are at least 2 percent below 2007 levels (Figure 2.5, panel 1). However, hours had been declining before that, and the pattern has continued.19 18In the case of Japan, the figure shows that the share of temporary contract workers has dropped by close to 6 percentage points compared with the 2000 07 average. But as noted in IMF (2016), the wider category of  nonregular  workers those who either (1) are not hired directly by the employer, (2) work part-time, or (3) do not have an open-ended contract actually increased as a share of overall employ- ment during this period. See also Aoyagi and Ganelli (2015). There are no comparable cross-country data on regular versus nonregular workers. 19The measure may understate the decline in hours per job if an individual now accumulates hours across multiple jobs more often than in the past.  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6  10  5 0 5 10 15 USA SVK KOR JPN ITA ISR ISL GRC GBR FRA EST ESP DEU CZE CAN AUS Growth of nominal compensation per hour Change in unemployment rate Figure 2.2. Distribution of Nominal Wage Growth and Correlation with Changes in the Unemployment Rate  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1. Nominal Wage Growth (Percentage-point difference relative to 2007) 2. Nominal Wage Growth and Unemployment Rate1 (Percentage points) Despite improved headline employment indicators, nominal wages in virtually all advanced economies are growing at a slower pace than before the Great Recession. This is particularly notable for economies where unemployment rates are now close to or below pre-Great Recession averages. Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The sample in panel 1 excludes Baltic countries. The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. The horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles. Data labels in panel 2 use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. Outliers and the 10 largest advanced economies (by 2016 nominal GDP in US dollars) are labeled. 1Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000 07 average.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 79 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The decline in hours could reflect worker preferences for greater flexibility and willingness to work fewer hours (for example for elderly workers or students who previously may not have been in the labor force). But it could also reflect firms  preference for hiring work- ers for fewer hours or on an as-needed basis. These just-in-time matches are often governed by agreements between firms and workers. The firm need not guar- antee minimum hours, and workers are not obligated to accept an offer made by the firm. These contracts are referred to as  zero-hours contracts  in the United Kingdom; similar agreements govern employment relationships elsewhere, including in Australia and Canada.20 As Box 2.1 documents, hours declined more in sectors with higher shares of low- and middle-skilled workers, suggesting that factors beyond worker pref- 20In the United Kingdom for example, workers on zero-hours contracts as a share of employed workers rose from 0.6 percent in 2010 to 3 percent in 2016 (Haldane 2017).  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 10  10  5 0 5 10 15 ITA ESP IRL GRC SVK FRA NLD PRT CZE NOR JPN EST DEU LTU BEL ISR Change in involuntary part-time employment share Change in unemployment rate Figure 2.3. Job Attributes: Involuntary Part-Time Employment  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1. Involuntary Part-Time Employment, Share of Total Employment (Percentage-point difference relative to 2007) 2. Involuntary Part-Time Employment and Unemployment1 (Percentage points) Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30 hours a week because they could not  nd a full-time position. The involuntary part-time employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part-time workers divided by total employment. In panel 1, the horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles. In panel 2, countries in gold are those with decreases in the involuntary part-time employment share; countries in red are those with pronounced increases. Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 1Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000 07 average. Involuntary part-time employment shares increased across virtually the entire sample in 2009 and remain above the 2007 level in more than three-quarters of the economies. The largest increases occurred in economies with unemployment rates above their 2000 07 averages.  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8  10  5 0 5 10 15 LUX DNK PRT SVK FRA NLD CHE ITA IRL DEU GBR KOR NOR LTU LVA ESP JPN Change in share of temporary contracts Change in unemployment rate Figure 2.4. Job Attributes: Temporary Contracts  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1. Share of Temporary Contracts (Percentage-point difference relative to 2007) 2. Temporary Contracts and Unemployment1 (Percentage points) Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Temporary workers are those with work contracts of limited duration; thresholds are country speci c. The share of temporary contracts is calculated as the number of temporary workers divided by total employment. In panel 1, the horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles. In panel 2, countries in gold are those with decreases in the share of temporary contracts; countries in red are those with pronounced increases. Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 1Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000 07 average. The temporary contract share in 2016 is above its 2007 level in over half of advanced economies. Temporary contracts are more common now than in 2000  07, primarily in economies where the unemployment rate remains above its pre-Great Recession average.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 80 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 erences were at play. A concurrent rise in involuntary part-time employment also suggests that the decline in hours per worker was driven by reduced demand for hours of work by firms, rather than reduced supply of hours by workers. However, it is still difficult to sepa- rate workers  preferences that shape labor supply from the binding constraints of weak labor demand. Hours per worker have fallen from their 2000 07 averages, regardless of whether unemployment rates are higher or lower than they were (Figure 2.5, panel 2). Declining hours also tend to be associated with higher shares of involuntary part-time employment (panel 3). Separating Compositional Shifts from Common Patterns across Sectors The previous sections point to a widespread change in labor market outcomes (subdued wage growth, larger involuntary part-time employment, higher incidence of temporary contracts, declining hours per worker) compared with the period before the Great Recession. To what extent do these developments mostly reflect common patterns across sectors, or compositional shifts in employment toward sectors where the change in labor market outcomes is more pronounced? Data for 21 sectors across 31 advanced economies since 2000 allow for a deeper look at the underlying role of compositional effects. Figures 2.6 and 2.7 compare the average change in a job attribute during 2009 16 with the imputed change if employment shares across sectors had remained as they were in 2008. Points on the 45-degree line indi- cate that the actual change and the imputed change are identical; it is therefore within-sector developments, rather than compositional change across sectors, that drive aggregate dynamics. Conversely, points off the 45-degree line indicate that compositional change contributed to the overall development. Points marked in red are those for which the indicator deteriorated during 2009 16 and compositional change in sectoral employment shares made a quantitatively import- ant contribution to that decline (that is, a shift in employment toward sectors where the deterioration was deeper). The figures indicate that compositional changes seem to play greater roles for part-time employment shares, temporary contracts, and hours per worker than for growth in nominal wages.21 21Labor mobility across sectors could cause wage growth to be broadly synchronized across sectors such that aggregate wage devel- opments appear to reflect mostly within-sector developments.  16  14  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4  10  5 0 5 10 15 KOR AUT IRL EST ISL ITA CHE JPN DEU SVN ISR SWE LTU Change in log (hours per worker) Average change in log (hours per worker) Change in unemployment rate (percentage points) Figure 2.5. Job Attributes: Hours per Worker  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1. Hours per Worker (Log level difference relative to 2007) 2. Hours per Worker and Unemployment1  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Average change in involuntary part-time employment share (percentage points) 3. Involuntary Part-Time Employment and Hours per Worker, 2009 16 Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: In panel 1, the horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles. In panel 2, countries in gold are those with increases in hours per worker; countries in red are those with pronounced decreases. In panel 3, countries in red display (on average) falling hours per worker and (on average) an increase in the involuntary part-time employment share for 2009 16. Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 1Changes shown are 2016 values relative to the 2000 07 average. In more than half of advanced economies in 2016, hours per worker were at least 2 percent below 2007 levels. However, this appears to be a continuation of the pre-2007 pattern. Hours per worker have fallen from their 2000 07 averages, regardless of whether unemployment rates are now higher or lower than before the Great Recession. Declining hours also tend to be associated with higher shares of involuntary part-time employment.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 81 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017   In the case of part-time employment, 26 countries in the sample experienced an increased share of part-time workers. In 12 of the 26 countries, com- positional change accounted for more than 25 per- cent of the increase (and more than half the increase in four countries).   Regarding the temporary contract share of employ- ment, 19 of the 26 countries experienced an increase. Compositional change accounted for more than 25 percent of the increase in seven of those countries (and more than half in three countries).   Declines in hours per worker were seen in 25 countries, with compositional change accounting for more than 25 percent of this decrease in 10 coun- tries (and more than half in five countries). Panels 1 and 2 of Figure 2.8 show that, during 2008 16, declining employment shares in sectors with low part-time employment and temporary contracts (mining and manufacturing), together with faster increases in employment in sectors with higher shares  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 Actual Imputed using 2008 employment shares Figure 2.6. Average Nominal Wage Growth, 2009 16, Actual versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral Employment Shares (Percent) Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The wage variable used is annual wage per worker excluding the self- employed. Compositional changes do not appear to have an important role in recent nominal wage growth dynamics. All advanced economies are close to the 45-degree line, indicating that aggregate wage growth is driven by within-sector developments.  0.75  0.50  0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50  0.75  0.50  0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 SVN LTU LVA EST SVK CZE AUS ESP MLT IRL ISL FIN JPN CAN CHE ITA DEU DNK AUT GBR Actual Imputed using 2008 employment shares  0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75  0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 LTU LVA EST SVK CZE AUS ESP MLT IRL ISL FIN CAN CHE NLD LUX ITA DEU FRA DNK BEL AUT GBR USA Actual Imputed using 2008 employment shares  0.50  0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75  0.50  0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 SVK CZE PRT MLT ISL CAN SWE NLD LUX ITA DNK BEL AUT GBR Actual Imputed using 2008 employment shares Figure 2.7. Changes in Labor Market Indicators, Actual versus Imputed Using 2008 Sectoral Employment Shares 3. Average Change in Hours per Worker, 2009 16 (Log level difference) 2. Average Change in Share of Temporary Contracts, 2009 16 (Percentage points) 1. Average Change in Part-Time Employment Share, 2009 16 (Percentage points) Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The part-time employment share is calculated as the number of part-time workers in a sector divided by total employment in the sector. Temporary workers are people with work contracts of limited duration; thresholds are country speci c. The share of temporary contracts is calculated as the number of temporary workers in a sector divided by total employment in the sector. Countries in red represent cases in which compositional changes ampli ed within-sector increases (panels 1 and 2) or decreases (panel 3). Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. Compositional change played an important role for changes in job attributes. Shifts in employment shares across sectors can explain about 22 percent of the increase in the part-time employment share, 18 percent of the increase in the share of temporary contracts, and 23 percent of the reduction in hours per worker.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 82 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 of these attributes (services), contributed to rising overall shares of part-time employment and temporary contracts. Panel 3 of Figure 2.8 shows that shifts in employment toward sectors with relatively low hours per worker contributed to the aggregate change in this job attribute. In sum, sectors that tend to have traditional employment arrangements (smaller shares of temporary contracts and part-time employment, longer hours per worker) have seen outright declines or weaker growth in employment than sectors where arrangements are more flexible. All in all, shifts in employment shares across sectors can explain about 22 percent of the increase in part-time employment, 18 percent of the increase in temporary contracts, and 23 percent of the reduction in hours per worker. Drivers of Recent Wage Dynamics As documented in the section  Surface Heal- ing Masks Deeper Changes,  nominal wage growth remains lower than before the Great Recession in most advanced economies. Furthermore, rising involuntary part-time employment, a higher incidence of tem- porary contracts, and a decline in hours per worker suggest broader changes in the labor market in many advanced economies since 2007, and notably even in those where unemployment rates are now below their precrisis averages. This section studies the determinants of wage growth across advanced economies in recent years. The empirical approach is guided by the sequence outlined in the primer on wage determination. It first explores the role of cyclical factors, such as headline unemploy- ment and inflation expectations and medium-term factors (trend productivity growth), before examin- ing how the changing nature of employment affects wage dynamics. Finally, it explores the influence of slower-moving factors on wage dynamics and involun- tary part-time employment. Aggregate Analysis Cross-Country Evidence The baseline approach is a panel variant of the wage Phillips curve estimated in Gali (2011), in which wage growth is regressed on expected inflation, lagged inflation, and the unemployment rate.22 The analysis 22The baseline wage measure is compensation per hour, excluding self-employment income. Because the data are insufficient to accu-  4  2 0 2 4 6 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 OTH ART HEA EDU PUB ADM PRF REA FIN INF ACC TRA TRD CON WAT ELC MNF MNG AGR Change in employment share (percentage points) Average part-time employment share relative to country mean Figure 2.8. Job Attributes and Changes in Sectoral Employment Shares, 2008 16  4  2 0 2 4 6 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 OTH ART HEA EDU PUB ADM PRF REA FIN INF ACC TRA TRD CON WAT ELC MNF MNG AGR Change in employment share (percentage points) Average share of temporary contracts relative to country mean  4  2 0 2 4 6 80 90 100 110 120 OTH ART HEA EDU PUB ADM PRF REA FIN INF ACC TRA TRD CON WAT ELC MNF MNG AGR Change in employment share (percentage points) Average hours per worker relative to country mean 3. Hours per Worker 1. Part-Time Employment 2. Temporary Contracts Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Markers to the right of 100 represent sectors with relatively high values (relative to country mean); markers to the left of 100 represent sectors with relatively low values. ACC = accommodation and food service activities; ADM = administrative and support service activities; AGR = agriculture, forestry, and  shing; ART = arts, entertainment, and recreation; CON = construction; EDU = education; ELC = electricity, gas, steam, and air-conditioning supply; FIN =  nancial and insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work activities; INF = information and communication; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and quarrying; OTH = other services; PRF = professional, scienti c, and technical activities; PUB = public administration and defense; REA = real estate activities; TRA = transportation and storage; TRD = wholesale and retail trade; WAT = water supply, sewerage, waste management, and remediation activities. Compositional shifts in employment toward sectors with relatively high shares of part-time employment and temporary employment and relatively low hours per worker contributed to the overall changes in these job attributes.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 83 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 focuses on nominal wage growth, examining the influ- ence of past inflation and inflation expectations explic- itly, alongside drivers that could be acting through real wage dynamics. These cyclical drivers can be rationalized as follows. Nominal wage growth depends on expected inflation (if wage setting is forward looking) or on lagged inflation (if backward indexation occurs); in aggre- gate, it is likely to depend on a combination of the two. Given that the benchmark model assumes a constant natural rate of unemployment and constant hours per worker, the unemployment rate proxies for labor market slack. In other models (described in Annexes 2.2 and 2.3), the output gap is used as an alternative measure of labor market slack. Greater slack in the labor market is expected to slow wage growth. Furthermore, at any given labor market slack and inflation expectations, wage growth can vary, depending on whether the economy is entering or exiting recession. The wage Phillips curves therefore also control for changes in unemployment (Manning 1993; Gali 2011). As described in the primer on wage determination, a key influence on wage growth is trend labor productivity growth. The benchmark model controls for this factor as well.23 The panel structure allows for the examination of wage dynamics across advanced economies, exploiting variation in the determinants of wage growth over time and across countries. Robustness tests are conducted by allowing the relationships between wage growth and labor market slack, changes in the unemployment rate, and inflation expectations to be country specific. Allowing coefficients to be country specific can help capture particular features of individual contexts for instance, the hypothesis that nominal wage growth in the United States has been subdued in recent years rately determine the shares of value added captured by labor versus capital for the self-employed, the baseline measure does not consider the wages of the self-employed. Results are broadly robust to using alternative wage measures. 23The inclusion of trend productivity growth in wage equations that examine the role of cyclical factors, such as slack and inflation expectations, is argued for by Ball and Moffitt (2001), Dew-Becker and Gordon (2005), Hall (2005), and Yellen (2005). The theoretical motivation for including productivity growth in wage Phillips curves is shown, for example, in Blanchard and Katz (1997), although the authors note that the empirical estimates for US Phillips curves estimated up to the time of writing do not strongly argue for its inclusion in the specification. The pass-through from labor produc- tivity to real wages depends on the bargaining power of workers and the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor (Chapter 3 of the April 2017 WEO). Annex Figure 2.2.3 illustrates the dynamics of trend productivity growth. in part because employers did not cut wages imme- diately after the financial crisis (Yellen 2014; Daly and Hobijn 2015), or the idea that wage growth may have been inhibited by a decline in the entry of new firms, a reduction in labor market  churn,  and fewer job-to-job transitions and thus fewer discrete increases in wages that often occur with these transi- tions.24 While testing these country-specific hypotheses in detail is beyond the scope of this chapter, two boxes supplement the cross-country analysis by shedding light on particular mechanisms that apply in certain advanced economy contexts. Box 2.2 examines the incidence of nominal wage freezes and cuts using firm-level data from Europe. Box 2.3 studies how wage growth in a broad sample of advanced economies may have been affected by firm-level balance sheet health after the financial crisis. Slack and Inflation The analysis indicates that slack and past inflation are statistically significantly associated with nominal wage growth, with expected signs (Annex Table 2.3.1, column 1). A 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a 0.3 to 0.4 per- centage point decline in nominal wage growth, while a 1 percentage point increase in lagged inflation is associ- ated with a 0.2 percentage point increase in nominal wage growth. Trend Labor Productivity Growth Firms  profitability and ability to accommodate wage increases are linked to changes in trend labor productivity growth, as discussed in the primer on wage determination. The empirical evidence sug- gests that nominal wage growth indeed appears to move broadly in line with trend productivity growth (Annex Table 2.3.1, column 2). A 1 percentage point increase in trend productivity growth is associated with a 0.7 percentage point increase in nominal wage growth.25 24Danninger (2016), for example, finds that job-to-job transitions in the United States have slowed for all skill and age groups in recent years. These developments are not necessarily a legacy of the Great Recession. Davis and Haltiwanger (2014) show that worker reallo- cation rates declined by 25 percent after 2000, suggesting that the labor market had begun to turn less fluid before the Great Recession. 25The impact of trend productivity growth on wage growth is consistent with other studies. These results suggest that a 1 percent- age point increase in trend productivity growth rate is associated with 0.4 to 0.9 percentage point higher wage growth, a range that includes the impact of about 0.8 percentage point implied in  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 84 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Similar patterns emerge through approaches that attempt to reduce concerns about reverse causality from wage growth to inflation (Annex Table 2.3.1, column 3) and by focusing on a sample that excludes smaller advanced economies to ensure that they are not driving the results (Annex Table 2.3.1, columns 5 7). Figure 2.9 shows coefficient estimates for the preferred specification, based on the sample excluding the smaller economies and using instrumental vari- ables to account for possible endogeneity of inflation in the wage equation (Annex Table 2.3.1, column 7). Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). A coefficient smaller than 1 implies a less than one-for-one association between increments to productivity growth and wage growth, and indicates that some of the gains from higher productivity growth translate into higher capital income (including rent, interest, dividends and retained corporate earnings). See Chapter 3 of the April 2017 WEO for a more exten- sive discussion. Furthermore, a country-by-country exploration of the influences of slack, past inflation, and trend productivity growth illustrates that the underlying dispersion of country-specific estimates (Figure 2.10; Annex Table 2.3.1, columns 4 and 8) is broadly consistent with the coefficients obtained from the cross-country panel.26 The findings also hold when using the aggregate output gap as a measure of slack (which allows for changes over time in the natural rate of unemployment and cyclical variations in hours per worker), as well as alternative measures of inflation expectations and trend productivity growth (Annex Table 2.3.2). 26The coefficients from the country-by-country specifications are, however, less precisely estimated than the panel coefficients due to smaller samples. Figure 2.9. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour: Panel Estimation (Percentage points)  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 Unemployment rate Change in unemployment rate Lagged in ation Trend labor productivity growth Slack, past in ation, and trend labor productivity growth are statistically signi cantly associated with nominal wage growth, with expected signs. Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Markers show estimated coef cients, and lines display 90 percent con dence intervals. Sample excludes Baltic countries. Oil price is used as an instrument for lagged in ation. Figure is based on column (7) of Annex Table 2.3.1. Figure 2.10. Effects on Growth of Compensation per Hour: Country-by-Country Estimation, Cross-Country Dispersion (Percentage points)  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Unemployment rate Change in unemployment rate Lagged in ation Trend labor productivity growth Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Markers show means of country-by-country estimation coef cients, and lines display corresponding interquartile ranges. Sample excludes Baltic countries. Figure is based on column (8) of Annex Table 2.3.1. A country-by-country exploration of the in uences of slack, past in ation, and trend labor productivity growth points to country-speci c estimates that are broadly consistent with the coef cients obtained from the country panel estimation.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 85 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The Changing Nature of Employment and Latent Slack Recent studies have argued that measured unem- ployment rates may not accurately capture slack in the United States (with a resulting focus on U-6 as a broader measure of slack) and some parts of the euro area (ECB 2017).27,28 Furthermore, to the extent that declining unemployment rates partly reflect workers forced into part-time jobs, increases in such types of employment may overstate the tightening of the labor market. Specifically, these workers may be willing to accept slower increases in wages and, at the same time, may continue to seek full-time employment and open-ended contracts. By doing so, they compete with workers employed under more traditional arrange- ments and, so, weigh on their wage growth as well. True labor market slack may therefore be larger than suggested by headline unemployment rates.29 Extensions of the baseline approach examine whether the changing nature of employment (as documented in the section  Surface Healing Masks Deeper Changes ) may have contributed to latent slack in the economy that is not picked up in headline unemployment numbers (Annex Tables 2.3.3 2.3.7). The analysis augments the baseline approach by including the shares of involuntary part-time employment and temporary contracts.30 A higher share of involuntary part-time employ- ment is associated with lower wage growth, even after controlling for the influence of the variables discussed 27U-6 includes the total unemployed, plus all marginally attached workers and total employed part-time for economic reasons as a per- cent of the civilian labor force plus all marginally attached workers. 28The evidence for the United States appears mixed. Krueger (2015) argues that the measured unemployment rate overstates the degree of slack in the United States because long-term unem- ployed workers have a negligible impact on wage setting. But as the same paper notes, other studies Aaronson and Jordan (2014), Altig and Higgins (2014), Smith (2014), and Kumar and Orrenius (2016) do find some evidence on the impact of the long-term-unemployment rate on wage growth, including at the state level. 29Aoyagi and Ganelli (2015) study the growing importance of nonregular employment in Japan in recent years. Katz and Krueger (2016) discuss the rise of alternative, flexible work arrangements  temping, contracting, freelancing through short-term gigs in the United States. They estimate that workers in such arrangements now comprise 16 percent of the US workforce. See also Brainard (2016). 30These could be seen as signs of binding constraints on workers (possibly stemming from weak labor demand since the Great Recession), reflecting in part structural developments, though with an important cyclical component. Given that hours per worker also reflect worker preferences, this attribute is not considered here as a measure of latent slack. previously. Across all countries, on average, a 1 per- centage point increase in the involuntary part-time employment share is associated with a 0.3 percentage point decline in nominal wage growth. To allow for the possibility that coefficients might vary across countries that have had different degrees of labor market tight- ening since the crisis, the regressions are also estimated separately for three subgroups. The coefficient is larger for the sample of countries where the unemployment rate is below pre Great Recession averages. Within this group of countries, a 1 percentage point increase in the involuntary part-time employment share is associated with a 0.7 percentage point decline in wage growth. The estimated effect is only 0.2 percentage point for countries with unemployment appreciably above the pre Great Recession averages. Though the point estimates are different for these subsamples, these differences are not statistically significant (Figure 2.11 depicts the coefficients shown in Annex Table 2.3.3, columns 5 8). In contrast to the finding that involuntary part-time employment has weighed on nominal wage growth, the analysis does not detect a role for temporary contracts in affecting wage dynamics. In general, the temporary contract share of employment does not have a statistically significant effect on aggregate wages for the whole sample or different subgroups (Annex Tables 2.3.6 and 2.3.7).31 Contributions to Changes in Nominal Wage Growth Putting the influences of slack, past inflation, and trend productivity growth together, Figure 2.12 examines the contributions of these factors to changes in average nominal wage growth since 2008 relative to 2000 07. For countries with unemployment rates below 2000 07 averages, about two-thirds of the observed decline in nominal wage growth can be explained by slower trend productivity growth an effect that is larger in 2015 16 than in previous years (given the recent decline in trend productivity growth for this group). Lower slack (captured here using the conven- tional labor market indicators that is, the unemploy- ment rate and its change) would have acted to increase nominal wage growth since 2014. However, involuntary part-time employment continues to weigh on nominal 31This could in part reflect measurement problems for this variable; to ensure cross-country comparability, the analysis uses a measure that does not contain information on regular versus non- regular contracts, but rather one that adheres to a legal definition of temporariness. See also note 18.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 86 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 wage growth (Figure 2.12, panel 1). In contrast, in countries with unemployment rates still above what they were before the crisis, conventional measures of labor market slack can explain about half of the slowdown in nominal wage growth since 2007, with involuntary part-time employment further weighing on wages (although part-time employment, even if involuntary, may have supported labor force participation and facili- tated stronger engagement with the workplace than the alternative of unemployment). Productivity growth plays  2  1 0 1 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15 16 Figure 2.12. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics, 2000 16 (Percentage-point change relative to 2000 07 average) 1. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average  3  2  1 0 1 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15 16  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15 16 Actual wage growth Conventional labor market indicators Lagged in ation Involuntary part-time employment share Trend productivity growth Residual 2. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000 07 Average 3. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30 hours a week because they could not  nd a full-time position. The involuntary part-time employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part- time workers divided by total employment. Groups are as de ned in Figure 2.11. The decomposition is based on the coef cients reported in column (5) of Annex Table 2.3.3 and is weighted by GDP at market exchange rates across countries. For countries with unemployment rates below 2000 07 averages, a large part of the decline in nominal wage growth can be explained by slower trend labor productivity growth, while lower slack would have acted to increase nominal wage growth. In contrast, in countries with unemployment rates still above what they were before the crisis, both conventional labor market slack measures and involuntary part-time employment weigh on nominal wage growth. Figure 2.11. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time Employment on Growth of Compensation per Hour, 2000 16 (Percentage points)  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 All countries Unemployment rates lower than 2000 07 average Unemployment rates moderately higher than 2000 07 average Unemployment rates appreciably higher than 2000 07 average Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Markers show estimated coef cients, and lines display 90 percent con dence intervals. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30 hours a week because they could not  nd a full-time position. The involuntary part- time employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part-time workers divided by total employment. Countries with unemployment rates lower than the 2000 07 average are CZE, DEU, GBR, ISR, JPN, SVK, and USA; countries with unemployment rates moderately higher than the 2000 07 average are those with increases below the median of all countries with unemployment rate increases and comprise AUS, AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, FIN, ISL, NOR, and SWE; countries with unemployment rates appreciably higher than the 2000 07 average are those with increases above the median of all countries with unemployment rate increases and comprise DNK, ESP, FRA, GRC, IRL, ITA, NLD, PRT, and SVN. Abbreviations in note use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. Figure is based on columns (5) to (8) of Annex Table 2.3.3. A higher share of involuntary part-time employment is associated with lower wage growth, even after controlling for the in uence of other variables. The effect is more pronounced in countries where the unemployment rate is below pre-Great Recession averages.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 87 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 a smaller role, possibly as it was already slow in the years before the crisis (Figure 2.12, panels 2 and 3). The domestic conditions driving wages (such as unemployment) could have a significant common component, given economic linkages between coun- tries as well as the common influence of global factors. In addition, domestic conditions in one country could have direct spillover effects on wage setting in others. For instance, relative wage weakness in one country could put downward pressure on wages in other coun- tries, given the threat of production relocation toward lower-cost destinations. These common factors would be picked up by statistically significant time effects in the regressions. The estimated year fixed effects tend to be correlated with advanced economy averages of lagged inflation, trend productivity growth, unem- ployment, and involuntary part-time employment. These forces together can explain over 70 percent of the total variation in the estimated year fixed effects. However, as illustrated in Figure 2.13, even beyond these factors, there is a negative residual after 2009, and especially during 2014 16. The residual could be picking up the effects of increased integration that make external conditions matter more and, in general, weigh on wage growth. Its increasing importance after the Great Recession and after the euro area sovereign debt crisis could point to downward pressure on wage demands as a result of synchronized recessions, and, in some cases, policy measures to slow wage growth and improve competitiveness. These findings thus corrob- orate the earlier findings on the importance of slack and lagged inflation on wage growth and also point to the effects of additional common external factors.32 Underlying Drivers Subdued nominal wage growth and changes in the nature of employment have taken place in an environ- ment of declining potential growth, changes to global production processes related to automation and trade integration, and changes in labor market institutions (Figures 2.14 and 2.15). Further extensions of the baseline approach to include these slower-moving factors show that a proxy for automation (the rel- ative price of investment goods) and diminished medium-term growth expectations appear to weigh 32Annex Figure 2.3.1 shows a decomposition similar to that in Figure 2.12, based on a regression with year fixed effects. The relative importance of the different drivers (slack versus productivity) shown in Figure 2.12 remains valid when year fixed effects are included. on wage growth alongside the influence of the forces discussed above.33 While other results are robust to whether the years of the Great Recession are included or not, some coeffi- cients are sensitive to the choice of period, as shown in Annex Tables 2.3.8 and 2.3.9. Automation as proxied by a decline in the relative price of investment goods  and diminished medium-term growth expectations consistently weigh on nominal wage growth, regardless of whether the Great Recession years are included. However, the coefficient on the change in union density is sensitive to both the choice of sample years and the inclusion of its level as an additional control. 33A decline in the relative price of investment goods can lower the cost of automating routine tasks (Autor and Dorn, 2013). However, this proxy may not fully capture the impact of automation on wages for example, advances in artificial intelligence that allow for automation may not be perfectly measured in the relative price of investment goods.  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Figure 2.13. Year Fixed Effects and Common Drivers, 2000 16 (Index) Residuals Predicted values Year  xed effects Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Year  xed effects are based on the panel ordinary least squares regression in column (1) of Annex Table 2.3.3. Residuals are from a regression of these year  xed effects on advanced economy averages of the drivers shown in Figure 2.12 and a constant. Year  xed effects and predicted values are subsequently renormalized such that year  xed effects over 2000 16 average to zero. The estimated year  xed effects tend to be correlated with advanced economy averages of lagged in ation, trend productivity growth, unemployment, and involuntary part-time employment. However, even beyond these factors, there is a negative residual after 2009, and especially during 2014 16. This could be picking up the effects of increased integration as well as downward pressure on wage demands as a result of synchronized recessions.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 88 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Changes in regulations related to individual and collec- tive dismissals (a measure of employment protection; see Annex 2.3.1 for details) do not have a statistically significant effect on nominal wage growth. Because these factors may be interrelated (an increase in global value chain participation and offshoring of production can, for example, contribute to lower unionization), ascribing precise contributions to each factor s influ- ence on recent wage dynamics is inherently difficult. Nevertheless, as seen in Figure 2.15, the limited decline in the relative price of investment goods in recent years compared with the earlier downward trend suggests that automation (as proxied by this measure) may not have made a large contribution to the subdued wage dynamics following the Great Recession.34 Such slower-moving forces may have also played a role in the increase in involuntary part-time employ- ment, beyond the influence of cyclical factors (Annex Table 2.3.10). While a more negative output gap (shortfall of actual output relative to the economy s potential) is associated with an increase in the involun- tary part-time employment share, other factors, such as medium-term growth expectations and automation, also appear to have had an influence (Figure 2.16). With declining medium-term growth expectations, firms may have preferred to hire workers part-time. Automation of work processes could have also led to structurally lower demand for labor. A higher services sector share of employment is also associated with an increase in involuntary part-time employment, consis- tent with the compositional shifts documented in the section on how surface healing masks deeper changes in advanced economy labor markets. Summary and Policy Implications Recent labor market developments in advanced economies point to a possible disconnect between unemployment and wages. Whereas in many econ- omies headline unemployment is approaching ratios seen before the Great Recession, or has even dipped below those levels, nominal wage growth rates con- tinue to grow at a distinctly slower pace. For some economies, this may reflect policy measures to slow wage growth and improve competitiveness in the 34Studies focusing on long-term effects of automation tend to find larger effects on the wages of particular groups, for example middle-skilled workers (see Autor and Dorn 2013 and Chapter 3 of the April 2017 WEO). 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Union density rate Share of countries with bi- or tripartite agreements Share of countries with  rm-level bargaining 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 Expected growth (one year ahead) Expected growth ( ve years ahead) Figure 2.14. Changes in Growth Expectations and Labor Market Institutions 1. Expected Growth (Percent, average across advanced economies) 2. Labor Market Institutions (Percent, average across advanced economies) 3. Strictness of Employment Protection (Index, average across advanced economies) 2000 07 2012 16 Sources: Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State Intervention, and Social Pacts database; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Union density rate refers to net union membership as a proportion of wage earners in employment (simple average across countries); bi- or tripartite agreements refers to the existence of a bipartite council of a central union and employers and/or the existence of a tripartite council with government participation. Firm-level bargaining denotes whether bargaining takes place predominantly at the local/company level. Strictness of employment protection refers to individual and collective dismissals (regular contracts). The sample consists of 26 33 advanced economies. Subdued nominal wage growth and changes to the nature of employment have taken place in an environment of declining potential growth and weakening worker bargaining power.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 89 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 aftermath of the global financial crisis and euro area sovereign debt crisis. Moreover, wage weakness appears to have a common component across advanced econo- mies, which could reflect larger cross-border spillovers of weak labor market conditions since the Great Reces- sion. Subdued nominal wage growth has also occurred in a context of a higher rate of involuntary part-time employment, an increased share of temporary employ- ment contracts, and a reduction in hours per worker. The analysis finds that aggregate developments in part-time employment, temporary contracts, and hours, in part, reflect compositional shifts in employ- ment away from sectors that tend to have traditional employment arrangements (smaller shares of part-time employment, a smaller proportion of temporary con- tracts, longer hours per worker) toward sectors where more flexible arrangements dominate. 0 10 20 30 40 50 MNG MNF CON TRA ACC INF FIN PUB 22 23 24 25 26 27 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 13 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 MNG MNF CON INF WHO FIN OTH UTL PUB RBS AGR ACC Figure 2.15. Long-Term Drivers of Labor Market Dynamics 2. Change in Relative Price of Investment by Sector, 2011 13 (Index, relative to 2000) 3. Evolution of Union Density Rates in Advanced Economies (Percent) 4. Union Density Rates by Sector (Percent) 2000 07 2009 12 Sources: Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State Intervention, and Social Pacts database; Penn World Tables Capital Detail; World Bank, World Development Indicators database; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Numbers for advanced economies are calculated by  rst aggregating over sectors to the country level using sectoral value added as weight, and subsequently aggregating over countries using nominal GDP as weight. Sectoral numbers are calculated by aggregating over countries using sectoral value added as weight. Sector abbreviations are as de ned in Figure 2.8. Technological advancements, captured by a declining relative price of investment, and falling union density rates could act as additional drivers of labor market dynamics. 1. Evolution of Relative Price of Investment in Advanced Economies (Index) Figure 2.16. Effects on Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share, Aggregate Analysis (Percentage points)  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 Five-year percentage- point change in GVC integration Five-year percentage- point change in price of investment Five-year percentage- point change in union density rate Percent increase in expected growth (aggregate) Five-year percentage- point change in share of service sector workers Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Markers show estimated coef cients, and lines display 90 percent con dence intervals. Figure is based on columns (2) to (6) of Annex Table 2.3.10. GVC = global value chain. Larger declines in the relative price of investment, lower expected growth, and a higher share of service workers are associated with a higher share of involuntary part-time employment.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 90 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 However, there is less evidence that sectoral shifts in employment account for subdued wage growth. Rather, the analysis finds that, at the country level, labor market slack, together with weak productivity growth and low inflation expectations, are the main forces weighing on wage growth. Automation (prox- ied by the relative price of investment goods) appears to have made a small contribution to subdued wage dynamics following the Great Recession due to a lim- ited decline in the relative price of investment goods in recent years compared with the previous downward trend. The analysis suggests that automation could weigh on wage growth more substantially in the future if the decline in the relative price of investment goods were to pick up again. However, inferences about the impact of automation are not straightforward given that, as noted previously, the relative price of invest- ment goods is just one channel through which its influence on wage growth may play out. Comparing the years since 2008 with 2000 07, the chapter finds that in economies where unemploy- ment rates are still appreciably above their averages before the Great Recession, conventional measures of labor market slack can account for about half of the slowdown, with involuntary part-time employment acting as a further significant drag on wages. In these economies, wage growth is unlikely to pick up unless slack diminishes meaningfully an outcome that will require continued accommodative policies to boost aggregate demand. In economies where unemployment rates are now below their averages before the Great Recession and measured slack appears low, slow productivity growth can account for about two-thirds of the slowdown in nominal wage growth since 2007. Even in these econo- mies, involuntary part-time employment, while it may have helped labor force participation and continued engagement with the workplace, appears to be weigh- ing on wage growth, alongside slower-moving drivers. The evidence further indicates that countries expe- riencing a slowdown in trend productivity will face headwinds to wage growth, even if unemployment rates decline. Inflation rates will also remain low unless wage growth accelerates beyond productivity growth in a sustained manner. In such cases, accommodative policies can help stimulate demand and lower headline unemployment rates, but overall wage growth (and hence inflation) may continue to remain subdued until involuntary part-time employment diminishes or trend productivity growth picks up. Assessing the true degree of slack beyond measured headline unemploy- ment rates will be important when determining the appropriate pace of exit from accommodative mone- tary policies. The evidence also suggests that involuntary part-time employment is in turn associated with both cyclical factors and slower-moving drivers, such as automation, diminished medium-term growth expectations, and the growing importance of the services sector. Some of these developments point to a persistent shift in the nature of work and employment relations. Policymakers may therefore need to enhance efforts to address the vulnerabilities that part-time workers face. Examples of possible initiatives in that regard include strengthening secondary and tertiary education to upgrade skills over the longer term; broadening minimum wage coverage where it does not currently include part-time workers; offering prorated paid annual, family, and sick leave to secure parity with full-time workers; and providing subsidized training for part-time workers for reskilling and retooling (see also the October 2017 Fiscal Monitor and Golden 2016 for a summary of measures taken by various cities in the United States, for example). However, any policy actions to address the income security of workers that hold part-time jobs or temporary contracts should be designed to minimize possible adverse impacts on the flexibility of labor markets and job creation. More generally, the rise of part-time employment and temporary contracts challenges the current structure of social insurance systems instituted in many advanced economies in the aftermath of the Great Depression and World War II which may be better equipped to handle  binary  employment status (people in the labor force are either employed full-time or unemployed). To the extent that changes in the nature of employment are not purely cyclical, but also related to longer-term shifts in structural factors, a broader rethinking of the nature of social insurance may be needed.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 91 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The skill premium the ratio of the wages of skilled to unskilled workers has been the focus of a wide body of research in recent years. Several studies look at the flattening in the skill premium in the United States since 2000 (Figure 2.1.1) and attribute it to: (1) the maturation of the information technology rev- olution slowing the demand for highly educated labor (Beaudry, Green, and Sand 2014, 2016), (2) a leveling off of the complementarity between highly educated labor and new production technologies (especially those that rely on computers and related organiza- tional capital), and (3) rising competition between education groups for increasingly scarce well-paid jobs (Valletta 2016; Autor 2017).1 Few studies, however, have analyzed the recent evo- lution of the skill premium in European economies.2 This box focuses on the evolution of labor market indicators by skill level in European economies during the most recent decade, using three cross-sections of data for 2006, 2010, and 2014.3 The results suggest that while low- and middle-skilled workers in Europe were hurt on the extensive margin (hours and employment, respec- The author of this box is Zs ka K cz n. 1Earlier studies link the widening wage dispersion in some advanced economies (in particular the United States and the United Kingdom) in the 1980s, and to a lesser extent the 1990s, to trade liberalization (Wood 1991, 1994, 1995; Leamer 1992, 1996; Burtless 1995), more intensive trade and migration (Borjas and Ramey 1995), outsourcing (Feenstra and Hanson 1996, 2001), or skill-biased technological change (Katz and Murphy 1992; Berman, Bound, and Griliches 1994; Autor, Katz, and Krueger 1998; Katz and Autor 1999; DiNardo and Card 2002; Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008). Autor and Dorn (2013) analyze the polarization of employment and earnings in the United States between 1980 and 2005 and emphasized the role of auto- mation of routine tasks. 2Parteka (2010) notes the increasing wage gap for low-skilled workers in the EU15 (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Neth- erlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom) during 1995 2005 in most sectors, and EU (2015) finds that earnings inequality increased from 2006 to 2011 in two-thirds of the members of the European Union. Cho and D az (2016), however, note that the skill premium fell in 2000 08 in the Baltic countries. 3Low-skilled workers are defined as those with up to lower-secondary education, middle-skilled as those with upper-secondary or postsecondary nontertiary education, and high-skilled as those with tertiary education. tively), the past decade brought relative gains for these groups in terms of hourly wages. Shrinking Wage Dispersion The skill premium declined in European economies between 2006 and 2014 (Figure 2.1.2); this is true in the case of the ratio of wages for high- to low-skilled workers as well as for high- to middle-skilled work- ers. In the United States, the former also declined over this period, however, the latter showed a small increase, pointing to relative wage losses of middle-skilled workers. Examining variation across sectors reveals that sectors with a higher share of low-skilled workers saw higher nominal wage growth. Naturally (given that the shares add up to 1) the opposite is the case for sectors with a higher share of high-skilled workers (Figure 2.1.3). Hollowing Out of Employment Changes in employment point to hollowing out in European economies as well in line with the liter- Figure 2.1.1. Evolution of Skill Premiums in the United States 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 1979 85 90 95 2000 05 10 16 High/low-skilled High/middle-skilled Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to those with at least a bachelor s degree. Box 2.1. Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 92 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 ature on the United States.4 The employment shares of middle-skilled workers fell, while those of low- and high-skilled workers increased (Figure 2.1.4). This pattern can be observed in all sectors, however, during this period it was starkest in services (finance, public administration, health, education). While sectoral data on the price of investment is limited, there are some evidence that sectors more exposed to technological change (that experienced larger declines in their price of investment goods) also saw more pronounced 4See also Das and Hilgenstock (forthcoming) for a larger sample of advanced as well as emerging market economies. hollowing out declines in the employment shares of middle-skilled labor.5 Falling Hours among Low-Skilled Workers Middle-skilled workers lost out in terms of employ- ment shares, but low-skilled workers appear to have experienced a larger decline in hours than other skill groups. Country-sector-level data on hours by skill level are unfortunately not readily available. However, 5Chapter 3 of the April 2017 World Economic Outlook high- lights a particularly large impact of technology (declining price of investment and exposure to routinization) on the labor share of middle-skilled workers. Figure 2.1.2. Skill Premiums and Changes in Skill Premiums in European Economies 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 High/low-skilled High/middle- skilled Middle/low- skilled 1. Skill Premiums, 2006 and 2014 2006 2014  60  50  40  30  20  10 0 10 MNG MNF CON TRD ACC FIN PUB EDU HEA 2. Change in Skill Premiums by Sector, 2006 14 High/low-skilled High/middle-skilled Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to those with at least a bachelor s degree. The  gure shows simple averages across sectors and economies. ACC = accommodation and food service activities; CON = construction; EDU = education; FIN =  nancial and insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and quarrying; PUB = public administration and defense; TRD = wholesale and retail trade. 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 OTH HEA EDU PUB FIN ACC TRD CON MNF MNG Nominal wage growth, 2012 15 (percentage points) Employment share of high-skilled workers, 2010 (percent) 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 OTH HEA EDU PUB FIN ACC TRD CON MNF MNG Nominal wage growth, 2012 15 (percentage points) Employment share of low-skilled workers, 2010 (percent) Figure 2.1.3. Nominal Wage Growth by Sector and Skill Group 2. Low-Skilled 1. High-Skilled Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high school diploma; high-skilled refers to those with at least a bachelor s degree. ACC = accommodation and food service activities; CON = construction; EDU = education; FIN =  nancial and insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and quarrying; OTH = other services; PUB = public administration and defense; TRD = wholesale and retail Box 2.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 93 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 sectors with larger shares of low-skilled workers have seen larger declines in hours (Figure 2.1.5). This agrees with the findings of EU (2015), which highlights significantly higher inequality levels for annual earn- ings than inequality measures for monthly and hourly wages. Number of months and, to a lesser extent, hours worked in the year appear to be significant sources of variation. Figure 2.1.4. Employment Shares by Skill 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Low-skilled Middle-skilled High-skilled 1. Employment Shares, 2006 and 2014 (Percent) 2006 2014  40  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 MNG MNF CON TRD ACC FIN PUB EDU HEA 2. Employment Share Changes, 2006 14 (Percentage points) Low-skilled Middle-skilled High-skilled Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to those with at least a bachelor s degree. ACC = accommodation and food service activities; CON = construction; EDU = education; FIN =  nancial and insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and quarrying; PUB = public administration and defense; TRD = wholesale and retail trade.  25  20  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 OTH HEA EDU PUB FIN ACC TRD CON MNF MNG Average change in hours per worker, 2012 15 Employment share of high-skilled workers, pre-2006 (percent) Figure 2.1.5. Employment Shares by Skill and Changes in Hours per Worker 1. High-Skilled 2. Low- and Middle-Skilled  25  20  15  10  5 0 5 10 15 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 OTH HEA EDU PUB FIN ACC TRD CON MNF MNG OTH HEA EDU PUB FIN ACC TRD CON MNF MNG Average change in hours per worker, 2012 15 Employment share of low-/middle-skilled workers, pre-2006 (percent) Middle-skilled Low-skilled Sources: Eurostat; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Low-skilled refers to workers with less than a high school diploma; middle-skilled refers to high school graduates with no college education; high-skilled refers to those with at least a bachelor s degree. ACC = accommodation and food service activities; CON = construction; EDU = education; FIN =  nancial and insurance activities; HEA = human health and social work activities; MNF = manufacturing; MNG = mining and quarrying; OTH = other services; PUB = public administration and defense; TRD = wholesale and retail trade. Box 2.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 94 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 This box examines the evolving nature of worker contract types and their potential implications for wage dynamics in Europe during the postcrisis period. The data set used in the analysis is from the Wage Dynamics Network (WDN), constructed to capture determinants of nominal wage dynamics for a large sample of European firms (see Izquierdo and others 2017 for further details on the data set).1 The data set is generated by three waves of surveys conducted in 2007, 2010, and 2014. Changes in Worker Contract Type Worker contract type in the firm-level survey falls into one of three categories: permanent full-time, permanent part-time, and temporary. Examining these three catego- ries of contracts by sector during 2007 14, the patterns seen in nonmanufacturing sectors appear to diverge from those registered in the manufacturing sector. Most nonmanufacturing sectors appear to have experienced a sharp decline in the permanent full-time worker share and increases in more flexible contracts, such as permanent part-time hires and workers on temporary contracts (Figure 2.2.1). In particular:   Permanent full-time worker share: The permanent full-time worker share, averaged across nonman- ufacturing sectors, declined from 81.8 percent in 2007 to 77.3 percent in 2014; in contrast, the share of permanent full-time workers stayed relatively stable for the manufacturing sector: 87.2 percent in 2007 and 85.9 percent in 2014.   More flexible contracts: The flip side of the above development is that the nonmanufacturing sectors experienced a higher increase in both the perma- nent part-time worker and temporary worker share of employment compared with the manufacturing sector. The share of permanent part-time workers increased by over 2 percentage points from 9.5 per- cent in 2007 to 11.8 percent in 2014 for nonmanu- facturing sectors, whereas the manufacturing sector experienced a mild increase in this category of less than a percentage point, from 5.6 percent to 6.4 per- cent over the same period. Similarly, the share of temporary workers in nonmanufacturing sectors rose from 8.6 percent in 2007 to 10.3 percent in 2014, while the share remained broadly unchanged for the manufacturing sector in these two periods (7.1 per- cent in 2007 and 7.6 percent in 2014). The author of this box is Gee Hee Hong. 1The author would like to thank the European Central Bank for making the WDN data sets available for this analysis. The magnitude of the decline in the permanent full-time worker share also varies across countries and appears related to the extent of healing in headline unemployment following the Great Recession (Figure 2.2.2). Countries whose unemployment rate is now below the 2000 07 average (blue bars) experienced a smaller decline in the share of permanent full-time work- ers than those where unemployment rate remains above the 2000 07 average (red bars).2 Although the increase in the temporary contract share is more pronounced for most of the nonmanufacturing sectors for countries in the first group, countries in the second group show a higher increase in the share of permanent part-time workers in some sectors, such as trade and energy. 2Countries with relatively high unemployment rates are those where the unemployment rate in 2016 was higher than their respective average unemployment rate between 2000 and 2007. These include Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, and Switzerland. Countries with relatively low unemployment rates are those where the unemployment rate in 2016 was lower than their respective average unemployment rate between 2000 and 2007. These include the Czech Republic, Estonia, Germany, Malta, the Slovak Republic, and the United Kingdom.  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 MNF ENR CON TRD MRK FIN NMR Figure 2.2.1. Changes in Employment Shares (Percentage points) Sources: Wage Dynamics Network, 2007, 2009, and 2014 waves; and IMF staff calculations. Note: CON = construction; ENR = energy; FIN =  nancial intermediation; MNF = manufacturing; MRK = market services; NMR = nonmarket services; TRD = trade. Permanent full-time workers Permanent part-time workers Temporary workers Box 2.2. Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 95 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Wage Dynamics Across the sample of 20,000 firms surveyed in 2014, sectors with a higher share of workers on temporary contracts also tend to have higher wage cuts and freezes. Figure 2.2.3 shows a positive relationship across sectors between the share of workers on tem- porary contracts and the fraction of firms within the sector reporting wage cuts and freezes. In contrast, there is a negative relationship between the share of permanent full-time workers and the fraction of firms with wage cuts and freezes. The patterns thus suggest an association between worker contract type and wage setting: sectors with a larger share of workers on more traditional contracts (permanent full-time) tend to experience fewer wage cuts and freezes as well. Countries with unemployment rates in 2016 lower than 2000 07 average Countries with unemployment rates in 2016 higher than 2000 07 average  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 FIN MNF TRD MRK ENR CON  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 FIN MNF TRD MRK ENR CON Figure 2.2.2. Changes in Employment Shares, 2007 14 (Percentage points) Sources: Wage Dynamics Network, 2007, 2009, and 2014 waves; and IMF staff calculations. Note: CON = construction; ENR = energy; FIN =  nancial intermediation; MNF = manufacturing; MRK = market services; TRD = trade. 1. Permanent Full-Time Workers 2. Permanent Part-Time Workers 3. Temporary Workers  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8 FIN MNF TRD MRK ENR CON 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 10 20 30 40 Likelihood of wage cuts and freezes Share of workers on temporary contracts (percent) 0 20 40 60 80 100 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Likelihood of wage cuts and freezes Share of permanent full-time workers (percent) Figure 2.2.3. Wage Cuts and Freezes, 2014 (Percent) Sources: Wage Dynamics Network, 2007, 2009, and 2014 waves; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Each marker in the  gure represents a country sector. 1. Permanent Full-Time Workers 2. Workers with Temporary Contracts Box 2.2 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 96 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 How have revenue growth performance and volatility affected firms  labor-related decisions in the postcrisis period? What role has firm-level financial vulnerability at the outset of the crisis played when it comes to postcrisis firm-level labor market choices? This box looks at these questions using the ORBIS data set compiled by Bureau van Dijk. It is a rich, cross-country, firm-level data set that contains firms  balance sheet variables as well as total wage bill and total employment information.1 The box first explores the association between recent growth (which arguably influences firm-level growth expectations) and uncer- tainty, and firms  wages and employment growth follow- ing the global financial crisis. To assess the potential effect of financial-crisis-related factors on firms  wage The author of this box is Gee Hee Hong. 1Comparability of the variables across countries and over time is ensured as described in Duval, Hong, and Timmer (2017), following the methodology of Gal and Hijzen (2016). and employment decisions, the box further explores whether firms with different degrees of ex ante financial vulnerability exhibit different wage and/or employment adjustment patterns in the postcrisis period. The evidence suggests that firms with stronger recent growth performance (and thus arguably more optimistic growth expectations) and low volatility exhibit higher wage and employment growth. Moreover, firms with weaker balance sheets before the crisis experience lower growth in wages and employment following the crisis, which highlights the potential role of crisis-related legacies in firms  labor-related decisions in the postcrisis period. Growth Expectations and Uncertainty as Determinants of Wage and Employment Growth To the extent that recent growth influences expectations about future growth (for example, if firms form adaptive expectations), trailing five-year average revenue growth can be considered a proxy for firm-level medium-term growth expectations. Moreover, the standard deviation of  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 Volatility (revenue based) Volatility (output based) Growth expectations Sources: ORBIS; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Wage is de ned as total wage bill divided by total employment for each  rm. The blue bars show the estimated wage growth differences between  rms with high uncertainty/growth expectations (75th percentile) and those with low uncertainty/growth expectations (25th percentile). The red bars show the corresponding employment growth differences. Nominal wage growth Employment growth Figure 2.3.1. Estimated Nominal Wage Growth and Employment Growth Differences Based on Uncertainty and Growth Expectations (Percentage points)  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 Change in wage per worker Change in employment Figure 2.3.2. Wage and Employment Growth by Debt Maturity in 2008 (Percentage points) Sources: ORBIS; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The left bar represents the estimated difference in postcrisis wage growth minus precrisis wage growth between a  rm with a high ratio of debt maturing in 2008 (75th percentile) and a  rm with a low ratio of debt maturing in 2008 (25th percentile). The right bar represents the estimated difference in postcrisis employment growth minus precrisis employment growth between the two types of  rms. Box 2.3. Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 97 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 revenue growth (volatility) or its ratio to average revenue growth over the trailing five-year interval (coefficient of variation) can be considered a proxy for firm-level uncertainty about the operating environment. The evidence suggests that firms with more optimistic growth expectations or lower volatility show stronger wage and employment growth in the postcrisis period.2 Figure 2.3.1 compares the differences in average wage and employment growth rates since 2008 between firms whose volatility and growth expectations are in the 25th and 75th percentiles. Wage growth is 0.3 to 0.6 per- centage point lower for firms with higher volatility than for their counterparts with lower volatility (depending on the measure used to construct volatility). In addi- tion, firms whose growth expectations are more optimis- tic show 2 percentage points stronger wage growth than their less optimistic counterparts. Similarly, for employ- ment growth, firms with higher volatility experience 0.5 to 0.8 percentage point lower employment growth than those with lower volatility. Optimism in growth expec- tations contributes positively to employment growth as well: firms with more optimistic expectations experience nearly 1.5 percentage points higher employment growth than those that are less optimistic. 2The two main dependent variables are the annual growth rate of total employment for each firm and the annual growth rate of wage per employee, in which the wage per employee is calculated as the total wage bill divided by the total number of employees for each firm. Financial Frictions and Labor-Related Decisions Firms whose financial vulnerability was higher before the crisis appear to exhibit weaker wage and employment growth in its aftermath, which highlights the potential role of financial frictions or crisis-related legacies in wage and employment adjustments following the crisis. Adopting the difference-in-differences methodology that compares the averages of precrisis and postcrisis wage and employment growth following Duval, Hong, and Timmer (2017), firms with ex ante more vulner- able balance sheets higher leverage and rollover risk entering the financial crisis exhibit lower wage and employment growth in the postcrisis years. The results are robust to controlling for labor productivity and mul- tifactor productivity, following Wooldridge (2009).3 Table 2.3.1 reports the results. Controlling for different measures of productivity, a 10 percentage point higher leverage ratio before the crisis is associated with 0.1 percentage point weaker growth in wages and employment after the crisis. Similarly, firms with higher precrisis rollover risk show about 0.3 to 0.4 percentage point weaker growth in wages and employment. 3Rollover risk, measured as the ratio of current liabilities (that is, debt maturing within a year) to total sales in the 2007 balance sheet, allows for a causal interpretation. Firms  debt structure in 2007 is unlikely to be associated with other unobserved firm characteristics affecting wage and employment decisions given that the timing of the global financial crisis was not foreseen from the vantage point in 2007 (Almeida and others 2012; Duval, Hong, and Timmer 2017). Table 2.3.1. Precrisis Financial Vulnerabilities and Postcrisis Labor Adjustments (1) (2) (3) (4) Changes in Log(average wage/worker) Changes in Log(employment) Leverage Precrisis1  0.0130*** 0.005  0.011***  0.010*** (0.003) (0.005) (0.003) (0.003) Debt Maturing 20082  0.038***  0.036***  0.034***  0.032*** (0.005) (0.004) (0.005) (0.004) Productivity (multifactor productivity)3 0.790*** 0.464*** (0.145) (0.119) Productivity (labor productivity)4 0.540*** 0.343*** (0.123) (0.111) Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes Sector Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes Number of Observations 82,162 98,386 82,204 98,420 R 2 0.0253 0.0280 0.0269 0.0268 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Changes in log(average wage/worker) is the difference between average wage per worker between the postcrisis and precrisis periods. Changes in log(employment) is the difference between log of average employment between the postcrisis and precrisis period. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the country-sector level. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1Average precrisis debt-to-assets ratio. 2Amount of debt maturing in 2008 divided by average total precrisis sales. 3Calculated using the methodology introduced by Wooldridge (2009). 4Calculated as the ratio of value-added output to total employment at the firm level. Box 2.3 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 98 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex 2.1. Country Coverage and Data The aggregate analysis is based on both quar- terly and annual data for 29 advanced economies during 2000:Q1 16:Q4. Sectoral regressions are based on annual data for 20 advanced economies during 2000 15. The primary data sources for labor market vari- ables are Eurostat, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and national authorities. Key sources for other variables used in this chapter are the Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database; Database on Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State Intervention and Social Pacts (ICTWSS); IMF World Economic Outlook database; and the OECD. Annex 2.2. Empirical Methodologies Aggregate Analysis The aggregate analysis uses a wage Phillips curve framework proposed by Gali (2011). The original equation used by Gali (2011) is similar to equa- tion (2.1):35 35Gali s wage Phillips curve includes both the current and previous periods  unemployment rate given that the unemployment rate in the United States follows an autoregressive (2) process, in which the expected unemployment rate is a function of current and previous unemployment rates. The analysis in this chapter uses a similar argument for controlling for the change in unemployment rate: it captures the expectation of the evolution of unemployment rates beyond the current rate. Intuitively, this captures the importance of whether a country is entering a recession (rising unemployment rates) or recovering from one (falling unemployment rates). Annex Table 2.1.1. Country Coverage Aggregate Analysis Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Lithuania, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States Sectoral Analysis Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States Annex Table 2.1.2. Data Sources Indicator Source Compensation, Wages Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Employment Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Part-Time Employment Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Involuntary Part-Time Employment Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Temporary Employment Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Hours per Worker, Total Hours Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Output Gap IMF, World Economic Outlook database Inflation, Expected Inflation Consensus Forecast database; IMF, World Economic Outlook database Unemployment Rate IMF, World Economic Outlook database Productivity Eora Multi-Region Input-Output table; Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Indicators of Employment Protection Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Expected Growth (aggregate) IMF, World Economic Outlook database Gross Output (sectoral) Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database Relative Price of Investment Goods (aggregate) World Bank, World Development Indicators Price of Investment (sectoral) Penn World Tables Capital Detail Capital Intensity Penn World Tables Exports, Final Exports, Final Imports World Input-Output Database Foreign Value Added Share of Exports Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database Labor Market Policies Database on Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Setting, State Intervention, and Social Pacts Source: IMF staff compilation.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 99 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017   i,t  w   =   i  +     i,t   1  +   1   u  i,t  +   2     u  i,t  +   i,t ,  ( 2.1 )  in which, for country  i  and time  t ,   i,t  w   is the nominal wage growth,   i,t   1  is lagged year-over-year inflation,   u  i,t  is the unemployment rate, and    u  i,t  is the change in the unemployment rate. To explore how productivity growth and labor underutilization may affect aggregate wage growth, equation (2.1) is augmented with two sets of vari- ables: trend productivity growth and labor mar- ket underutilization measures. Equation (2.2) is estimated:   i,t  w   =   i  +     i,t   1  +   1   u  i,t  +   2     u  i,t  +    g     i,t  Y/H  +    Z      i,t  +   i,t ,  ( 2.2 )  in which  g     i,t  Y/H  is the trend of the growth rate of real output per hour, and  Z      i,t  are labor underutiliza- tion measures. These measures include the share of employed workers who take part-time jobs invol- untarily, with part-time jobs defined as less than 30 hours a week, and the share of employed workers who have temporary work contracts. The primer earlier in this chapter explains why these drivers matter for wage growth. As noted there, the analysis focuses on nominal wage growth; Annex Figures 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 illustrate real wage dynamics for reference. Annex Figure 2.2.3 shows the dynamics of two key drivers in equation (2.2): trend productivity growth and lagged inflation (a proxy for inflation indexation). The analysis examines several robustness tests:   Data frequency: The labor market underutilization measures (involuntary part-time and temporary contract employment shares) are not available at quarterly frequency hence the analysis of their impact on aggregate wage growth in Annex Annex Figure 2.2.1. Distribution of Real Compensation Growth Measures (Percentage-point difference relative to 2007)  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1. De ated Using Consumer Price Index  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2. De ated Using GDP De ator Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The sample excludes Baltic countries. The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. The horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles.  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8  10  5 0 5 10 15 USA KOR JPN ITA GBR FRA ESP DEU CAN AUS Growth of real compensation per hour Unemployment rate  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 8  10  5 0 5 10 15 USA KOR JPN ITA GBR FRA ESP DEU CAN AUS Growth of real compensation per hour Unemployment rate Annex Figure 2.2.2. Growth of Real Compensation per Hour and Unemployment Rates (Percentage-point change, 2016 relative to 2000 07 average) 1. De ated Using Consumer Price Index 2. De ated Using GDP De ator Sources: National authorities; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. The 10 largest advanced economies (by 2016 nominal GDP in US dollars) are labeled.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 100 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Tables 2.3.3 2.3.9 uses data at annual frequen- cy.36 Robustness tests suggest that interpolation to quarterly series (uniform values across quarters or linear interpolation) does not significantly affect the results.   Alternative wage measures (Annex Table 2.3.5; Annex Figure 2.2.4): Robustness tests examine dif- ferent choices of wage measures as the dependent variable in equation (2.2) aggregate compensa- 36The unemployment rate and its change and trend productivity growth are defined using annual data; lagged inflation is based on the year-over-year change in the consumer price index lagged by one quar- ter (wage contracts may not be set in a synchronized way, hence infla- tionary shocks may affect aggregate wages with a short lag). Results are broadly robust to, instead, using annual inflation with a one-year lag. In some specification (for example, Annex Table 2.3.3, column 5), this can lead to more plausible lagged inflation coefficients. Annnex Figure 2.2.3. Factors Associated with Nominal Wage Growth (Percentage point difference relative to 2007) Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Trend labor productivity growth is calculated as  ve-year trailing averages. Annual averages over four quarters are shown in panel 2. The horizontal line inside each box represents the median, the upper and lower edges of the box show the top and bottom quartiles, and the red markers denote the top and bottom deciles.  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1. Trend Labor Productivity Growth, Advanced Economies  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2. One-Quarter-Lagged In ation, Advanced Economies Annex Figure 2.2.4. Effects of Involuntary Part-Time Employment on Compensation and Wages, 2000 16 (Percentage points)  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 Compensation per employee Compensation per hour Wage per hour  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 Compensation per employee Compensation per hour Wage per hour  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 Compensation per employee Compensation per hour Wage per hour  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 Compensation per employee Compensation per hour Wage per hour 1. All Countries 2. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average 3. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000 07 Average 4. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Markers show estimated coef cients, and lines display 90 percent con dence intervals. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30 hours a week because they could not  nd a full-time position. The involuntary part-time employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part- time workers divided by total employment. Groups are as de ned in Figure 2.11. Figure is based on Annex Tables 2.3.4 and 2.3.5.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 101 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 tion divided by total employees (compensation per employee), aggregate wage bill divided by total employees (wage per employee), aggregate com- pensation divided by total hours (compensation per hour), and aggregate wage bill divided by total hours (wage per hour, which includes aggregate social contributions of employers). Annex Fig- ure 2.2.5 further illustrates that public sector wages are unlikely to have been an important driver of aggregate wages during 2009 16.   Alternative measures of explanatory variables: The magnitude and significance of the coefficients are, in general, robust to alternative measures of slack, inflation expectations, and trend productivity growth (Annex Table 2.3.2).   Country-by-country regressions: The significance and the magnitude of the coefficients of trend produc- tivity growth and the involuntary part-time employ- ment share are broadly similar when relying on country-by-country regressions (Annex Table 2.3.1, columns 4 and 8).   Instrumental variables: Reverse causality from wage growth to price inflation may occur if firms pass faster growth in labor costs on in the prices they charge. This is alleviated by instrumenting lagged inflation with past changes in oil prices, which is critical in helping identify the degree of inflation indexation.37 There are two possible concerns regarding the validity of oil price changes as the instrumental variable for lagged inflation: first, global demand shocks may drive both oil prices and wage growth. This is partly alleviated by the current wage Phillips curve equation already controlling for several channels through which global demand shocks could influence wages slack and change in slack. The second concern is whether there could be reverse causality from wage growth to other inflation drivers. However, this too is unlikely to drive the main results lower wage growth should cause lower labor market slack, which would bias the ordinary least squares estimates of the impact of slack on wage growth downward rather than upward. Similar logic applies to the labor underuti- lization measure. The main result that involuntary 37Addressing this reverse causality could be expected to reduce the coefficient of lagged inflation. Annex Table 2.3.3 suggests that this is indeed the case for groups A and C. There could be some idiosyncratic reasons biasing the ordinary least squares estimate of lagged inflation downward for group B (the coefficient is negative and insignificant). part-time employment weighs on wage growth is not sensitive to using ordinary least squares or instrumental variables estimation.38 The effects of secular drivers on job attributes are examined using a cross-country panel regression of 36 countries from 2000 to 2016, including country and year fixed effects, and controlling for the output gap. In this analysis, the share of involuntary part-time workers at the country level is the main dependent variable. Potential secular drivers include measures of worker bargaining power (proxied by the five-year change in the union density rate), the five-year change in the share of employment in the services sector, technological change (proxied by the five-year change 38Reverse causality from wage growth to trend productivity growth may cause upward bias in the effect of trend productivity growth through employment growth. However, estimated coefficients of the labor productivity trend are often lower than what is implied from other studies in the literature (for instance, Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014), especially if the sample is restricted to the post Great Recession period. Together, these suggest that downward attenuation bias may dominate reverse causality, causing an underestimation of the role of trend productivity growth. Results are broadly unchanged when imposing the coefficient of trend productivity growth to be 1 or the value implied from other studies.  50  40  30  20  10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 USA NLD DEU GBR FIN CZE EST LTU AUS IRL Annex Figure 2.2.5. Correlations between Aggregate Wage Growth and Two-Quarter-Lagged Public Wage Growth (Percent) Sources: Eurostat; national authorities; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. 2001 08 2009 16  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 102 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 in the relative price of investment), growth expecta- tions, and global value chain integration (proxied by the five-year change in foreign value added as a percent of exports). Sectoral Analysis As a complement to the aggregate analysis, drivers of nominal wage growth and part-time employment shares are examined at the sectoral level.39 Following the structure of the aggregate analysis, sector-level regressions explore the roles of slack, medium-term growth expectations, technological progress, increased trade integration, and changes in labor market institutions.40 These are examined as possible drivers of nominal wage growth and part-time employment to determine their effect on different margins of adjustment. The analysis exploits variation in sectoral exposure to aggregate forces to shed light on mecha- nisms that operate within countries.41 As noted earlier, across several advanced econo- mies, a rise in involuntary part-time employment has 39Estimates of involuntary part-time employment are not available at the sectoral level, so the focus here is on total part-time employ- ment, including both voluntary and involuntary. 40Control variables are in line with those used in ECB (2009) and EC (2003), as well as in the literature on interindustry wage differentials and wage dispersion (for example, Erdil and Yetki- ner 2001; Koeniger, Leonardi, and Nunziata 2007; and Du Caju and others 2010). Wage regressions also control for inflation and (sectoral) trend productivity growth. 41The regressions also control for country, sector, and year fixed effects. accompanied subdued wage growth, even as headline employment has fallen. These developments have occurred in the context of falling growth expectations and declines in worker bargaining power, as shown in Figures 2.14 and 2.15.42 The sectoral analysis examines the effects of increas- ing trade openness, automation (captured by the declining relative price of investment), and slowing sectoral growth rates (used to construct a measure of adaptive growth expectations at the sectoral level) on nominal wage growth and part-time employment as a share of total employment.43 It does so by exploit- ing sectoral variations in exposure to aggregate forces (Annex Table 2.2.1). For instance, country-level slack could be expected to matter more for labor market dynamics in sectors that are more correlated with the aggregate economy, and the effects of a decline in the aggregate relative price of investment could vary by the initial capital intensity of the sector. The analysis relies on annual data for a sample of 20 advanced economies starting in 2000, and relates changes in nominal wage growth to the same cyclical and secular drivers used in the aggregate analysis, con- trolling for country, sector, and year fixed effects: 42Panel 4 of Figure 2.15 shows the decline in union density rates occurring in most sectors, with the notable exception of public administration; coverage of sectoral union density rates is unfortu- nately too limited to be included in the regression analysis. 43Sectoral expected growth is measured as the five-year trailing average of sectoral gross output growth rates. As noted above, this could be capturing expected productivity growth as well as demand conditions. Annex Table 2.2.1. Aggregate Forces and Sectoral Exposures Measure Aggregate Variable Sectoral Variation Near-Term Factors Slack inflation Aggregate output gap, inflation Interaction with sectoral correlation Medium-Term Factors Trend productivity growth Five-year trailing average of productivity growth Long-Term Factors Expected growth Expected growth (one and five years ahead) Interaction with sectoral correlation; sectoral expected growth (adaptive) Trade openness Exports, intermediate exports, global value chain participation, final imports Technological progress Change in relative price of investment Interaction with sectoral capital intensity; change in sectoral price of investment Worker bargaining power Union density rate, bi- or tripartite agreement, level of bargaining Interactions with sectoral characteristics: high expected growth, high volatility Ease of hiring and firing Ease of hiring and firing Interactions with sectoral characteristics: high expected growth, high volatility Source: IMF staff compilation. Note: Sample comprises 20 advanced economies: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 103 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017  y  ijt  =   i  +   j  +   t  +    X  ijt  +    Z  jt , (2.3) in which  y  ijt  is nominal wage growth,  X  ijt  includes mea- sures that vary at the country-sector level, such as the share of part-time employment, how correlated a sec- tor s gross output growth is with the overall economy, sectoral trend productivity growth (measured again using a five-year trailing average), sectoral expected growth (an adaptive measure based on a five-year trailing average of sectoral gross output growth), and the five-year change in final imports as a share of gross output.  Z  jt  includes measures that vary only at the country level, such as the aggregate output gap and (lagged) inflation, the change in the relative price of invest- ment, and measures of worker bargaining power (proxied again using the five-year change in the union density rate). To exploit sectoral variation in exposure to aggregate forces, these are interacted with sec- toral characteristics, looking at the interaction of the aggregate output gap with the correlation of the sector and the aggregate economy and the interaction of the change in the relative price of investment with sectoral capital intensity. As in the aggregate regressions, the sectoral analysis relates the share of part-time employment to slack (captured using the output gap and how correlated a sector is with the aggregate economy and the inter- action between these two variables) and to secular drivers: expected growth, change in final imports as a share of gross output, change in the relative price of investment (also interacted with capital intensity), and change in the union density rate. Annex 2.3. Empirical Results Aggregate Analysis Annex Tables 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 show estimates of wage Phillips curves using ordinary least squares and instrumental variables estimations, for the full sample as well as a sample excluding the Baltic countries, and for alternative measures of the dependent and explana- tory variables. Annex Table 2.3.1. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) All Advanced Economies All Advanced Economies Excluding Baltic Countries OLS OLS IV1 Country-by- Country OLS2 OLS OLS IV1 Country-by- Country OLS2 Unemployment Rate  0.332***  0.366***  0.394***  0.464  0.261***  0.281***  0.338***  0.428 (0.0261) (0.0257) (0.0284) (0.0249) (0.0249) (0.0279) Change in Unemployment Rate  0.114***  0.0836**  0.124*** 0.00042  0.0386  0.0111  0.00301 0.0313 (0.0381) (0.0373) (0.0419) (0.0427) (0.0425) (0.0474) Lagged Inflation 0.215*** 0.161*** 0.291*** 0.177 0.216*** 0.190*** 0.235** 0.187 (0.0438) (0.0431) (0.110) (0.0435) (0.0432) (0.112) Trend Productivity Growth Rate3 0.697*** 0.922*** 0.344 0.446*** 0.778*** 0.261 (0.0725) (0.0732) (0.0729) (0.0742) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects yes yes no yes yes no Number of Observations 1,889 1,889 1,857 1,766 1,766 1,736 R 2 0.472 0.498 0.478 0.438 0.450 0.419 Memorandum: The coefficient of trend productivity growth rate implied from other studies: 0.781.4 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = year-over-year growth rate of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of quarterly frequency from the first quarter of 2000 to the fourth quarter of 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. OLS = ordinary least squares. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 2Averages of the estimates of country-specific wage Phillips curves. 3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate. 4Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014).  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 104 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Oil price changes are common across countries, so instrumental variables results do not control for year fixed effects. The main results are not sensitive to the choice of estimation method ordinary least squares including year fixed effects or instrumental variables without year fixed effects (Annex Figure 2.3.1 com- pared with Figure 2.12). The share of variation in wage growth explained by inflation drivers is broadly similar across the two approaches.44 Annex Tables 2.3.3 2.3.5 augment the wage Phillips curve specification in Annex Table 2.3.1 further with the share of involuntary part-time employment, and 44Further analysis relating the residuals from the wage Phillips curve analysis to the global output gap (weighted by dollar GDP) suggests that the global output gap is not significant in explaining such residuals. examine robustness to using different measures of wages, as well as exploring differences across countries with unemployment rates below, moderately above, and appreciably above 2000 07 averages. Annex Tables 2.3.6 and 2.3.7 conduct a similar exercise for the temporary contract employment share instead of involuntary part-time employment share. Results are very similar if both the involuntary part-time employment share and temporary contract employment share are controlled for simultaneously. These labor market underutilization measures do not appear to affect the sensitivity of wage growth to unemployment rates they are thus included additively. As described above, Annex Table 2.3.8 augments the wage Phillips curve with secular drivers. Because wage Annex Table 2.3.2. Estimates of Wage Phillips Curves with Alternative Measures (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Benchmark1 Alternative Measure of Labor Market Slack3 Alternative Measure of Inflation Expectations4 Alternative Measure of Trend Productivity Growth5 Restricting the Coefficient of Trend Productivity Growth6 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 Unemployment Rate  0.339***  0.220***  0.347***  0.339*** (0.0291) (0.0236) (0.0296) (0.0287) Output Gap 0.291*** (0.0331) Change in Unemployment Rate 0.0244 0.0279  0.0935***  0.00512 0.0240 (0.0480) (0.0502) (0.0397) (0.0479) (0.0447) Lagged Inflation 0.195 0.149 0.735*** 0.302*** 0.196* (0.120) (0.128) (0.0594) (0.117) (0.108) Ten-Year Inflation Expectation 0.265*** (0.0594) Trend Productivity Growth Rate: Five-year7 0.783*** 0.645*** 0.553*** 0.781 (0.0720) (0.0727) (0.0634) Trend Productivity Growth Rate: Three-year8 0.410*** (0.0692) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no Number of Observations 1,656 1,656 1,656 1,656 1,656 R 2 0.406 0.369 0.379 0.396 0.284 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = year-over-year growth rate of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of quarterly frequency from the first quarter of 2000 to the fourth quarter of 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The sample size is slightly smaller than that in Annex Table 2.3.1, as this table ensures the sample size consistency for columns (1) to (5). 2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 3Output gap replaces unemployment rate as the measure of the labor market slack. 4Lagged inflation is replaced by lagged inflation and 10-year inflation expectation, with the sum of the two coefficients assumed to be 1. 5Three-year trailing average of productivity growth replaces five-year trailing average of productivity growth. 6The coefficient of trend productivity growth is imposed to be 0.781, to address the reverse causality from wage growth to trend productivity growth. 7Five-year trailing average of labor productivity growth rate. 8Three-year trailing average of labor productivity growth rate.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 105 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 growth rates were volatile during the Great Recession, Annex Table 2.3.9 examines robustness to excluding the years 2008 and 2009. Annex Table 2.3.10 zooms in on the determinants of job attributes and examines the drivers of involun- tary part-time employment, linking it to the output gap and the secular drivers explored above. Sectoral Analysis Sectoral data have many more missing observations than country-level data, resulting in an unbalanced panel, and sectoral measurements are likely nois- ier. Although the results of the sectoral regressions are not as conclusive as those based on the country panel regressions presented earlier, they tend to be consistent. Annex Tables 2.3.11 and 2.3.12 report the results of the sectoral analysis, linking growth in nominal wages and part-time employment to cyclical and secular drivers. These include country, sector, and year fixed effects results are robust to including interacted sector-year fixed effects instead, which would pick up common sectoral developments across countries. Diminished sector-specific slack is associated with higher nominal wage growth in countries where unemployment in 2016 was below 2000 07 averages (as captured by the sum of the impacts of the aggre- gate output gap, the correlation between the sector and the aggregate economy, and their interaction; see Figure 2.3.2, panel 1). Automation and medium-term growth expectations have been generally associated with lower wage growth in these economies. Where unemployment rates are still appreciably above 2000 07 averages, slack and past inflation are the largest drags on nominal wage growth (Figure 2.3.2, panel 3). For countries with unemployment rates only moderately above their former averages, struc- tural factors automation and medium-term growth expectations play a role (Figure 2.3.2, panel 2). Although sectoral productivity growth does not have a significant effect in the sectoral analysis, this finding could result from spillovers of wage pressures across sectors and cross-sector labor mobility. These spillovers tend to weaken links between sector-level drivers and sectoral nominal wage growth. Automation and lower sectoral medium-term growth expectations are also associated with higher shares of part-time employment across sectors,  3  2  1 0 1 2 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15 16 Annex Figure 2.3.1. Decomposition of Wage Dynamics, 2000 16 (Percentage-point change relative to 2000 07 average) 1. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average  3  2  1 0 1 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15 16  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15 16 Lagged in ation Year  xed effects Trend productivity growth Residual Conventional labor market indicators Actual wage growth Involuntary part-time employment share 2. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000 07 Average 3. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The wage variable used is compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Involuntary part-time workers are those working less than 30 hours a week because they could not  nd a full-time position. The involuntary part-time employment share is calculated as the total number of involuntary part-time workers divided by total employment. Groups are as de ned in Figure 2.11. The decomposition is based on the coef cients reported in column (1) of Annex Table 2.3.3 and is weighted by GDP at market exchange rates across countries.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 106 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 2.3.3. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share by Country Group (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) Full Sample Group A Group B Group C Full Sample Group A Group B Group C OLS OLS OLS OLS IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share  0.177**  0.503*  0.336** 0.0159  0.275***  0.653**  0.291*  0.186* (0.0830) (0.274) (0.139) (0.124) (0.0829) (0.294) (0.154) (0.101) Unemployment Rate  0.187***  0.0178  0.00699  0.280***  0.182*** 0.0855  0.284  0.395*** (0.0445) (0.128) (0.186) (0.0686) (0.0438) (0.146) (0.186) (0.0722) Change in Unemployment Rate  0.349***  0.690***  0.609**  0.128  0.263***  0.449**  0.830*** 0.0821 (0.0960) (0.244) (0.271) (0.129) (0.0887) (0.181) (0.247) (0.117) Lagged Inflation 0.193*** 0.378***  0.183 0.156 0.300* 0.287 0.397  0.279 (0.0728) (0.129) (0.124) (0.206) (0.164) (0.282) (0.248) (0.292) Trend Productivity Growth Rate2 0.456*** 0.634*  0.131 0.699*** 0.624*** 0.763*** 0.00955 0.986*** (0.112) (0.348) (0.189) (0.170) (0.106) (0.223) (0.176) (0.170) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes no no no no Number of Observations 411 117 146 148 411 117 146 148 R 2 0.610 0.709 0.649 0.723 0.577 0.652 0.458 0.660 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = annual growth rates of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1. for countries in the full sample. A few countries are not in the sample due to missing data on involuntary part-time employment share. Country groups are divided by comparing unemployment rate in 2016 with 2000 07 average. Group A (2016 unemployment lower than 2000 07): Czech Republic, Germany, Japan, Israel, Slovak Republic, United Kingdom, and United States. Group B (2016 unemployment moderately higher than 2000 07): Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Switzerland, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. Group C (2016 unemployment appreciably higher than 2000 07): Denmark, Spain, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, and Slovenia. IV = instrumental variable. OLS = ordinary least squares. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 2Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate. Annex Table 2.3.4. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Full Sample Countries with Unemployment Rate Lower than 2000 07 Average (Group A) Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share  0.203**  0.275***  0.242***  0.535**  0.653**  0.705** (0.0803) (0.0829) (0.0805) (0.261) (0.294) (0.292) Unemployment Rate  0.167***  0.182***  0.177***  0.0174 0.0855 0.103 (0.0424) (0.0438) (0.0422) (0.130) (0.146) (0.145) Change in Unemployment Rate  0.473***  0.263***  0.321***  0.574***  0.449**  0.567*** (0.0859) (0.0887) (0.0853) (0.161) (0.181) (0.180) Lagged Inflation 0.509*** 0.300* 0.309* 0.491* 0.287 0.253 (0.159) (0.164) (0.162) (0.250) (0.282) (0.279) Trend Productivity Growth Rate3 0.413*** 0.624*** 0.701*** 0.659*** 0.763*** 0.760*** (0.103) (0.106) (0.102) (0.198) (0.223) (0.222) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no no Number of Observations 411 411 410 117 117 117 R 2 0.570 0.577 0.603 0.705 0.652 0.663 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes in Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in the full sample and group A. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates. 2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 107 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 2.3.6. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract Employment Share: Full Sample and Countries with Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Full Sample Countries with Unemployment Rate Lower than 2000 07 Average (Group A) Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 Temporary Contract Employment Share  0.0274  0.0866  0.0861 0.0498  0.115  0.146 (0.0566) (0.0584) (0.0561) (0.135) (0.174) (0.176) Unemployment Rate  0.244***  0.297***  0.277***  0.0666 0.262 0.308 (0.0428) (0.0441) (0.0427) (0.219) (0.281) (0.285) Change in Unemployment Rate  0.428***  0.181*  0.249***  0.392*  0.291  0.375 (0.0974) (0.100) (0.0960) (0.203) (0.261) (0.265) Lagged Inflation 0.556*** 0.259 0.281 0.431  0.167  0.249 (0.182) (0.188) (0.183) (0.430) (0.553) (0.561) Trend Productivity Growth Rate3 0.503*** 0.736*** 0.806*** 0.987*** 1.130*** 1.133*** (0.118) (0.122) (0.116) (0.195) (0.251) (0.254) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no no Number of Observations 388 388 387 88 88 88 R 2 0.617 0.616 0.648 0.732 0.591 0.575 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes in Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in the full sample and group A. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates. 2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate. Annex Table 2.3.5. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000 07 Average (Group B) Countries with Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average (Group C) Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share  0.221  0.291*  0.110  0.157*  0.186*  0.235** (0.147) (0.154) (0.147) (0.0923) (0.101) (0.105) Unemployment Rate  0.203  0.284  0.147  0.358***  0.395***  0.375*** (0.177) (0.186) (0.187) (0.0663) (0.0722) (0.0751) Change in Unemployment Rate  1.429***  0.830***  0.743***  0.0369 0.0821  0.0381 (0.235) (0.247) (0.241) (0.107) (0.117) (0.121) Lagged Inflation 0.522** 0.397 0.780***  0.126  0.279  0.369 (0.236) (0.248) (0.259) (0.268) (0.292) (0.304) Trend Productivity Growth Rate3  0.183 0.00955 0.0518 0.834*** 0.986*** 1.082*** (0.168) (0.176) (0.167) (0.156) (0.170) (0.177) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no no Number of Observations 146 146 145 148 148 148 R 2 0.487 0.458 0.389 0.681 0.660 0.652 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes in Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in groups B and C. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates. 2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 108 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 and the associations are broadly similar in size to those found in the aggregate analysis for involun- tary part-time employment (Figure 2.3.3; Annex Table 2.3.12). Annex Table 2.3.13 reports the robustness test in which growth in nominal wages, employment, and part-time employment are treated as jointly deter- mined and estimates the system using three-stage least squares, which treats the dependent variables as endogenous, instruments them using the exogenous variables, and allows them to be correlated with distur- bances in the system s equations. The results are also robust to looking at three-year nonoverlapping averages of the dependent and explan- atory variables instead of annual data. Furthermore, as in the aggregate analysis, results are robust to omitting smaller advanced economies (the Baltic countries). While skill composition is not included in the baseline specifications due to data limitations, the results are robust to including it as an additional control. Further robustness tests have explored alternative trade measures, such as exports and intermediate exports as a share of gross output and global value chain participation, aggregate expected growth (one and five years ahead) interacted with sectoral correla- tion instead of sectoral expected growth, and further measures of worker bargaining power. Such further measures include whether the country has a bi- or tripartite agreement, whether bargaining is done predominantly by firms (as opposed to at the sector or country level), the ease of hiring and firing, and the strictness of employment protection regulation. Results on other variables are broadly comparable to those in the baseline regressions. Annex Table 2.3.7. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Temporary Contract Employment Share: Countries with Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher and Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Countries with Unemployment Rate Moderately Higher than 2000 07 Average (Group B) Countries with Unemployment Rate Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average (Group C) Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 Compensation per Employee1 Compensation per Hour1 Wage per Hour1 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 IV2 Temporary Contract Employment Share  0.0416  0.158  0.138  0.106  0.107  0.101 (0.0987) (0.102) (0.0975) (0.0818) (0.0875) (0.0919) Unemployment Rate  0.489***  0.446***  0.383**  0.383***  0.426***  0.411*** (0.153) (0.158) (0.153) (0.0699) (0.0748) (0.0786) Change in Unemployment Rate  1.227***  0.636**  0.610**  0.0615 0.0538  0.0717 (0.249) (0.257) (0.250) (0.117) (0.126) (0.132) Lagged Inflation 0.384 0.128 0.563* 0.0161  0.104  0.132 (0.274) (0.283) (0.293) (0.272) (0.291) (0.306) Trend Productivity Growth Rate3 0.0832 0.303* 0.277* 0.862*** 1.000*** 1.097*** (0.158) (0.163) (0.155) (0.190) (0.204) (0.214) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no no Number of Observations 147 147 146 153 153 153 R 2 0.607 0.582 0.564 0.667 0.647 0.637 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See the notes of Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in groups B and C. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates. 2The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 3Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 109 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 2.3.8. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share  0.275***  0.306***  0.192**  0.200**  0.166*  0.225***  0.272***  0.0840  0.0570 (0.0829) (0.0947) (0.0845) (0.0976) (0.0977) (0.0794) (0.0830) (0.133) (0.125) Unemployment Rate  0.182***  0.226***  0.211***  0.293***  0.365***  0.199***  0.177***  0.333***  0.362*** (0.0438) (0.0556) (0.0492) (0.0688) (0.0590) (0.0444) (0.0446) (0.0948) (0.0902) Change in Unemployment Rate  0.263***  0.225**  0.137  0.284***  0.0325  0.247***  0.267***  0.295**  0.334*** (0.0887) (0.0969) (0.0833) (0.109) (0.0887) (0.0893) (0.0887) (0.130) (0.123) Lagged Inflation 0.300*  0.0452 0.00644  0.380  0.236 0.199 0.308*  0.432  0.540 (0.164) (0.280) (0.197) (0.311) (0.206) (0.186) (0.164) (0.332) (0.327) Trend Productivity Growth Rate 0.624*** 0.720*** 0.845*** 0.497*** 0.594*** 0.570*** 0.628*** 0.231 0.325** (0.106) (0.118) (0.109) (0.123) (0.117) (0.101) (0.107) (0.168) (0.156) Change in Foreign Value Added as a Share of Exports2 0.0944** (0.0424) Change in the Relative Price of Investment2 0.114*** (0.0302) Change in the Union Density Rate2  0.330***  0.340*** (0.0774) (0.0774) Change in Individual and Collective Dismissal Regulation2  0.259 (0.918) Expected Growth 0.459** (0.180) Change in the Share of Service Sector Workers2  0.0194 (0.0327) Union Density Rate (Level) 0.322*** 0.186*** (0.0836) (0.0678) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no no no no no Number of Observations 411 361 316 288 247 411 411 267 264 R 2 0.577 0.561 0.596 0.590 0.603 0.589 0.578 0.501 0.567 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = annual growth rates of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 2Relative to five years ago.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 110 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 2.3.10. Drivers of Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share, Aggregate Analysis (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Output Gap  0.265***  0.263***  0.172***  0.238***  0.172***  0.245*** (0.030) (0.029) (0.029) (0.031) (0.033) (0.030) Expected Growth  0.454*** (0.134) Change in Relative Price of Investment1  0.122*** (0.018) Change in Foreign Value Added as a Share of Exports1 0.037 (0.033) Change in Union Density Rate1 0.007 (0.028) Change in Share of Service Sector Workers1 0.085*** (0.023) Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Number of Observations 386 386 357 361 288 386 R 2 0.447 0.465 0.548 0.447 0.474 0.467 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = involuntary part-time employment share in logs. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1Relative to five years ago. Annex Table 2.3.9. Estimation of Wage Phillips Curve Augmented with Structural Variables: Excluding 2008 and 2009 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 IV1 Involuntary Part-Time Employment Share  0.213**  0.227  0.168*  0.215*  0.193  0.173**  0.205**  0.212  0.169 (0.0912) (0.139) (0.102) (0.123) (0.131) (0.0862) (0.0913) (0.198) (0.178) Unemployment Rate  0.174***  0.205***  0.186***  0.301***  0.319***  0.196***  0.162***  0.367  0.380* (0.0428) (0.0657) (0.0549) (0.105) (0.0768) (0.0446) (0.0435) (0.230) (0.227) Change in Unemployment Rate  0.400***  0.321*  0.280**  0.308*  0.129  0.352***  0.406***  0.495**  0.507** (0.118) (0.183) (0.131) (0.168) (0.152) (0.127) (0.118) (0.229) (0.213) Lagged Inflation 0.502** 0.351 0.180  0.583  0.254 0.354 0.520**  1.289  1.417 (0.208) (0.598) (0.346) (1.107) (0.677) (0.251) (0.207) (2.101) (2.053) Trend Productivity Growth Rate 0.768*** 0.826*** 0.891*** 0.471*** 0.662*** 0.721*** 0.779***  0.0674 0.151 (0.101) (0.118) (0.120) (0.154) (0.130) (0.0968) (0.101) (0.662) (0.466) Change in Foreign Value Added as a Share of Exports2 0.0262 (0.0452) Change in Relative Price of Investment2 0.0911*** (0.0338) Change in Union Density Rate2  0.390*  0.483 (0.234) (0.373) Change in Individual and Collective Dismissal Regulation2  0.390 (1.653) Expected Growth 0.414** (0.197) Change in Share of Service Sector Workers2  0.0424 (0.0308) Union Density Rate (Level) 0.542 0.302 (0.510) (0.302) First-Stage F-statistics above 10 yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no no no no no Number of Observations 361 311 274 241 203 361 361 221 219 R 2 0.678 0.676 0.654 0.612 0.632 0.682 0.680 0.264 0.369 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = annual growth rates of compensation per hour of workers excluding the self-employed. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2016. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. IV = instrumental variable. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The instrumental variable for lagged inflation is the two-quarter-lagged change in oil price. 2Relative to five years ago.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 111 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 2.3.11. Drivers of Sectoral Nominal Wage Growth (1) (2) (3) Group A Group B Group C Aggregate Output Gap  0.221** 0.0417 0.177* (0.0750) (0.119) (0.0867) Correlation of Sectoral and Aggregate Output Growth 0.321  0.599 0.179 (1.077) (0.606) (0.310) Aggregate Output Gap   Correlation  0.183  0.123 0.319* (0.138) (0.102) (0.158) Lagged Inflation 0.182 0.304 0.492** (0.295) (0.216) (0.195) Trend Productivity Growth Rate1  0.0229  0.0387  0.00741 (0.0889) (0.0286) (0.0306) Part-Time Employment Share 0.0215  0.00107 0.00870 (0.0254) (0.0193) (0.00999) Expected Growth (Sectoral) 0.189* 0.134** 0.0135 (0.0716) (0.0483) (0.0256) Change in Final Imports as a Share of Gross Output2 0.0943 0.0213 0.0209 (0.0494) (0.0384) (0.0262) Change in Relative Price of Investment2 0.256** 0.0701  0.0215 (0.0861) (0.0369) (0.0427) Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes Sector Fixed Effects yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects yes yes yes Number of Observations 349 447 493 R 2 0.400 0.111 0.355 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = year-over-year percent change in nominal wages and salaries per worker (excludes self-employment and employers  social con- tributions) for NACE revision 2 sectors. NACE = Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2015. See notes for Annex Table 2.3.3 for countries in different groups. The following countries are absent in respective groups due to data constraints: Japan (A), Israel (A), Iceland (B), Switzerland (B), and Greece (C). Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1Five-year trailing average of the labor productivity growth rate. 2Relative to five years ago. Annex Table 2.3.12. Drivers of Sectoral Part-Time Employment Shares (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Aggregate Output Gap  0.0273  0.00807 0.0237 0.00105 0.0124  0.00168 (0.0710) (0.0685) (0.0736) (0.0781) (0.0595) (0.0830) Correlation of Sectoral and Aggregate Output Growth  0.318  0.355  0.321  0.290 0.254  0.441 (0.512) (0.514) (0.454) (0.478) (0.479) (0.773) Aggregate Output Gap   Correlation  0.0703  0.0779  0.115  0.0297  0.0204 0.0285 (0.0739) (0.0727) (0.0788) (0.0686) (0.0924) (0.0831) Expected Growth (Aggregate)  0.615* (0.322) Expected Growth (Sectoral)  0.137** (0.0573) Change in Final Imports as a Share of Gross Output1  0.0577 (0.0367) Change in Relative Price of Investment1  0.147*** (0.0464) Change in Relative Price of Investment   Capital Intensity 0.00118** (0.000419) Capital Intensity 5.052 (4.032) Change in Union Density Rate1 0.106 (0.0749) Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Sector Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes yes Number of Observations 2,103 2,103 2,103 1,687 1,710 1,562 R 2 0.806 0.806 0.807 0.811 0.810 0.824 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable = part-time employment shares for NACE revision 2 sectors. NACE = Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the Euro- pean Community. Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2015. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1Relative to five years ago.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 112 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017  7.5  5.0  2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15  3  2  1 0 1 2 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15  6  4  2 0 2 4 2000 07 08 12 13 14 15 Annex Figure 2.3.2. Decomposition of Sectoral Wage Dynamics, 2000 15 (Percentage-point change relative to 2000 07 average) 1. Unemployment Rates Lower than 2000 07 Average Actual Slack Year  xed effects Lagged in ation Structural factors Residual 2. Unemployment Rates Moderately Higher than 2000 07 Average 3. Unemployment Rates Appreciably Higher than 2000 07 Average Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Groups are as de ned in Figure 2.11. Structural factors include automation (proxied by the relative price of investment), trade, and expected growth. Regressions also control for trend labor productivity growth, the share of part-time employment, as well as country and sector  xed effects. The decomposition is based on the coef cients reported in Annex Table 2.3.11 and is weighted by GDP at market exchange rates across countries. Only statistically signi cant coef cients are shown. Annex Figure 2.3.3. Effects on Part-Time Employment Share, Sectoral Analysis (Percentage points) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Markers show estimated coef cients, and lines display 90 percent con dence intervals. Figure is based on columns (2) to (6) of Annex Table 2.3.12.  1.4  1.2  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 Five-year percentage- point change in  nal imports (sectoral) Five-year percentage- point change in price of investment (aggregate) Five-year percentage- point change in union density rate (aggregate) Percent increase in expected growth (aggregate) Percent increase in expected growth (sectoral)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 113 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 References Aaronson, Daniel, and Andrew Jordan. 2014.  Understanding the Relationship between Real Wage Growth and Labor Market Conditions.  Chicago Fed Letter 327. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kili   elik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2017.  Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.  IMF Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott Weisbenner. 2012.  Corporate Debt Maturity and the Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis.  Critical Finance Review 1 (1): 3 58. Altig, David E., and P. Higgins. 2014.  The Wrong Question?  Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Macroblog, June 20. Aoyagi, Chie, and Giovanni Ganelli. 2015.  Does Revamping Japan s Dual Labor Market Matter?  Economic Systems 39 (2): 339 57. Autor, David H. 2017.  How Long Has This Been Going On? A discussion of  Recent Flattening in the Higher Educa- tion Wage Premium: Polarization, Skill Downgrading, or Both?  by Robert G. Valletta. National Bureau of Economic Research, Conference on Research and Income in Wealth. Autor, David H., and David Dorn. 2013.  The Growth of Low-Skill Services Jobs and the Polarization of the US Labor Market.  American Economic Review 103 (5): 1553 97. Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008.  Trends in US Wage Inequality: Revising the Revision- ists.  Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2): 300 23. Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998.  Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed the Labor Market?  Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1169 215. Ball, Laurence, and Robert Moffitt. 2001.  Productivity Growth and the Phillips Curve.  Economics Working Paper Archive 450, Johns Hopkins University Department of Economics, Baltimore, MD. Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2014.  The Declining Fortunes of the Young since 2000.  American Economic Review 104 (5): 381 86.  . 2016.  The Great Reversal in the Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks.  Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1, Part 2): S199 247. Bentolila, Samuel, Pierre Cahuc, Juan J. Dolado, and Thomas Le Barbanchon. 2012.  Two-Tier Labor Markets in the Annex Table 2.3.13. Drivers of Nominal Wage Growth, Employment Growth, and Part-Time Employment (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Nominal Wage Growth1 Employment Growth1 Part-Time Employment1 3SLS2 3SLS3 3SLS2 3SLS3 3SLS3 Aggregate Output gap 0.284*** 0.241***  0.0682  0.0513  0.0907 (0.0334) (0.0322) (0.0786) (0.0641) (0.0816) Correlation of Sectoral and Aggregate Output Growth  0.388**  0.412**  1.001**  0.226  0.698* (0.172) (0.163) (0.404) (0.324) (0.413) Aggregate Output Gap   Correlation 0.321*** 0.269*** 0.606*** 0.644*** 0.000166 (0.0548) (0.0531) (0.129) (0.106) (0.135) Lagged Inflation 0.207*** 0.210*** 0.0552  0.0967 0.131 (0.0573) (0.0578) (0.135) (0.115) (0.147) Expected Growth (Sectoral) 0.0205 0.0226*  0.0700**  0.0337  0.106*** (0.0138) (0.0137) (0.0324) (0.0272) (0.0347) Change in Final Imports as a Share of Gross Output4  0.0103  0.00520 0.0280 0.0218 0.0588** (0.0110) (0.00973) (0.0258) (0.0194) (0.0247) Change in the Relative Price of Investment4 0.102*** 0.115*** 0.0294 0.0133  0.0683 (0.0228) (0.0213) (0.0537) (0.0424) (0.0540) Country Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes Sector Fixed Effects yes yes yes yes yes Year Fixed Effects no no no no no Number of Observations 1,833 1,526 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Sample is of annual frequency from 2000 to 2015. See Annex Table 2.1.1 for countries in the sample. 3SLS = three-stage least squares. Standard errors in parentheses. * p < .10; ** p < .05; *** p < .01. 1The dependent variable of the regression, defined as annual growth rates and share of total employment. 2System estimated using 3SLS for nominal wage growth and employment growth as the endogenous dependent variables. 3System estimated using 3SLS for nominal wage growth, employment growth, and the share of part-time employment as the endogenous dependent variables. 4Relative to five years ago.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 114 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Great Recession: France versus Spain.  The Economic Journal, 122, F155 F187. Berman Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. 1994.  Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within US Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers.  Quar- terly Journal of Economics 109 (2): 367 97. Blanchard, Olivier, and Francesco Giavazzi. 2003.  Macroeco- nomic Effects of Regulation and Deregulation in Goods and Labor Markets.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (3): 879 907. Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence F. Katz, 1997.  Wage Dynam- ics: Reconciling Theory and Evidence.  American Economic Review 89 (2): 69 74. Blanchflower, David G., and Adam S. Posen. 2014.  Wages and Labor Market Slack: Making the Dual Mandate Operational.  PIIE Policy Brief 14 10. Borjas, George J., and Valerie A. Ramey. 1995.  Foreign Compe- tition, Market Power, and Wage Inequality.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (4): 1075 110. Borowczyk-Martins, Daniel, Gregory Jolivet, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2013.  Accounting for Endogeneity in Match- ing Function Estimation.  Review of Economic Dynamics 16 (3): 440 51. Brainard, Lael. 2016.  The  Gig  Economy: Implications of the Growth of Contingent Work.  Speech at the  Evolution of Work  conference, November 17. https:// www .federalreserve  .gov/ newsevents/ speech/ brainard20161117a .htm. Burda, Michael C., and Stefanie Seele. 2016.  No Role for the Hartz Reforms? Demand and Supply Factors in the German Labor Market, 1993 2014.  SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2016 010, Humboldt University, Berlin. Burtless, Gary. 1995.  International Trade and the Rise in Earn- ings Inequality.  Journal of Economic Literature 33 (2): 800 16. Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016.  Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?  Working Paper Series 2016 3, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Cho, Sang-Wook (Stanley), and Jul an P. D az. 2016.  Skill Premium Divergence: The Roles of Trade, Capital, and Demographics.  The Future of Europe: Central and Eastern Europe in a Comparative Perspective conference. Council of Economic Advisers. 2014. Economic Report of the President. Washington, DC. Daly, Mary, and Bart Hobijn. 2015.  Why Is Wage Growth So Slow?  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2015 01, January. Danninger, Stephan. 2016.  What s Up with US Wage Growth and Job Mobility?  IMF Working Paper 16/122, Interna- tional Monetary Fund, Washington DC. Das, Mitali, and Benjamin Hilgenstock. Forthcoming.  Labor Market Consequences of Routinization in Developed and Developing Economies.  Unpublished. Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger. 2014.  Labor Mar- ket Fluidity and Economic Performance.  NBER Working Paper 20479, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Dew-Becker, Ian, and Robert J. Gordon. 2005.  Where Did Productivity Growth Go? Inflation Dynamics and the Distri- bution of Income.  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 36 (2): 67 150. DiNardo, John, and David Card. 2002.  Skill Biased Technolog- ical Change and Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles.  Journal of Labor Economics 20 (4): 733 83. Du Caju, Philip, G bor K tay, Ana Lamo, Daphne Nicolit- sas, and Steven Poelhekke. 2010.  Inter-Industry Wage Differentials in EU Countries: What Do Cross-Country Time-Varying Data Add to the Picture?  European Central Bank Working Paper 189, Frankfurt. Duval, Romain, Gee Hee Hong, and Yannick Timmer. 2017.  Financial Frictions and the Great Productivity Slowdown.  IMF Working Paper 17/129, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC. Erdil, Erkan, and I. Hakan Yetkiner. 2001.  A Comparative Analysis of Inter-Industry Wage Differentials: Industrial- ized versus Developing Countries.  Applied Economics 33 (13): 1639 48. European Central Bank (ECB). 2009.  Wage Dynamics in Europe: Final Report of the Wage Dynamics Network.  Directorate General Research, Frankfurt.  . 2017.  Assessing Labor Market Slack.  Economic Bulletin 3. European Commission (EC). 2003.  Wage Structures and Determinants in an Enlarged Europe.  In Employment in Europe 2003: Recent Trends and Prospects. Directorate-General for Employment and Social Affairs, Frankfurt. European Union (EU). 2015.  Wage and Income Inequality in the European Union.  Directorate-General for Internal Policies, Policy Department Economic and Scientific Pol- icy, Frankfurt. Feenstra, Robert, and Gordon Hanson. 1996.  Foreign Invest- ment, Outsourcing and Relative Wages.  In The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Paper in Honour of Jagdish Bhagwati, edited by Robert Feenstra, Gene Grossman, and Douglas Irwin, 89 127. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  . 2001.  Global Production Sharing and Rising Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages.  NBER Work- ing Paper 8372, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Fernald, John G. 2014.  Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession.  NBER Work- ing Paper 20248, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Gal, Peter, and Alexander Hijzen. 2016.  The Short-Term Impact of Product Market Reforms: A Cross-Country Firm-Level Analysis.  IMF Working Paper 16/116, Interna- tional Monetary Fund, Washington DC. Gali, Jordi. 2011.  The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve.  Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (3): 436 61.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 115 CHAPTER 2 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Golden, Lonnie. 2016.  Still Falling Short on Hours and Pay.  Economic Policy Institute, Washington, DC. http:// www .epi .org/ publication/ still -falling -short -on -hours  -and -pay -part -time -work -becoming -new -normal/ . Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. 2014.  Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshoring.  American Economic Review 104 (8): 2509 26. Gordon, Robert. 2013.  The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow Recovery.  NBER Working Paper 19390, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Haldane, Andrew G. 2017.  Work, Wages, and Monetary Policy.  Speech given at the National Science and Media Museum, Bradford, United Kingdom, June 20. http:// www .bankofengland  .co .uk/ publications/ Pages/ speeches/ 2017/ 984 .aspx. Hall, Robert E. 2005.  Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness.  American Economic Review 95 (1): 50 65. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. Japan Article IV Consultation Report. IMF Staff Country Report 16/267, Washington, DC. Izquierdo, Mario, Juan Francisco Jimeno, Theodora Kosma, Ana Lamo, Stephen Millard, Tairi R m, and Eliana Viviano. 2017.  Labour Market Adjustment in Europe During the Crisis: Microeconomic Evidence From the Wage Dynamics Network Survey . European Central Bank Occasional Paper Series 192. European Central Bank, Frankfurt. Kang, Joong Shik, and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2014.  Progress towards External Adjustment in the Euro Area Periphery and the Baltics.  IMF Working Paper 14/131, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014.  The Global Decline of the Labor Share.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1): 61 103. Katz, Lawrence, and David Autor. 1999.  Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality.  In Handbook of Labor Economics (3), edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Katz, Lawrence, and Alan Krueger. 2016.  The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the United States, 1995 2015.  NBER Working Paper 22667, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Katz, Lawrence, and Kevin Murphy. 1992.  Changes in Relative Wages, 1963 87: Supply and Demand Factors.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1): 35 78. Kiley, Michael. 2014.  An Evaluation of the Inflationary Pressure Associated with Short- and Long-term Unem- ployment.  FEDS Notes 2014 28, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC. Koeniger, Winfried, Marco Leonardi, and Luca Nunziata. 2007.  Labor Market Institutions and Wage Inequality.  Industrial and Labor Relations Review 60 (3): 340 56. Kramarz, Francis. 2017.  Offshoring, Wages, and Employment: Evidence from Data Matching Imports, Firms, and Workers.  In The Factory Free Economy, edited by Lionel Fontagne and Ann Harrison. https:// www .researchgate .net/ publication/  303374155 _The _Factory _Free _Economy. Krueger, Alan. 2015.  How Tight Is the Labor Market?  Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research.  , Judd Cramer, and David Cho. 2014.  Are the Long-Term Unemployed on the Margins of the Labor Market?  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. Kumar, Anil, and Pia Orrenius. 2016.  A Closer Look at the Phillips Curve Using State-Level Data.  Journal of Macroeco- nomics 47: 84 102. Leamer, Edward. 1992.  Wage Effects of a US-Mexican Free Trade Agreement.  NBER Working Paper 3991, National Bureau of Economic Research, Washington, DC.  . 1996.  Wage Inequality from International Com- petition and Technological Change: Theory and Country Experience.  American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 86 (2): 309 14. Manning, Alan. 1993.  Wage Bargaining and the Phillips Curve: The Identification and Specification of Aggregate Wage Equa- tions.  CEP Discussion Paper dp0062, Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economic, London. Mortensen, Dale T., and Christopher A. Pissarides. 1999.  Job Reallocation, Employment Fluctuations and Unemployment.  Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, 1171 228. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2017.  Economic Policy Reforms 2017: Going for Growth.  Paris. Parteka, Aleksandra. 2010.  Skilled-Unskilled Wage Gap in the Enlarged EU: Sectoral Analysis Based on the Experi- ence of EU-15 Countries and Five New Member States.  12th European Trade Study group conference, Lausanne, Switzerland. Rudebusch, Glenn, and John Williams. 2014.  A Wedge in the Dual Mandate: Mon etary Policy and Long-Term Unem- ployment.  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2014 14. Smith, Christopher L. 2014.  The Effect of Labor Slack on Wages: Evidence from State-Level Relationships.  FEDS Notes, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC. Stock, James H. 2011.  Discussion of Ball and Mazumder,  Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession.  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 42 (1): 387 402. Taylor, John. 2016.  The Staying Power of Staggered Wage and Price Setting Models in Macroeconomics.  NBER Work- ing Paper 22356, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Trigari, Antonella. 2014.  Commentary: Long-Term Non- employment and Job Displacement.  Paper prepared for  Re-Evaluating Labor Market Dynamics,  August 21 23, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. Valletta, Robert G. 2016.  Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium: Polarization, Skill Downgrading,  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 116 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 or Both?  NBER Working Paper 22935, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Watson, Mark W. 2014.  Inflation Persistence, the NAIRU, and the Great Recession,  American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 104 (5): 31 36. Wood, Adrian. 1991.  How Much Does Trade with the South Affect Workers in the North?  World Bank Research Observer 6: 19 36, Washington, DC.  . 1994. North-South Trade, Employment and Inequal- ity: Changing Fortunes in a Skill-Driven World. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  .1995.  How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers.  Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (3): 57 80. Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2009.  On Estimating Firm-Level Produc- tion Functions Using Proxy Variables to Control for Unob- servables.  Economic Letters 104 (3): 112 14. Yellen, Janet L. 2005.  Productivity and Inflation.  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter.  . 2014.  Labor Market Dynamics and Monetary Policy.  Speech at Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. https:// www  .federalreserve .gov/ newsevents/ speech/ yellen20140822a .htm.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 117 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Global temperatures have increased at an unprecedented pace over the past 40 years, and significant further warming could occur, depending on our ability to restrain greenhouse gas emissions. This chapter finds that increases in temperature have uneven macroeconomic effects, with adverse consequences concentrated in countries with relatively hot climates, such as most low-income coun- tries. In these countries, a rise in temperature lowers per capita output, in both the short and medium term, by reducing agricultural output, suppressing the produc- tivity of workers exposed to heat, slowing investment, and damaging health. To some extent, sound domestic policies and development, in general, alongside invest- ment in specific adaptation strategies, could help reduce the adverse consequences of weather shocks. But given the constraints faced by low-income countries, the interna- tional community must play a key role in supporting these countries  efforts to cope with climate change a global threat to which they have contributed little. And while the analysis of the chapter focuses on the impact of weather shocks in low-income countries, most coun- tries will increasingly feel direct negative effects from unmitigated climate change through warming above optimal levels in currently cooler countries, more frequent natural disasters, rising sea levels, loss of biodiversity, and adverse spillovers from vulnerable countries. Looking ahead, only continued international cooperation and a concerted effort to stem the man-made causes of global warming can limit the long-term risks of climate change. Introduction Since the turn of the 20th century, the Earth s average surface temperature has increased significantly. Sizable swings in global temperatures used to happen The main authors of this chapter are Sebastian Acevedo, Mico Mrkaic, Natalija Novta, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, Evgenia Pugacheva, and Petia Topalova (lead), with contributions from Manoj Atolia, Claudio Baccianti, and Ricardo Marto and support from Gavin Asdorian, Marina Klasnja, Olivia Ma, Fien Analbers Ribeiro, Jilun Xing, and Yuan Zeng. The chapter benefited from comments and suggestions by Edward Miguel, Benjamin Olken, and St phane Hallegatte. over long periods, such as fluctuations in and out of the Ice Ages. However, the speed at which the climate has changed over the past 30 40 years appears to be unprecedented in the past 20,000 years (Figure 3.1).1 Most scientists agree that global temperatures are set to rise further, at a scale and pace very much dependent on our ability to restrain greenhouse gas emissions, the central cause of global warming (IPCC 2013). Extreme weather events, such as heat waves, droughts, and floods, are likely to become more frequent, and sea levels will rise. Although considerable uncertainty surrounds temperature projections, the scientific consensus predicts that without further action to tackle climate change, average temperatures could rise by 4 C or more by the end of the 21st century. Very substan- tial cuts to current emissions will be needed to limit warming to less than 2 C. Will climate change have significant macroeconomic consequences, especially in low-income developing countries that tend to be more exposed to the vagaries of the weather? And how can these countries cope with the rises in temperature they are set to experience over the coming decades? Pinning down the economic consequences of cli- mate change is difficult. Temperature increases of the magnitude that could potentially occur over the next century and many other aspects of climate change, such as rapid rise in sea levels, ocean acidification, and the like sit well outside recent (and relevant) his- torical experience and could affect a large number of countries. Extrapolating from the historically observed relationship between activity and weather patterns could also be problematic as populations adapt to per- sistent changes in climate. Yet studying the macroeco- nomic effects of annual variation in weather patterns 1Climate refers to a distribution of weather outcomes for a given location, while weather refers to a realization from that distribution. Climate change typically implies that the whole distribution of outcomes shifts, with a possible increase in the likelihood of extreme outcomes. As argued by Weitzman (2011), the fattening of the tails the increase in the probability of poten- tially irreversible and catastrophic damages justifies aggressive policy actions to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere ( climate change mitigation ) and adjust to the chang- ing climate ( adaptation ). THE EFFECTS OF WEATHER SHOCKS ON ECONOMIC ACTIVITY: HOW CAN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES COPE? 3 CHAPTER  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 118 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 could produce useful insights.2 In an influential study, Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) find that higher temperatures significantly reduce economic growth in low-income countries. Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) provide evidence that productivity peaks at about 13 C and declines strongly at higher tempera- 2Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014); Carleton and Hsiang (2016); and Heal and Park (2016) provide surveys of the new climate literature, which explores the impact of weather fluctuations on a broad range of economic variables. tures. Since low-income countries are concentrated in geographic areas with hotter climates, the Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) findings suggest that a rise in temperature would be particularly harmful for this set of economies. Countries negatively affected by climate change will need to increase their resilience to rising temperatures and extreme weather events, both by enhancing their ability to smooth out shocks, which could become more frequent, and by investing in adaptation strat- egies, such as activity diversification, infrastructure investment, and technology innovation, that reduce the harm they do. Populations may also respond to chang- ing climatic conditions by relocating geographically, which could have important cross-border ramifications. But the evidence on which policies may help countries and individuals cope with weather shocks is limited. Understanding the macroeconomic effects of weather shocks and the scope for policy actions to moderate them will be crucial for low-income devel- oping countries to achieve durable growth in the long term a precondition for convergence and imple- mentation of the United Nations Sustainable Devel- opment Goals. Drawing from and building on the existing litera- ture, this chapter contributes to the policy debate by examining the following questions:   What has been the historical relationship between temperature and precipitation shocks and economic activity in both the short and the medium term? Are low-income countries particularly vulnerable? Through what channels do weather fluctuations affect the economy? And has the sensitivity of growth to weather shocks changed over time?   How can countries, particularly low-income ones, cope with weather shocks? Can policies and other country characteristics mitigate the macroeconomic response to weather fluctuations?   Given the projected path of temperature by the end of the 21st century, what might be the impact of climate change on low-income countries? To address these questions, the chapter starts by documenting the historical evolution and projected change in temperature and precipitation patterns across broad country groups according to leading climate change models, as well as these groups  contributions to greenhouse gas emissions. It then examines the historical evidence on the macroeconomic effects of annual variation in temperature and precipitation (Degrees Celsius) Sources: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase Five AR5 Atlas subset; Marcott and others (2013); Matsuura and Willmott (2007); National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute Climate Change Atlas; Shakun and others (2012); and IMF staff calculations. Note: In panel 2, the thin lines represent each of the 40 models in the IPCC WG1 AR5 Annex I Atlas, where a model with different parametrization is treated as a separate model. The thick lines represent the multimodel mean. Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) are scenarios of greenhouse gas concentrations, constructed by the IPCC. RCP 4.5 is an intermediate scenario, which assumes increased attention to the environment, with emissions peaking around 2050 and declining thereafter. RCP 8.5 is an unmitigated scenario in which emissions continue to rise throughout the 21st century.  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1880 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 20 40 60 80 2100 2. Recent and 21st Century Projections (Deviations from 1880 1910 average) Observed RCP 8.5 mean prediction RCP 4.5 mean prediction 1. From 20,000 BCE to Present The average global temperature has risen at an extraordinary pace over the past century, and signi cant further warming could occur. Figure 3.1. Average Global Temperature 15 16 17 18 19 20 Last glacial period ends Most mammoths go extinct The Great Pyramid completed Industrial revolution begins, ca. 1760 Early farming begins 1920  20,000  16,000  12,000  8,000  4,000 0 2014  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 119 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 across a large sample of economies, highlighting the channels through which climatic conditions affect the macroeconomy. The chapter offers evidence on how various policies and country characteristics influence the sensitivity of growth to weather variations, using both empirical analysis and model simulations, and presents case studies of various climate change adap- tation strategies. Finally, the chapter incorporates the empirical estimates of economic loss from weather shocks and projected changes in temperature into a dynamic general equilibrium model to trace the poten- tial long-term effects of climate change. The chapter s main findings are as follows:   The rise in temperature over the past century has been broad based. No country has been spared from the warming of the Earth s surface, and no coun- try is projected to be spared further temperature increases, with the largest increases in temperature expected in countries with relatively colder cli- mates. The contribution of low-income developing countries which tend to be situated in some of the hottest geographic areas on the planet to atmo- spheric greenhouse gas concentrations is negligible, both in absolute terms and on a per capita basis.   The macroeconomic effect of temperature shocks is uneven across countries. Confirming the global nonlinear relationship between annual tempera- ture and growth uncovered by Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) using an expanded data set, the empirical analysis suggests that rising temperatures lower per capita output in countries with relatively high annual average temperature, such as most low-income countries. In these economies, the adverse effect is long-lasting and operates through several channels: lower agricultural output, depressed labor productivity in sectors more exposed to the weather, reduced capital accumulation, and poorer human health. Moreover, data indicate that macro- economic outcomes have not become any less sensi- tive to temperature shocks in recent years, pointing to significant adaptation constraints.   To some extent, sound policies and institutional frameworks, investment in infrastructure, and other adaptation strategies can reduce the damage from temperature shocks in hot countries. Although causal interpretation is difficult, empirical evidence suggests that countries with better-regulated capital markets, higher availability of infrastructure, flexible exchange rates, and more democratic institutions recover somewhat faster from the negative impacts of temperature shocks. Higher temperatures also constrain growth in hot regions of emerging market and developing economies significantly more than in hot regions of advanced economies, which corrob- orates the importance of development in reducing vulnerability.   The temperature increase projected by 2100 under a scenario of unmitigated climate change implies significant economic losses for most low-income countries. Under the conservative assumption that weather shocks have permanent effects on the level, rather than the growth rate, of per capita output, model simulations suggest that the per capita GDP of a representative low-income country would be 9 percent lower in 2100 than it would have been in the absence of temperature increases, with the pres- ent value of output losses amounting to more than 100 percent of current GDP when discounted at the growth-adjusted rate of 1.4 percent. Taken together, these findings paint a worrisome picture. Rising temperatures would have vastly unequal effects across the world, with the brunt of adverse consequences borne by those who can least afford it. In all likelihood, most countries will increasingly feel the direct impact of unmitigated climate change, through warming above optimal temperatures, more frequent (and more damaging) natural disasters, rising sea levels, loss of biodiversity, and many other hard-to-quantify effects. In addition, climate change is likely to cre- ate economic winners and losers at both individual and sectoral levels, even in countries where the effect might be moderate or positive on average. However, low-income countries will suffer disproportionately from further temperature increases a global threat to which they have contributed little. And within low-income countries, the poor would likely be the most heavily affected by climate change (Hallegatte and Rozenberg 2017). Having little influence on the future course of climate, how can these countries cope with the challenges they face as temperatures rise? The findings of this chapter suggest that domestic policies can partially dampen the adverse effects of weather shocks. Improving buffers and strengthening well-targeted social safety nets that can deliver sup- port when needed would help countries smooth some of the instantaneous effects of weather shocks, while policies and institutions that make capital and labor markets more flexible and foster structural economic transformation could help countries recover somewhat  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 120 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 faster and reduce their vulnerability to future shocks. Adaptation strategies that reduce specific climate change effects and risks, such as targeted infrastruc- ture projects, adoption of appropriate technologies, and mechanisms to transfer and share these risks through financial markets, could also be part of the toolkit for reducing the economic damage caused by climate change. But putting in place the right policies will be par- ticularly difficult in low-income countries, which have huge spending needs and limited ability to mobilize the resources necessary for adaptation in a challeng- ing economic environment. In some cases, political uncertainty and security issues exacerbate the chal- lenge. Moreover, even when in place, domestic policies alone cannot fully insulate low-income countries from the adverse consequences of climate change, as higher temperatures push the biophysical limits of these coun- tries  ecosystems, potentially triggering more frequent epidemics, famines, and other natural disasters, along with armed conflict and refugee flows. The interna- tional spillovers from these difficult-to-predict effects of climate change could be very considerable. Climate change is a negative global externality of potentially catastrophic proportions, and only collec- tive action and multilateral cooperation can effec- tively address its causes and consequences. Mitigating climate change requires radically transforming the global energy system, including through the use of fiscal instruments to better reflect environmental costs in energy prices and promote cleaner technologies as discussed in Box 3.6. Adapting to the consequences of climate change necessitates vast investments, including in boosting infrastructure, reinforcing coastal zones, and strengthening water supply and flood protec- tion (Margulis and Narain 2010; UNEP 2016). The international community will have a key role to play in fostering and coordinating financial and other types of support for affected low-income countries. With advanced and emerging market economies contributing the lion s share to the warming that has occurred so far and is projected to continue, helping low-income countries cope with its consequences is a humanitarian imperative and sound global eco- nomic policy. In the future, only continued interna- tional cooperation and a concerted effort to stem the man-made causes of global warming can limit the long-term risks of climate change (IPCC 2014; IMF 2015; Stern 2015; Farid and others 2016; Hallegatte and others 2016). It is important to highlight from the outset the inherent difficulty of quantifying the potential mac- roeconomic consequences of climate change. Extrap- olating from historically observed weather responses of GDP to the long-term effect of global warming is challenging for several reasons.3 On one hand, such an extrapolation may overstate the impact as govern- ments and other economic agents take ameliorative actions, make investments, or develop new technolo- gies that help populations adapt to persistent changes in climate. On the other hand, the actual impact could be larger if there are nonlinearities in the response as the climate shifts to conditions beyond recent expe- rience.4 Moreover, the chapter does not separately quantify the effects of natural disasters, whose higher projected frequency may amplify the damages they cause; it does not analyze distributional impacts across sectors and households within countries, which may be quite sizable; nor does it shed light on the conse- quences of many aspects of climate change, such as a rapid rise in sea levels, ocean acidification, and the like, that have no historical precedent but could have very large macroeconomic consequences.5 Nevertheless, as long as the Earth continues to warm over the rest of the 21st century in the same pattern as over the past 50 years a stochastic series of annual shocks along an upward trend this chapter may provide valuable guidance on climate change vulnerabilities and adapta- tion needs under the current production technologies and geographic distribution of populations (Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012). 3Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014); Carleton and Hsiang (2016); Hsiang (2016); and Lemoine (2017) provide discussions of the conditions under which empirical estimates of the effect of weather shocks based on historical data can shed light on the consequences of climate change. 4For example, the historically observed natural year-to-year temperature variability for countries located in the tropics is roughly 0.5 C. The projected increase in temperature for these countries between 2005 and 2100 under the extreme unmitigated climate change scenario is 4.1 C in other words, more than 8.5 times larger than the current natural variability, implying a totally new climatic regime (see also World Bank 2013). 5A large body of literature studies the macroeconomic impact of natural disasters (see, for example, Noy 2009; Cavallo and others 2013; Acevedo 2014; Felbermayr and Gr schl 2014; Cabezon and others 2015; IMF 2016a; IMF 2016b; Gerling, forthcoming; and Gerling, Moreno Badia, and Toffano, forthcoming). The chapter focuses on direct measures of the weather because natural disaster data may suffer from reporting and mismeasurement issues. Mismea- surement could be a particular problem in low-income countries, which typically have lower capacity to accurately evaluate, record, and report damage (Jennings 2011).  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 121 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Temperature and Precipitation: Historical Patterns and Projections This section sets the context for the rest of the chapter by summarizing the scientific consensus on how climate and one of its key man-made drivers  greenhouse gas emissions have evolved over the past century. The section then presents scientists  projected changes for the rest of the 21st century and discusses the link between temperature, precipitation, and weather-related disasters. Historical Patterns Global temperatures have increased by roughly 1 C compared with the 1880 1910 average (Figure 3.2). The rise started in earnest in the 1970s, following a large increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions.6 Although natural factors explain some of the warming over the past century, according to the Intergovern- mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), more than half of the temperature increase since 1950 can be attributed to human activity (IPCC 2014). The increase in temperature has occurred in all regions, with the same accelerating trend, starting in the 1970s (Figure 3.3).7 The median temperature over the first 15 years of this century, compared with the first 15 years of the past century, was 1.4 C higher in advanced economies, 1.3 C higher in emerging market economies, and 0.7 C higher in low-income devel- oping countries. Even though most of the warming occurred in advanced economies, by 2015 the tem- perature in the median low-income developing country (25 C) was more than twice that of the median advanced economy (11 C). Other aspects of the climate have also changed appreciably. Since 1900, the global mean sea level has risen by 17 21 centimeters. As with temperature, there has been an increase in the pace at which the sea level is rising: from 0.17 centimeter a year throughout most of the 20th century to 0.32 centimeter a year over the past 20 years (IPCC 2014). 6The three most important greenhouse gases, which are regulated under the Kyoto Protocol, are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O). Among those, CO2 has so far been the largest contributor to global warming. 7Trends in precipitation are generally less clear (Figure 3.3, panels 2, 4, and 6). Precipitation has increased somewhat in the northern hemisphere since the 1950s, and average precipitation in low-income developing countries has declined since the 1970s. CO2 emissions have grown rapidly since the 1950s across all income groups, along with rising incomes and populations (Figure 3.4). However, emissions in low-income developing countries are still a fraction of those in advanced and emerging market economies, in both aggregate and per capita terms. And although advanced economies have managed to contain their overall emissions over the past decade, in per capita terms they still contribute vastly more than the rest of the world. Projections The overwhelming majority of scientists agree that future climate change depends largely on the path of CO2 emissions, which in turn hinges on demo-  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1880 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 16 Sources: Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center; National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Roston and Migliozzi (2015); and IMF staff calculations. Note: The lines present the actual increase in land and ocean surface air temperature relative to 1880 1910 and the increase predicted by different factors. Human factors include land use, ozone emissions, aerosol emissions, and GHG emissions. Natural factors include orbital changes, solar output, and volcanic activity. The contribution of each factor is estimated by  ModelE2  by NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies. GHG = greenhouse gases. Figure 3.2. Increase in Average Global Temperature and Contributions of Key Factors (Deviations from 1880 1910 average, degrees Celsius) Temperature GHG Human Natural According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, most of the increase in temperature since 1950 can be attributed to human factors.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 122 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 graphic changes, economic development, technological advances, and the vigor with which countries imple- ment mitigation measures.8 Yet, given the significant buildup and persistence of greenhouse gas concen- tration in the atmosphere, even with immediate and substantial cuts to current greenhouse gas emissions, temperatures are projected to rise for some time, albeit at a slower pace. The IPCC constructed four possible scenarios, called Representative Concentra- tion Pathways (RCP), using alternative greenhouse gas concentration assumptions to project likely ranges 8Surveying 12,000 peer-reviewed scientific papers on climate change, Cook and others (2013) find that 97 percent of the studies expressing a position on the reasons behind global warming agree that it is influenced by man-made causes. See also Cook and others (2016). 600 700 800 900 1,000 1,100 1,200 8 9 10 11 12 Figure 3.3. Temperature and Precipitation across Broad Country Groups 1. Temperature (Degrees Celsius) 2. Precipitation (mm per year) Temperature has risen across all country groups, while precipitation does not exhibit a clear pattern. Sources: Climate Research Unit (v. 3.24); and IMF staff calculations. Note: Terrestrial median annual temperature and precipitation data at grid level are aggregated to the country-year level using 1950 population weights. See Annex 3.1 for data sources and country groupings. mm = millimeter. Advanced Economies 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 15 Emerging Market Economies 20 21 22 23 24 600 700 800 900 1,000 1,100 1,200 3. Temperature (Degrees Celsius) 4. Precipitation (mm per year) Low-Income Developing Countries 23 24 25 26 1,000 1,100 1,200 1,300 1,400 1,500 1,600 5. Temperature (Degrees Celsius) 6. Precipitation (mm per year) 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 15 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 15 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 15 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 15 1900 20 40 60 80 2000 15 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 5 10 15 20 25 Sources: Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center; and IMF staff calculations. Note: AEs= advanced economies; CO 2 = carbon dioxide; EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income developing countries. Figure 3.4. Annual CO2 Emissions across Broad Country Groups (Billion metric tons, unless noted otherwise) CO2 emissions have grown rapidly since the 1950s across all income groups, but emissions by low-income developing countries are negligible in both absolute and per capita terms. 1. Advanced Economies 2. Emerging Market Economies 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 3. Low-Income Developing Countries 0 5 10 15 20 Bangladesh Other LIDCs Nigeria Vietnam India China Other EMs Other AEs Japan Germany Russia United States 4. Average CO2 Emissions per Capita, 1970 2014 (Metric tons) China India Russia Other EMs United States Germany Japan Other AEs Vietnam Nigeria Bangladesh Other LIDCs 1880 1990 20 40 60 80 2000 1880 1990 20 40 60 80 2000 1880 1990 20 40 60 80 2000  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 123 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 of temperatures over the 21st century. The rest of the chapter focuses on two of these scenarios: an interme- diate path (RCP 4.5) and an unmitigated path (RCP 8.5), as shown in Figure 3.1, panel 2.9 Under the RCP 8.5 scenario of unmitigated climate change, the average global temperature by 2081 2100 could rise by 3.7 C (with a projected range of 2.6 C 4.8 C).10 Warming would occur all over the globe, with larger increases over the northern hemi- sphere, where some regions could experience tempera- tures almost 12 C higher than in 2005 (Figure 3.5). Between 2005 and 2100, the increase for the median advanced economy is projected to be 4.4 C, and 4.5 C for the median emerging market economy and median low-income developing country. Increases are projected to be smaller in absolute terms closer to the equator, but are very significant when set against the historical year-to-year and intrayear variability in temperature observed in those locations. Change in precipitation will vary by region, with dry areas generally expected to become drier and wet regions expected to experience an increase in rainfall. Under this scenario, the global mean sea level is projected to rise by almost 0.8 meter by the end of the 21st century, exposing coastal areas, includ- ing some large population centers, to higher risk of flooding and erosion. Sea level rise will not be uniform across regions it is projected to be higher than the global mean closer to the equator and less than the global mean at high latitudes (IPCC 2014; World Bank 2013). It is important once again to stress the large uncer- tainty surrounding climate change projections. Future emissions depend on many factors that are difficult to predict and, even for the same emission scenario, climate models differ widely in their temperature and precipitation projections (Figure 3.1, panel 2). How- ever, it is precisely this uncertainty and the possibility 9The Paris Agreement aims to contain the rise in temperature to less than 2 C (ideally to less than 1.5 C) relative to the preindustrial average, which would require policy efforts beyond those assumed under the RCP 4.5 scenario. Under the RCP 4.5 scenario, there is increased attention to the environment. CO2 emissions peak around 2050 and decline thereafter, with a resulting temperature increase of 1.8 C by 2081 2100 relative to 1986 2005 (a likely range of 1.1 C to 2.6 C and a greater than 50 percent chance of an increase exceed- ing 2 C by 2100). Under the RCP 8.5 scenario, CO2 emissions grow throughout the 21st century. 10Under this scenario, the average increase in population-weighted temperature between 2005 and 2100 across the countries in the sam- ple is projected to be 4.4 C, with the median country experiencing warming of 4.5 C. of fat tails the probability that catastrophic climate change can occur that is behind calls for strong mit- igation actions to reduce emissions and for adaptation to prepare for significant shocks (Weitzman 2011). Weather-Related Disasters As temperatures rise, the risks of extreme weather events, such as floods, droughts, and heat waves, will increase (IPCC 2014). New statistical analysis suggests that projected climate change will likely bring more frequent weather-related disasters events that cause great damage or loss of life.11 This likelihood is partic- ularly important for low-income developing countries and small states, which historically have been much more likely, relative to their land area, to experience natural disasters than advanced and emerging market economies (Figure 3.6, panel 1).12 Using monthly data from 1990 to 2014 on 8,000 weather-related disasters, a statistical analysis uncovers the historical relationship between the occurrence of a disaster and temperature and precipitation.13 It then combines the estimated elasticities and the projected monthly temperature and precipitation in 2050 and 2100 under the RCP 8.5 scenario to forecast the likelihood of natural disasters. The results indicate that most disaster types will be more common by the end of the century, across all country income levels. As depicted in Figure 3.6, the frequency of disasters caused by heat waves or tropical cyclones will increase considerably (see Box 3.1, which explores the effect of tropical cyclones on economic activity).14 Similarly, 11The International Disaster Database (EM-DAT) defines a natu- ral disaster as an event in which at least one of the following criteria is met: 10 or more people are reported killed, 100 or more people are reported affected, and either a declaration of a state of emergency or a call for international assistance is made (Guha-Sapir, Below, and Hoyois 2015). 12Low-income developing countries and small states, respectively, are five and 200 times more likely to be hit by a weather-related natural disaster than the rest of the world, after controlling for country size. 13The probability of each disaster type (flood, tropical cyclone, and so on) is estimated using a panel logit with country fixed effects, in which temperature and precipitation are the main explanatory variables. The analysis expands on Thomas and Lopez (2015) by modeling each disaster type separately and relying on monthly rather than annual data. See Annex 3.2 for further details. 14Scientists project that the frequency of tropical cyclone storms will decrease, but their strength and intensity will rise in a warmer world (Knutson and others 2010). This could lead to more natural disasters caused by more intense tropical cyclones despite the overall lower frequency of storms.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 124 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 12 10 8 6 4 2 1,500 + 1,000 500 0  500  1,000 Figure 3.5. Temperature and Precipitation Projections under the RCP 8.5 Scenario Under the scenario of continued increase in greenhouse gas emissions, temperatures across the globe are projected to rise signi cantly. 1. Temperature Change between 2005 and 2100 (Degrees Celsius) 2. Precipitation Change between 2005 and 2100 (mm per year) Sources: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP); World Bank Group Cartography Unit; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The NEX-GDDP data set comprises downscaled climate scenarios for the globe that are derived from the General Circulation Model (GCM) runs conducted under the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) and for two Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) greenhouse gas emissions scenarios (4.5 and 8.5). The CMIP5 GCM runs were developed for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report. The data set includes downscaled projections from the 21 models and scenarios for daily maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation for 1950 2100. The spatial resolution of the data set is 0.25 degrees (~25 km x 25 km). mm = millimeter.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 125 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 floods and epidemics, which mainly affect low-income developing countries, will also become more common. More frequent weather-related disasters, without a corresponding increase in reconstruction capabilities, could amplify the damages they cause because econ- omies may have insufficient time to recover between events (Hallegatte, Hourcade, and Dumas 2007). The Macroeconomic Impact of Weather Shocks The design of appropriate policies to cope with climate change requires an understanding of its poten- tial macroeconomic consequences. In the absence of historical experience with climate change that may be relevant for countries today, the analysis in this section builds on existing literature and identifies how annual fluctuations in temperature and precipitation affect macroeconomic performance in the short and medium term. The channels through which macroeconomic effects occur and the changes in the sensitivity of growth to weather shocks are explored, motivated by evidence that higher temperatures constrain per capita GDP growth in countries with hot climates. Short- and Medium-Term Effects To measure the impact of weather shocks, this section examines the historical relationship between weather patterns and economic activity, using the approach of Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) and Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a). Similar to these studies, the analysis uses within-country and across-country year-to-year fluctuations in tempera- ture and precipitation to identify the causal effect of weather on aggregate outcomes, both contemporane- ously and over the medium term. It builds on these studies by expanding the geographic and temporal coverage of the analysis, examining the effects of weather shocks on a larger set of outcome variables and establishing the robustness of findings to dif- ferent sources of weather data and alternative, more flexible empirical specifications. The baseline analysis uses Jord s (2005) local pro- jection method to trace the impulse response function of real per capita GDP to a weather shock in a sample of more than 180 economies during 1950 2015. Weather is measured as the country s average annual temperature and precipitation, along with the squared terms of temperature and precipitation to account for the global nonlinear relationship between temperature 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 AEs EMs LIDCs LIDCs Other LIDCs Drought LIDCs Tropical cyclone LIDCs Epidemic LIDCs Flood Figure 3.6. Natural Disasters: Historical and Projected Monthly Probability of Occurrence 1. Natural Disasters by Type, 1990 2014 2010 14 2050 2100 Natural disasters, which have historically occurred with greater frequency in low- income developing countries relative to their land area, could become more common by the end of the 21st century under the scenario of continued increase in greenhouse gas emissions. 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 AEs EMs LIDCs 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 AEs EMs LIDCs 0.00 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20 AEs EMs LIDCs 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 AEs EMs LIDCs 2. Tropical Cyclone 3. Flood 4. Heat Wave 5. Epidemic 6. Wild re 8,476 disasters, in LIDCs 2,606 Sources: International Disaster Database (EM-DAT); and IMF staff calculations. Note: In panel 1, the colors indicate the different types of natural disasters, with the lighter shades of each color specifying the portion that has occurred in low-income developing countries (LIDCs). Panels 2 6 show the predicted monthly probability of a disaster in 2050 and 2100, based on the Representative Concentration Pathways 8.5 scenario. Most of the predicted probabilities for individual months are not statistically signi cant, therefore the results should only be interpreted as indicative of the potential increase in the frequency of disasters with climate change. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; LIDCs = low-income developing countries.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 126 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 and growth, as demonstrated by Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a).15 The analysis confirms the existence of a statistically significant nonlinear effect of temperature on per capita economic growth, first established by Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a), in this chapter s substantially larger sample. In countries with high average temperatures, an increase in temperature dampens economic activ- ity, whereas it has the opposite effect in much colder climates. The threshold temperature is estimated to be about 13 C to 15 C (see Annex Table 3.3.1).16 These results suggest highly uneven effects of warming across the globe (Figures 3.7 and 3.8). Because most advanced economies are in colder locations, with annual average temperatures close to the threshold, a marginal temperature increase does not materially affect their contemporaneous growth (Figure 3.7, panel 1).17 Emerging market economies and particularly low-income developing countries tend 15Average annual temperature and precipitation are constructed by aggregating weather data at the grid-cell level to the level of the country using the population in each cell as weights to account for differences in population density within countries and capture the average weather experienced by a person in the country (see Annexes 3.1 and 3.3). The empirical approach consists of regressing contemporaneous and future output growth on temperature and precipitation and the squared terms to estimate an impulse response function at various horizons, controlling for country fixed effects, region-year fixed effects, lags and forwards of weather shocks, and lagged growth. See Annex 3.3 for further details. 16The finding is robust to, among other things: (1) using alterna- tive sources of raw grid-level weather data, (2) aggregating grid-level weather data to country averages with population weights from different decades, (3) estimation through an autoregressive distribu- tive lag specification instead of a local projection method, (4) using country-specific linear and quadratic time trends as opposed to region-year fixed effects, and (5) controlling for the occurrence of natural disasters. The analysis does not find a consistently significant relationship between precipitation and per capita GDP growth, although it uncovers an effect of precipitation on agricultural output (Annex Tables 3.3.1 and 3.3.2). 17Even if the effects on overall GDP in these countries are negli- gible, this may mask large losses and gains, with some sectors facing large investment needs to cope with higher temperatures, rising sea levels, or more damaging disasters. Moreover, the analysis focuses on the macroeconomic effects of a limited set of weather characteristics, namely temperature and precipitation. The negative impact of other aspects of the climate, such as the rise in sea levels or the occurrence of extreme weather events, may be less unequal across broad income groups, as demonstrated in Box 3.1, which documents similar out- put losses from tropical cyclones across advanced and emerging mar- ket economies. The estimates also abstract from potential spillovers to advanced economies from famines, epidemics, social conflicts, and other difficult-to-predict effects of weather shocks in vulner- able economies. Moreover, under the scenario of unconstrained CO2 emissions, most advanced economies will cross the threshold temperature and would start suffering the negative effects of higher temperatures on economic output (Annex Figure 3.6.1).  3  2  1 0 1 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  3  2  1 0 1 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  3  2  1 0 1 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 0 6 10 14 18 22 26 30  3  2  1 0 1 2 0 3 5 8 10 13 15 18 0 6 10 14 18 22 26 30  3  2  1 0 1 2 0 2 5 7 9 11 14 16 18 0 6 10 14 18 22 26 30 Figure 3.7. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output (Percent) 3. Emerging Market Economies  3  2  1 0 1 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 5. Low-Income Developing Countries 4. Emerging Market Economies (T = 22 C) 6. Low-Income Developing Countries (T = 25 C) 1. Advanced Economies Estimate 90 percent con dence interval Contemporaneous Effect (Temperature on x-axis) Effect over Time (Years on x-axis) In relatively hot countries, such as most low-income developing countries, an increase in temperature has a negative, statistically signi cant, and long-lasting effect on per capita output. Median temperature 2. Advanced Economies (T = 11 C) Percent of countries (right scale) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Left-hand-side panels superimpose the contemporaneous effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output at different temperature levels computed as per equation (3.3) over the distribution of average annual temperatures recorded in 2015 in advanced economies (panel 1), emerging markets (panel 3), and low-income developing countries (panel 5). The blue lines show the point estimates and 90 percent con dence intervals, while the light blue bars denote the percent of countries at each temperature level. The vertical red line is the median temperature for the country group. Right-hand-side panels depict the impulse response of per capita output to a 1 C increase in temperature estimated at the median temperature of advanced economies (panel 2), emerging markets (panel 4), and low-income developing countries (panel 6). Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. T = temperature.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 127 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Figure 3.8. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe (Percent) An increase in temperature has a highly uneven effect across the globe, with adverse consequences concentrated in the parts of the world where the majority of the world s population lives. 1. Effect of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Real per Capita Output at the Grid Level 2. Effect of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Real per Capita Output at the Country Level, with Countries Rescaled in Proportion to Their Population 0.80 to 1.63 0.43 to 0.80 0.33 to 0.43  0.50 to  0.32  0.97 to  0.50  1.30 to  0.97  1.68 to  1.30 Insigni cant effect No data Sources: Natural Earth; ScapeToad; United Nations World Population Prospects Database: the 2015 Revision; World Bank Group Cartography Unit; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The maps depict the contemporaneous effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output computed as per equation (3.3). Panel 1 uses 2005 grid- level temperature, while panel 2 uses the recent 10-year average country-level temperature together with estimated coef cients in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5). In the cartogram in panel 2, each country is rescaled in proportion to its 2015 population. Gray areas indicate the estimated impact is not statistically signi cant. 4.23 3.58 2.93 2.28 1.63 0.98 0.33  0.32  0.97  1.62  2.27  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 128 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 to have much hotter climates, and a rise in tempera- ture significantly lowers per capita GDP growth. For the median emerging market economy, a 1 C increase from a temperature of 22 C lowers growth in the same year by 0.9 percentage point. For the median low-income developing country, with a temperature of 25 C, the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature is even larger: growth falls by 1.2 percentage points (Fig- ure 3.7, panels 3 and 5).18 And even though countries projected to be significantly affected by an increase in temperature produced only about one-fifth of global GDP in 2016, they are home to close to 60 percent of current global population and more than 75 percent of the projected global population at the end of the century (Figure 3.8 and Annex Figure 3.3.1). Does economic activity in countries with warmer climates recover quickly after a rise in temperature? The analysis suggests not. Even seven years after a weather shock, per capita output is 1 percent lower for the median emerging market economy and 1.5 percent lower for the median low-income country (Figure 3.7, panels 2, 4, and 6).19 A deepening in the shape of the estimated impulse response of output to a temperature shock hints at the possibility of a growth effect (and consequently much larger economic losses from higher temperatures). How- ever, statistically, it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that the contemporaneous and medium-term effects of a temperature shock on per capita output are identical.20 Channels of Impact The weather can influence economic activity through various channels. The most obvious one is agricultural output, given that temperature and precipitation are direct inputs in crop production. However, studies show evidence of broader impacts, including on labor pro- ductivity, mortality, health, and conflict.21 The literature 18There are also substantial differences in the estimated effects of temperature increases within each broad country group, which reflect the wide distribution of average temperature across countries (Figure 3.7, panels 1, 3, and 5; Figure 3.8). 19The persistence of the estimated effects may reflect the relatively persistent nature of temperature shocks. Univariate time series regression analysis shows that temperature shocks decay slowly, especially in rela- tively hot locations. A 1 C degree increase in annual temperature leads to significantly higher temperatures over the subsequent eight years. 20Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) and Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) argue in favor of a growth effect, although it is difficult to pin down the precise channel through which weather shocks persistently influence economic growth. 21See Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014); Carleton and Hsiang (2016); and Heal and Park (2016) for literature reviews. Weather shocks can also indirectly affect economic activity through their impacts so far has often studied these effects within a specific country or through laboratory experiments; this chapter examines whether these channels are also at work in a cross-country setting. Box 3.1 extends the analysis in this section by examining the macroeconomic effects of another aspect of the weather tropical cyclones. The main analysis begins by studying whether weather shocks influence only agricultural produc- tion or also affect other economic sectors. As shown on third markets. See Cashin, Mohaddes, and Raissi (2017) for an analysis of the international macroeconomic transmission of El Ni o within a dynamic multicountry framework.  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 3.9. Effect of Temperature Increase on Sectoral Output Estimated at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income Developing Country (Percent; years on x-axis) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The panels depict the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature estimated at the median low-income developing country temperature (25 C). Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Crop production is an index, produced by the Food and Agriculture Organization, of price-weighted quantities of agricultural commodities produced excluding production for seeds and fodder. 1. Agriculture Value Added 3. Manufacturing Value Added 4. Services Value Added  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 An increase in temperature lowers agricultural output, but also has adverse effects on manufacturing value added in hot countries. Estimate 90 percent con dence interval 2. Crop Production  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 129 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 in Figure 3.9, at the temperatures prevailing in the median low-income developing country, agricultural value added and crop production drop with higher temperatures, recover somewhat in subsequent years, and generally remain depressed over the medium term much as expected and as documented in a large body of work.22 However, the analysis also confirms findings that industrial output is similarly hurt as temperatures rise in countries with hot climates, although the estimates are more imprecise (see also Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015a). Only services sector output appears to be sheltered from the weather. To shed light on the reasons weather shocks affect sectors besides agriculture, the analysis concentrates on how key elements of the aggregate production function productivity and labor and capital inputs  respond to weather shocks. As in other studies, the analysis aims to capture the net reduced-form effects of weather on various outcomes rather than uncover the potentially complex structural relationships that may exist among these variables. Productivity Evidence from surveys and other sources shows that exposure to heat above a certain point reduces people s performance on both cognitive and physi- cal tasks.23 The analysis therefore examines whether higher temperatures in parts of the world that are hot decrease labor productivity. If productivity is a channel through which weather shocks affect aggre- gate GDP, the effect should be significantly larger 22See, among others, Barrios, Bazoumana, and Strobl (2010); Barrios, Bertinelli, and Strobl (2006); Feng, Krueger, and Oppen- heimer (2010); Schlenker and Lobell (2010); Lobell, Schlenker, and Costa-Roberts (2011); and Lanzafame (2014) for evidence from emerging market and developing economies, and Schlenker and Roberts (2009), Burke and Emerick (2016), and Wang and others (2017) for evidence from the United States. Unlike per capita out- put, agricultural value added and crop production respond to precip- itation, in addition to temperature shocks, with more precipitation generally boosting production. See Annex Table 3.3.2. 23Sepp nen, Fisk, and Faulkner (2003) report a productivity loss of about 2 percent for every 1 C increase in temperature above 25 C, based on a survey of laboratory experiments. See also Sepp nen, Fisk, and Lei (2006) for a meta-analysis of the litera- ture, Deryugina and Hsiang (2014) for evidence from the United States, and Somanathan and others (2017) for recent evidence on labor productivity from India. Heat stress may also reduce cognitive function, as captured in student performance (Wargocki and Wyon 2007; Graff Zivin, Hsiang, and Neidell 2015; Garg, Jagnani, and Taraz 2017; Park 2017). for sectors in which workers are directly exposed to the weather.24 Analysis of sectoral data on value added per worker reveals that, at the temperatures prevailing in the median low-income developing country, produc- tivity of workers in heat-exposed industries falls significantly after a rise in temperature (Figure 3.10, panels 1 and 2). However, labor productivity is unaffected in industries in which work is performed mostly indoors. Overall productivity may also decline if weather shocks provoke political instability, incite conflict, or undermine governing institutions in other ways. Although a more detailed analysis would be beyond the scope of this chapter, numerous studies docu- ment a strong link between weather shocks and these outcomes.25 Since conflict is one of the key triggers of refugee flows, as discussed in Chapter 1 of the April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO), weather shocks could result in substantial spillovers to neighboring countries and ultimately to advanced economies through this channel. Capital Accumulation Temperature increases are largely supply-side shocks, but they could lead to persistent output losses and affect growth if they influence the rate of factor accu- mulation.26 Using national accounts data, the analysis examines the response of the main components of aggregate demand gross capital formation, consump- tion, exports, and imports to weather shocks within the empirical framework described above. At the tem- 24The analysis follows Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) and uses the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health definitions of heat-exposed industries. Heat-exposed industries include agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, construction, mining, transportation, and utilities, as well as manufacturing in facilities that may not be climate controlled in low-income countries and whose production processes often generate considerable heat. 25Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015b) review the literature that links climate to conflict. Forcible removal of rulers has also been linked to fluctuations in climate (Burke and Leigh 2010; Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012; Chaney 2013; Kim 2014), and several historical cases of societal collapse have been compellingly attributed to climate change (Cullen and others 2000; Haug and others 2003; Buckley and others 2010; B ntgen and others 2011). 26Investment may fall in response to temperature shocks because there are fewer resources to invest, because the rate of return on capital is lower, and/or because the temporary negative shock to income raises the cost of financing investment in an environment of imperfect capital markets (see, for example, Fankhauser and Tol 2005). When access to formal savings, credit, or insurance is limited, households may also sell productive assets to smooth consumption in response to weather shocks.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 130 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 perature of the median low-income country, all four components respond negatively to a 1 C increase in temperature. However, in the medium term, the effect is most pronounced for investment, which is estimated to be 6 percent lower seven years after the shock (Figure 3.10, panel 3). Imports, which are typically closely tied to investment, also exhibit a significant and long-lasting drop as temperature rises (Chapter 2 of the October 2016 WEO).27 Labor Supply The analysis also reveals that, in hot climates, higher temperatures may reduce (future) labor supply because of their influence on mortality rates (Figure 3.10, panel 5). A 1 C increase in temperature raises infant mortality by 0.12 percentage point in the year of the shock. The effect grows through the estimation period as weather-related lower income (and potential food insecurity) reinforces the direct physiological impact of higher temperatures in hot climates. This cross-country panel evidence corroborates findings of numerous studies of links between weather and mortality, prenatal health, and other health outcomes in various countries.28 The adverse effects on the health and educational attainment of children could be one of the key reasons behind the long-lasting nature of weather s consequences. Effects over Time As countries repeatedly face weather fluctuations, it is reasonable to expect them to take measures that lessen the impact of temperature shocks on the economy. However, the analysis does not find any obvious evidence of such adaptation over the past 60 years. Estimates of the response of per capita output 27The negative effect of temperature shocks on aggregate invest- ment is consistent with evidence from household-level studies, which find that weather shocks could slow or even reverse capital accumulation as households try to smooth consumption or perceive investment as too risky (Hallegatte and others 2016). 28Desch nes (2012) and Guo and others (2014) provide compre- hensive reviews of the literature on the link between temperature and mortality and health. See, for example, Desch nes and Greenstone (2011), Barreca (2012), and Barreca and others (2016) for evidence from the United States; Kudamatsu, Persson, and Str mberg (2012) for evidence from a subset of African countries; and Burgess and others (2014) for evidence from India. Carleton (2017) documents a significant increase in suicide rates when higher temperatures threaten agricultural yields in India. Deryugina and Hsiang (2014), Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014), Park (2016), and Somanathan and others (2017) find a direct effect of higher temperature on labor supply and productivity.  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  6  4  2 0 2 4  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 3.10. Effect of Temperature Increase on Productivity, Capital, and Labor Input Estimated at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income Developing Country (Percent; years on x-axis) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The panels depict the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature estimated at the median low-income developing country temperature (25 C). Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Heat-exposed industries include agriculture, forestry,  shing, and hunting, construction, mining, transportation, utilities, and manufacturing, following Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014). 3. Investment  6  4  2 0 2 4  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 5. Infant Mortality 2. Labor Productivity in Non-Heat-Exposed Industries 4. Imports 6. Human Development Index 1. Labor Productivity in Heat-Exposed Industries Estimate 90 percent con dence interval In hot countries, an increase in temperature dampens labor productivity in heat- exposed industries, depresses investment and imports, and has damaging health effects.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 131 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 to temperature shocks over rolling 20-year periods suggest that the relationship between the two variables has remained constant (Figure 3.11).29 The reasons behind this apparent lack of adaptation are not well understood, but high costs, limited access to credit for financing adaptation, insufficient information about the benefits of adaptation, limited rationality in plan- ning for future risks, and inadequate access to technol- ogy are likely constraints, as discussed in Carleton and Hsiang (2016). Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change This section examines how policies, institutions, and other country characteristics can mitigate the adverse consequences of temperature shocks and climate change. It begins by discussing the toolkit available to policymakers and private agents with which to cope with weather shocks. It then presents illustrative evidence of the extent to which, historically, some policies (along with the overall level of develop- ment) have shaped the link between macroeconomic performance and temperature shocks. The empirical evidence is complemented in Box 3.2 by dynamic general equilibrium model scenarios of the response of macroeconomic aggregates to weather shocks under various proxies for relevant policies. Case studies of specific adaptation strategies occupy Boxes 3.3 and 3.4. The section also examines migration as a response to persistent changes in climate as adaptation strategies reach their limits. Finally, the role of international cooperation in supporting countries  efforts to cope with weather shocks and climate change is discussed. A Toolkit To structure the discussion, this subsection lays out a toolkit of possible domestic policy actions and pri- vate choices that may help insulate economic activity 29Studies reveal large differences in the ability of individual sectors to adapt to specific weather shocks. For example, Hsiang and Narita (2012) and Hsiang and Jina (2014) find that countries more frequently exposed to tropical cyclones experience less damage, which suggests that they have learned to cope with these extreme events. Mortality caused by high temperatures has declined significantly over time with the introduction of air-conditioning in the United States (Barreca and others 2016). But there is little evidence of declining sensitivity of agricultural yields (Burke and Emerick 2016) or overall output (Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012; Deryugina and Hsiang 2014; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015a) to temperature fluctuations. from weather shocks and from the risks that accom- pany climate change (Figure 3.12). Fluctuations in weather can be viewed as one of many shocks that affect macroeconomic performance. As such, their consequences could be attenuated by general macroeconomic and structural policies and institutions that enhance countries  ex ante and ex post resilience to shocks. While priorities will vary depending on each country s specific circumstances and weather-related threats, policies may include those that seek to limit the short-term impact when shocks occur, help the economy recover faster, and reduce vulnera- bility to future shocks. Policies reinforce each other to achieve these goals. For example, countries with buffers (fiscal and monetary space, large international reserves, access to foreign aid) and well-targeted social safety nets may be better placed to deliver support to people affected by weather shocks, thus smoothing consump- tion in the short term. Adjusting to weather shocks and climate change will likely require reallocating peo- ple and capital across sectors and regions as production and trade patterns shift. Policies and institutions that  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1965 70 75 80 85 90 95 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure depicts the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature at horizon 0 estimated at the median low-income developing country temperature (25 C), over a 20-year rolling window. Each point estimate is for a period (t, t + 20). Figure 3.11. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output Estimated at the Temperature of the Median Low-Income Developing Country over Time (Percent; years on x-axis) The contemporaneous effect of temperature shocks on per capita output has remained relatively constant over time. Estimate 90 percent con dence interval  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 132 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 facilitate the needed reallocation, such as those that ensure access to finance, labor market flexibility, and investment in human capital and infrastructure, could speed up recovery and foster the structural transforma- tion necessary to reduce vulnerability.30 Mitigating the risks associated with climate change will also require some very specific adaptation policies to help countries reduce their exposure and vulnera- bility to climatic events. Once the key climate change risks are identified for a particular location, both  soft  and  hard  adaptation measures can be applied (Halle- gatte 2009). Soft measures may include strengthening 30The classification of policies presented in Figure 3.12 is rather loose. Greater financial access could help farmers both smooth consumption when higher temperatures damage crops and invest in the technology needed to prevent future damage (such as buying heat-resistant seeds). public information provision, building codes, and land use and zoning laws, and devising warning and evacuation systems, along with targeted incentives for climate-related technologies (such as air-conditioning) and transferring and sharing risks related to weather events (such as natural disasters, which may increase in frequency) through financial markets. Hard measures may include investment in climate-smart infrastruc- ture, such as retrofitting properties and building (or upgrading) irrigation or drainage systems, building seawalls, and the like.31 Appropriate adaptation mea- sures are highly specific to the climate-related risks in 31See Hallegatte (2009); Hallegatte, Lecocq, and de Perthuis (2011); IPCC (2014); Cabezon and others (2015); OECD (2015a); Farid and others (2016); Hallegatte and others (2016); IMF (2016a); and IMF (2016b) for a comprehensive discussion of various climate change adaptation strategies. Mitigate risks by reducing exposure and vulnerability Figure 3.12. Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: A Toolkit Adaptation Strategies to Speci c Climate Change Risks Macroeconomic and Structural Policies to Build Resilience to Shocks Enhance ability to smooth the impact of the shocks Enhance  exibility and foster structural transformation Policy buffers To enable policy response Labor market policies To facilitate labor movement across production sectors and regions Well-targeted social safety nets To effectively support those affected Exchange rate  exibility To cushion some of the economic cost of the shock Education and health policies To strengthen human capital, facilitate lifelong learning, and develop a  exible and resilient labor force To reduce vulnerability Financial sector policies To ensure access to credit, insurance, and other  nancial services needed by households to smooth consumption To enable  rms to invest, develop new technologies, and so forth Infrastructure investment Strong Institutional Framework Transfer and share risks Migration Public information provision about climate-related risks Early warning systems and evacuation schemes Stronger building laws, land use planning, and zoning rule; and better regulation of the use of common resources (for example, water) Fiscal incentives and appropriate pricing for the development and adoption of appropriate technologies (for example, resistant crops, air-conditioning, housing improvements) Climate-smart infrastructure investment (for example, irrigation, drainage, seawalls) Private and sovereign insurance (for example, parametric insurance, crop insurance, catastrophe bonds) Multilateral risk-sharing mechanisms Source: IMF staff compilation.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 133 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 each location and national circumstances; the infra- structure requirements for a flood-prone area would be vastly different from those of an area that is frequently exposed to droughts. This specificity, together with lack of comparable data on adaptation measures, precludes cross-country empirical analysis. Case studies of adaptation strategies, however, could prove insightful and are presented in Box 3.3. Box 3.4 discusses the role of financial markets in sharing and transferring weather-related risks. Important synergies exist between general macroeco- nomic and structural policies and specific adaptation strategies: economic and institutional development will likely strengthen a country s capacity to cope with climate change and to invest in specific adaptation strategies. For example, stronger institutions will make enforcement of soft measures more effective, while fiscal space will enable the investment in needed infrastruc- ture. Conversely, some adaptation strategies, such as efficient water use, climate-resilient housing, or activity diversification could facilitate development even in the absence of climate change (Farid and others 2016). Finally, as adaptation strategies reach their limits, economic agents could respond to persistent changes in climate and the associated loss in income by relocat- ing geographically. The Role of Domestic Policies and Institutions: Empirical Evidence To study the extent to which macroeconomic and structural policies and country characteristics mute the effect of weather shocks, the analysis extends the empirical approach described above. It does so by allowing the response of per capita output to weather shocks to vary with various proxies for these policy and institutional settings, which are included one at a time in the analysis.32 It is important to emphasize that, whereas fluctuations in temperature and precipitation are truly exogenous, which allows their causal impact to be identified, variations in policies and institutions across countries and over time are not. Accordingly, estimated correlations should be interpreted as being merely suggestive of causal impact. 32More specifically, the estimated specification augments equation (3.2) to include an interaction term between the weather shock and the policy variable. For simplicity, the sample is restricted to coun- tries with average temperature exceeding 15 C, in which an increase in temperature has a statistically significant linear negative impact on economic activity. See Annex 3.3 for further details. The results suggest that having the right policies and institutions in place may help attenuate the effects of temperature shocks, to some extent. The instanta- neous effect of a temperature shock is slightly smaller in countries with lower public debt, higher inflows of foreign aid, and greater exchange rate flexibility. The presence of monetary buffers (proxied by having below double-digit inflation) or international reserves makes no notable difference (Figure 3.13). However, the extent of attenuation that buffers provide is estimated to be small and short lived. The evidence is somewhat more compelling for struc- tural policies and country characteristics that are typi- cally deemed important for easing sectoral reallocation of factors of production and structural transformation in general. Although the uncertainty surrounding the empirical estimates is often very large, the medium-term adverse effect of a temperature increase appears to fade when domestic and international financial markets are better regulated, the exchange rate is flexible, infra- structure is widely available, democratic institutions are strong, and the distribution of income is fairly even  that is, in more-developed economies (Figure 3.14). Patterns uncovered in the data broadly mirror sim- ulations of a dynamic structural general equilibrium model, which can properly isolate the causal effects of the availability of buffers, costs of capital adjustment, quality of institutions, and investment in adaptation strategies (Box 3.2). They are also in line with the empirical findings that show less damage from extreme weather events and natural disasters in countries where exchange rates are flexible, financial services are readily available, and institutions are strong.33,34 33See Kahn (2005); Noy (2009); McDermott, Barry, and Tol (2013); Burgess and others (2014); and Felbermayr and Gr schl (2014) for the role of financial development, and Von Peter, Dahlen, and Saxena (2012); Breckner and others (2016); and Lee, Villaruel, and Gaspar (2016) for the role of insurance penetration. Kahn (2005), Noy (2009), and Felbermayr and Gr schl (2014) find evi- dence for the role of institutions, and Ramcharan (2009) examines the role of exchange rates in reducing damage from extreme weather events and natural disasters. 34Two studies make a compelling case for the importance of sectoral reallocation in alleviating output losses from climate change. When quantifying the effects of climate change on agricultural markets using micro data from 1.7 million fields around the world, Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith (2016) find that the welfare losses would be three times larger if farmers were unable to switch produc- tion in response to changing climatic conditions and comparative advantage. In an empirical study, Colmer (2016) establishes that labor movements from agriculture into manufacturing in India can significantly offset the aggregate economic losses associated with weather-driven changes in agricultural productivity.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 134 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 3.14. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions (Percent; years on x-axis) 3. Human Capital  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 5. Political Regime 2. International Finance 4. Physical Capital 1. Domestic Financial Sector Reform 6. Inequality There is some suggestive evidence that the medium-term effect of an increase in temperature on per capita output is marginally lower in countries with better- regulated  nancial markets, greater physical capital, more democratic institutions, and lower income inequality. Low Gini High Gini High  nancial sector liberalization Low  nancial sector liberalization High restrictions on capital account Low restrictions on capital account High human capital Low human capital Low prevalence of paved roads High prevalence of paved roads High polity score Low polity score Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The panels depict how the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output in the sample of countries with average temperature exceeding 15 C varies with the empirical proxies of structural policies and institutional settings. Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Gray areas indicate that the blue and red lines are signi cantly different from each other at the 15 percent level. See Annex 3.3 for the exact de nition of policy variables.  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 3.13. Role of Policy Buffers (Percent; years on x-axis) 3. International Reserves  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 5. Remittances 2. In ation 4. Foreign Aid 1. Public Debt 6. Exchange Rate Flexibility There is some suggestive evidence that the contemporaneous effect of temperature on per capita output is marginally lower in countries with lower public debt, greater foreign aid in ows, and  exible exchange rates. Low debt to GDP High debt to GDP Below double digit Above double digit Less than four months of imports More than four months of imports High foreign aid Low foreign aid High remittances Low remittances Not pegged Pegged Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The panels depict how the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output in the sample of countries with average temperature exceeding 15 C varies with the empirical proxy of a policy buffer. Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Gray areas indicate that the blue and red lines are signi cantly different from each other at the 15 percent level. See Annex 3.3 for the exact de nition of policy variables.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 135 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 An alternative approach to assessing whether devel- opment more broadly reduces vulnerability to weather shocks takes advantage of subnational cross-country data. It is difficult to establish definitively whether advanced economies experience a smaller marginal effect of heat on macroeconomic performance, because so few of them have hot climates. However, some of the larger advanced economies, such as the United States, span several climate zones.35 This within-country geographic heterogeneity makes it possible to compare whether economic activity in the  hot  states or provinces of advanced economies responds to a temperature increase in the same way as economic activity does in states or provinces of emerg- ing market and developing economies with a similar average temperature. Indeed, analysis suggests that temperature shocks hurt hot areas in emerging market and developing economies significantly more than those in advanced economies (Figure 3.15). Thus, eco- nomic development seems, to some extent, to insulate countries from the vagaries of the weather.36 The Role of Migration Migration is another possible adaptation strategy for households hurt by weather shocks and persistent changes in climate one with important cross-border spillovers. Theoretically, the impact of weather shocks on migration is ambiguous (see Dell, Jones, and Olken 2014). Although lower incomes, safety concerns, and physiological discomfort are powerful incentives to relocate, the adverse income effect of weather shocks may undermine households  ability to pay for transport and other relocation expenses (Bryan, Chowdhury, and Mobarak 2014; Carleton and Hsiang 2016).37 Several empirical studies have documented adaptation to weather shocks and natural disasters through migration 35Average annual temperatures in the US states of Maine and Texas are about 7 C and 21 C, respectively. 36Data constraints prevent the identification of the precise chan- nels through which development attenuates the link between weather and overall economic performance. Economic activity in hot areas in advanced economies may be more insulated from temperature shocks given that households exposed to these shocks have better access to ex post coping mechanisms (such as social protection) or have reduced their vulnerability to shocks through ex ante adaptation strategies (such as activity diversification, adoption of air-condition- ing, and the like). 37Lack of knowledge and uncertainty about the risks caused by slowly changing climate conditions (Lee and others 2015) as well as the provision of government assistance to disaster-prone areas may also result in minimal behavioral change (Baez and others 2017). within country borders.38 Evidence of international migration responses is scarcer and typically focuses on flows from individual countries.39 The analysis builds on Cattaneo and Peri (2016) and examines whether weather shocks and natural 38See Gray and Mueller (2012b) for evidence from Bangladesh; and Boustan, Kahn, and Rhode (2012); Feng, Oppenheimer, and Schlenker (2012); Hornbeck (2012); and Hornbeck and Naidu (2014), among others, for evidence from the United States. Der- yugina (2011), on the other hand, finds no population response in the 10 years following a hurricane landfall in the United States, but documents a substantial increase in government transfer payments. 39Munshi (2003), for example, finds that more migrants move from Mexico to the United States when rainfall is lower in a given Mexican community a pattern also confirmed by Feng, Krueger, and Oppenheimer (2010). Country-specific evidence also includes Ethiopia (Gray and Mueller 2012a), Indonesia (Bohra-Mishra, Oppenheimer, and Hsiang 2014), Pakistan (Mueller, Gray, and Kosec 2014), and Syria (Kelley and others 2015). Barrios, Bertinelli, and Strobl (2006) and Marchiori, Maystadt, and Schumacher (2012) provide evidence from several countries in sub-Saharan Africa.  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure depicts how the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature in the sample of states or provinces with average temperature exceeding 15 C varies with an indicator of whether the state or province is located in an advanced economy. Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Gray area indicates that the blue and red lines are signi cantly different from each other at the 15 percent level. Figure 3.15. Role of Development: Evidence from Subnational Data (Percent; years on x-axis) Advanced economies Non-advanced economies The adverse effect of an increase in temperature on output is more pronounced in non-advanced economies.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 136 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 disasters trigger emigration.40 The findings suggest that a rise in temperature and greater incidence of weather-related disasters induce emigration, but only from countries where people can generally afford to leave, which confirms Cattaneo and Peri s (2016) results (Figure 3.16; Annex Table 3.4.1). Households in low-income developing countries, which tend to have limited access to savings and credit, appear trapped by weather-induced income shocks (see Black and others 2011; Chen and others 2017). This inter- pretation is consistent with the findings of Hallegatte and others (2016) that the poorest households in 40Focusing on the sample of countries with average annual temperature of at least 15 C, as in the section titled  The Role of Domestic Policies and Institutions: Empirical Evidence,  the analysis relates the share of emigrants from a country to its average temperature, precipitation, and incidence of natural disasters over a 10-year period, controlling for time-invariant country characteristics and global and region-specific decadal shocks. See Annex 3.4 for further details. low-income countries tend to be the most exposed and vulnerable to climate change. These are also precisely the households with the fewest resources available to finance relocation. Substantial migration flows, potentially spilling across country borders, could arise if climate change leads to a significant rise in sea levels. Hundreds of millions of people in low-lying areas could become vulnerable to flooding, forcing them to abandon their homes and relocate (Usery, Choi, and Finn 2007, 2009). In the United States alone, more than 4 million people living in coastal areas could be affected if oceans rise the 80 centimeters the IPCC projects by 2100 under the unmitigated climate change scenario. If the rise in sea levels is twice as much, the affected pop- ulation would exceed 13 million (Hauer, Evans, and Mishra 2016). International Support Climate change is a global externality, and countries will not be able to deal with its causes or its conse- quences on their own. Both equity and efficiency arguments call for active support from the interna- tional community in helping low-income countries plan, fund, and implement adaptation measures to cope with the consequences of climate change without compromising developmental objectives. On equity grounds, low-income countries have contributed only marginally to greenhouse gas emissions, yet they are the most vulnerable to their harmful consequences, as this chapter demonstrates. On efficiency grounds, requiring countries that have and/or are currently con- tributing substantially to the atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration to bear some of the adaptation costs of low-income countries will help offset polluters  fail- ure to fully internalize the cost of greenhouse gas emis- sions. And while the benefits of adaptation are largely domestic, successfully coping with weather shocks and climate change could avert significant cross-border spillovers, for example by stemming climate-induced population migration. Support from the international community in the form of concessional climate finance will be crucial to mobilize the resources necessary to build resilience to climate change in low-income countries (see Box 3.6). The commitment by advanced economies to jointly contribute $100 billion a year by 2020 for mitigation and adaptation in developing economies, which was further strengthened by the 2015 Paris Agreement,  2.0 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 Emerging market economies Low-income developing countries Figure 3.16. Effect of Temperature and Natural Disasters on International Migration (Percentage points of origin country s total population) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Estimates from a panel regression of the effects of a 1 C increase in 10-year average temperature and number of natural disasters on the share of emigrants. See Annex 3.4 for further details on the data, speci cation, and estimation. Vertical lines denote 90 percent con dence intervals. Among the sample of countries with average temperature exceeding 15 C, an increase in temperature and greater incidence of natural disasters induce migration, but only from non-low-income developing countries. 1. Temperature  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 Emerging market economies Low-income developing countries 2. Number of Natural Disasters  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 137 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 is an important step in that regard.41 In addition to financial assistance, the transfer of appropriate adap- tation and clean technologies to low-income countries can further enhance their efforts to cope with climate change by improving access to state-of-the-art technol- ogy, skills, and knowledge. Several initiatives under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change have promoted the international exchange of knowledge related to good practices in adaptation (such as the Adaptation Learning Mechanism), which can be integrated into national and local plans. Multi- lateral risk-sharing mechanisms, such as the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility and the African Risk Capacity, can also help countries with emergency response in the immediate aftermath of a disaster, as discussed in Boxes 3.3 and 3.4. Cognizant of the challenges posed by climate change, the IMF, among other international financial institutions, offers direct technical and financial support to small states and other countries that are vulnerable to weather conditions. To foster adaptation, it provides policy advice and capacity building on how to enhance macroeco- nomic and risk management frameworks, determine the appropriate balance between self-insurance and risk transfer, and strengthen investment and growth to build resilience.42 The IMF has also increased vulnerable coun- tries  annual access limits under the Rapid Credit Facility and Rapid Financing Instrument to provide rapid assis- tance to countries with urgent payment needs, including as a result of natural disasters (IMF 2016b). Long-Term Effects of Temperature Increase A Model-Based Approach Empirical work in this chapter so far has assessed the macroeconomic effects of weather shocks in the short and medium term. This section incorporates these estimates into a dynamic general equilibrium model to shed light on the potential long-term effects of temperature increases on GDP, investment, and 41Estimates vary, but there is general agreement that adaptation needs in developing economies are on the order of billions of dollars a year (Margulis and Narain 2010; UNEP 2016). The Paris Agreement reiterates and extends developed economies  commitment to jointly mobilize $100 billion a year by 2020: advanced economies are strongly urged to scale up their efforts with a concrete road map for achieving the goal and, by 2025, are expected to set a new collective, quantified goal from a floor of $100 billion a year (Farid and others 2016). 42The IMF completed its first Climate Change Policy Assess- ment in June 2017 in collaboration with the World Bank for Seychelles (IMF 2017). public debt for a representative small open low-income country. The model also highlights the role that struc- tural transformation of low-income countries (that is, making the transition from agriculture to a more services-based economy) could play in attenuating the impact of climate change. Box 3.5 complements the analysis by reviewing the evidence on the long-term effects of historical climate on economic performance. Simulations are based on the Debt, Investment, and Growth (DIG) model of Buffie and others (2012), which captures aspects pertinent to low-income countries such as low public investment efficiency and high capital adjustment costs and can be extended easily to incorporate the structural transfor- mation process.43 These aspects of the DIG model make it preferable for studying the impact of climate change in low-income countries relative to the Inte- grated Assessment Models (IAMs) more commonly used to assess climate change effects.44 In the DIG model, firms combine labor, private capital, and infrastructure to produce output. Consumers supply labor and derive utility from consuming traded and nontraded goods, while the government collects rev- enue, redistributes income, and invests in infrastructure, which it funds through domestic and external borrowing, grants, and remittances. Based on the empirical results, changes in the exogenously-given sector-specific total factor productivity (TFP) levels are modeled as quadratic functions of temperature, while all other parameters are calibrated broadly as in Buffie and others (2012).45 43For a detailed description of the model, see Buffie and others (2012) and Annex 3.5. 44The three best-known IAMs are the Dynamic Integrated Climate-Economy (DICE) model; the Climate Framework for Uncer- tainty, Negotiation, and Distribution model; and the Policy Analysis of the Greenhouse Effect model. RICE is a DICE model that includes regions and AD-DICE is a variant of DICE that includes adaptation. Anthoff and Tol (2010), Hope (2011), and Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013) provide descriptions of these models. Existing IAMs are typically not geographically granular enough, lumping together economies with different income levels and average temperatures. They include various feedback loops among emissions, growth, and climate that are less rele- vant for low-income countries. And they are typically not well suited to analyzing sectoral issues and structural economic transformation. 45In particular, TFPt + 1   TFPt =   1 1  (Tt + 1   Tt) +  2   1 2  (Tt + 1  Tt)   T  t  +   TFP t  * , in which  TFP  t  *  is the TFP growth rate that would prevail under no climate change, assumed to be 2.8 percent based on the WEO medium-term growth forecast for low-income countries.  1 1 and  1 2 are the estimated coefficients on the linear and squared temperature terms in equation (3.2), as reported in column (5) of Annex Table 3.3.1, rescaled to match the modeled decline of GDP when temperature increases by 1 C, and Tt is the average annual temperature for the median low-income country at time t, where the initial temperature is set at 25 C.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 138 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The effects of climate change are examined through simulations of the macroeconomic response of output, the public-debt-to-GDP ratio, and private investment to the temperature increases projected under two of the scenarios prepared by the IPCC, as discussed in the  Projections  subsection of this chapter. The simulations suggest that under both scenarios, the representative low-income country will experience sizable economic losses relative to a baseline of no changes in temperature, with significant downside risks (Figure 3.17). Under the milder scenario, the increase in tem- perature will lower output by 4 percent by 2100 and depress private investment by 5 percent as firms respond to lower productivity from rising temperatures by cutting back capital spending. The relative decline in output implies an increase in the public-debt-to-GDP ratio of 2 percentage points by 2100. Under the unmitigated climate change scenario, the macroeconomic effect would be much larger. Output would fall short by close to 9 percent relative to no climate change, private investment would fall by 11 percent, and the public-debt-to-GDP ratio would rise by 5 percentage points by 2100.46 Conversely, the adverse effect would be significantly smaller if the rise in temperature is successfully con- tained to less than 2 C, as stipulated in the 2015 Paris Agreement, underscoring the critical importance of mitigation efforts in limiting climate change damage. Box 3.6 discusses recent developments in climate miti- gation efforts. There is great uncertainty surrounding these central projections because empirical estimates of the effect of temperature shocks are imprecise and temperature projections are uncertain. As a result, wide confidence intervals surround this chapter s central projections.47 There is a 2.5 percent chance of output declining more than 8 percent below the trend under the milder sce- nario and more than 16 percent under the unmitigated climate change scenario. In line with lower output, public debt would increase significantly relative to output (about 10 percent of GDP under the worst-case scenario), and the private-investment-to-GDP 46These results are broadly in line with other model-based esti- mates of the impact of climate change as discussed in Tol (2009). For a survey of estimates of climate change damage at the global level, see Tol (2014) and Nordhaus and Moffat (2017). 47The construction of confidence intervals is detailed in Annex 3.5. These intervals do not account for stochastic variations in the weather or fat-tail events.  16  14  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 2017 40 60 80 2100  16  14  12  10  8  6  4  2 0 2 4 6 2017 40 60 80 2100 Figure 3.17. Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase for a Representative Low-Income Developing Country: Model Simulations Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: RCP = Representative Concentration Pathways. Model simulations suggest that the increase in temperature projected under the intermediate and the unmitigated climate change scenarios could have signi cant economic consequences for a representative low-income developing country, with sizable downside risks. Midpoint 95 percent con dence interval Intermediate Scenario (RCP 4.5) Unmitigated Climate Change Scenario (RCP 8.5) 1. GDP (Percent deviation from trend) 2. GDP (Percent deviation from trend) 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 2017 40 60 80 2100 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 2017 40 60 80 2100 3. Public Debt (Percent of GDP) 4. Public Debt (Percent of GDP)  21  18  15  12  9  6  3 0 3 6 9 2017 40 60 80 2100  21  18  15  12  9  6  3 0 3 6 9 2017 40 60 80 2100 5. Investment (Percent deviation from trend investment rate) 6. Investment (Percent deviation from trend investment rate)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 139 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 ratio could plummet by as much as 20 percent below the trend. An alternative way to quantify climate change damage for a representative low-income country is to compute the present value of the shortfall in economic output relative to the baseline of no climate change and to express this present value as a share of current output.48 Using a moderate growth-adjusted discount rate of 1.4 percent, the present value of output losses is large, at 48 percent and 100 percent of current output under the RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios, respectively. The above simulations assume a static economic structure. However, as seen in the  Channels of Impact  subsection, rising temperatures affect some economic sectors more than others. For example, com- pared with agriculture, the services sector is relatively sheltered from the adverse effects of higher tempera- ture. Hence, structural economic transformation from a mostly agrarian to a more services-based economy could lower the economic cost of climate change. The analysis extends the baseline DIG model to include an exogenous process of reallocating labor from agri- culture and manufacturing to services. The pace of structural transformation is assumed to be moderate and replicates past trends for low-income countries: in the absence of shocks, the employment share of the services sector rises by 2.5 percentage points a decade. Simulations in this extended model indicate that over the long term, for the median low-income country, structural transformation can reduce the cost of climate change by about 25 percent and 30 percent under the RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios, respectively. The potential impact of climate change quantified in this section is subject to important caveats. First, extrapolating from the short- to medium-term causal effects of weather shocks estimated from historical data to the long-term impact of potential global warming may overstate the case if persistent changes in climate induce agents to adapt their economic activity to the new environment. Conversely, permanent changes in climate may have consequences that fluctuations in annual weather do not. Moreover, the model does not capture the effects of extreme weather events, which inflict long-lasting macroeconomic damage, as demon- 48In line with Nordhaus (2010), the real interest rate is assumed to be 4.25 percent, giving a growth-adjusted discount rate of 1.4 percent. A more extreme discount rate of 0.1 percent, proposed by Stern (2007), would increase the present value of damage by an order of magnitude. strated in Box 3.1 in the case of tropical cyclones, and could increase in frequency, potentially amplifying the damage they cause. Certain expected or possible events (such as rising sea levels) have no historic precedents from which to draw inference but may have very sig- nificant economic consequences for many low-income countries, which are also not quantified in the simu- lations. Moreover, the long-term projections do not incorporate several of the channels through which temperature increases, and climate change in general, could affect economic activity, such as declining labor supply from higher mortality and migration. Even abstracting from these difficulties, considerable uncertainty exists about how to incorporate the empir- ical estimates of economic losses into the dynamic general equilibrium model. The analysis in this chapter has taken a very conservative approach and assumes that weather shocks have a permanent effect on the level of output. However, several studies have argued that the empirical evidence is not inconsistent with a persistent effect on the growth rate of output (Dell, Jones, and Olken 2012; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015a). Because even a small growth effect would ultimately dwarf a level effect, the adverse consequence of temperature increases for the median low-income country would be many times larger if rising tempera- tures were incorporated into the model as affecting the growth path of output.49 Summary and Policy Implications Coping with climate change is one of the fun- damental challenges of the 21st century, and this challenge looms particularly large for low-income developing economies. This chapter documents the extraordinarily fast rise in temperature over the past century across advanced, emerging market, and low-income developing economies and the significant warming that could occur by the end of this century, depending on the international community s ability 49Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) estimate much larger dam- ages from climate change for hot countries: they model temperature increases as having a persistent effect on the growth rate, rather than the level of output. Permanent growth effects could arise if weather shocks scar productivity growth through their effects on institutions, innovation, or human capital accumulation. Several studies have found evidence of effects of weather shocks on outcomes that could plausibly shape productivity growth (for example, the link between weather and conflict or weather and educational attainment), but it is difficult to establish empirically how long the growth damage through this channel lasts.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 140 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 to contain greenhouse gas emissions. Low-income developing countries, which tend to be in some of the hottest parts of the planet and are projected to experience sizable increases in temperature, have con- tributed very little to the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases. Yet the analysis suggests that rising temperatures have highly uneven macroeconomic effects, with the adverse consequences borne disproportionately by countries with hot climates, such as most low-income developing countries. The chapter finds that a rise in temperature lowers per capita output in countries with high average temperatures, in both the short and medium term, through a wide array of channels. In areas with hot climates, higher temperatures reduce agricultural output, lower productivity of workers exposed to the heat, slow the rate of capital accumula- tion, and damage health. These findings reflect impacts of weather shocks on average country outcomes. But weather shocks could also have sizable unfavorable distributional consequences within a country. Poor households tend to be more vulnerable to weather fluctuations as a result of their heavy reliance on agri- cultural income, higher proportion of income devoted to food items, and limited access to savings and credit (Hallegatte and others 2016; Hallegatte and Rozenberg 2017; IMF 2016b). Despite the significant warming that has occurred over the past century, the sensitivity of per capita output to temperature shocks has not changed materially, pointing to significant constraints to adaptation. The negative effects of projected climate change for low-income countries could be large. Focusing on one particular aspect of climate change namely, the projected rise in temperature and under the conser- vative assumption that temperature increases affect the level rather than the growth path of output, model simulations suggest that, absent efforts to reduce global emissions, the output of a representative low-income country could be 9 percent lower than without an increase in temperature, with considerable downside risks.50 The significant uncertainty about the mag- nitude and effects of climate change not only how much temperatures will rise, but also how the environ- ment will react calls for careful consideration of these downside risks. 50Moreover, the negative welfare consequences of changing climate conditions will likely exceed output losses. Uncomfortably high temperatures could spur investment as households adapt, but the increase in economic activity may not improve welfare. How can low-income countries cope with the rise in temperatures they are set to experience over the coming decades? Although causal interpretation is difficult, the chapter finds that the sensitivity of per capita output to temperature shocks varies with several mediating factors, and these factors are fun- damental to teasing out the chapter s policy implica- tions. Sound domestic policies and institutions, and development in general, could play a role in partially reducing the adverse effects of weather shocks. Having policy buffers in place can help cushion some of the negative effects of weather shocks by helping sustain public investment at adequate levels. Policies and institutional settings that facilitate the reallocation of factors of production across economic sectors and geographic regions and that foster development such as better access to domestic and international finan- cial markets, high-quality infrastructure, and stronger institutions can increase resilience to weather shocks to some extent. These policies and institutional settings enable countries to recover faster from the negative consequences of temperature increases and reduce their exposure and vulnerability in the future. Investment in adaptation strategies and projects such as, for exam- ple, well-targeted social safety nets that can promptly deliver support where needed, climate-smart infrastruc- ture, and appropriate technology could also reduce some of the damage from climate change, as illustrated by selected case studies. But low-income countries have huge spending needs and scarce resources to undertake the investments necessary to cope with climate change. According to United Nations estimates, attaining the Sustainable Development Goals would require low-income coun- tries to increase public spending by up to 30 percent of GDP an amount that likely exceeds the fiscal space available in most countries (Baum and others 2017; Schmidt-Traub 2015). Low-income countries also often lack the institutional setting, administrative capacity, or political stability to implement appropri- ate macroeconomic policies or adaptation strategies (Figure 3.18). Moreover, domestic policies alone cannot fully insulate low-income countries from the consequences of climate change as higher temperatures push the biophysical limits of these countries  ecosys- tems, potentially triggering more frequent epidemics, famines, and other natural disasters, at the same time fueling migration pressure and conflict risk. The international spillovers from these impacts of climate change in vulnerable countries could be very sizable.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 141 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Given that low-income countries  potential to address the climate change challenge by themselves is limited, the international community must play a key role in providing and coordinating financial and nonfinancial support to these countries (see Box 3.6). Advanced and emerging market economies have con- tributed the lion s share to actual and projected climate change. Hence, helping low-income developing coun- tries cope with the consequences of climate change is both a humanitarian imperative and sound global economic policy that helps offset countries  failure to fully internalize the costs of greenhouse gas emissions. While the analysis in this chapter focused on the impact of global warming in low-income countries, it is important to note that all countries will increasingly feel direct negative effects from unmitigated climate change, through more frequent (and more damaging) natural disasters (see Box 3.1), rising sea levels, loss of biodiversity, and many other difficult-to-quantify consequences. Warming will also begin to weigh on growth in many advanced economies as their tempera- tures rise above optimal levels (see Annex Figure 3.6.1). And even in countries where the effect might be moderate or positive on average, climate change will create winners and losers at both the individual and sectoral levels. Moreover, the international spillovers from the most vulnerable countries, through depressed economic activity and potentially higher conflict and migration flows, could be considerable. Going forward, only a global effort to contain carbon emissions to lev- els consistent with an acceptable increase in tempera- ture can limit the long-term risks of climate change (Farid and others 2016; Hallegatte and others 2016; IMF 2015; Stern 2015; IPCC 2014). Figure 3.18. Vulnerability to Temperature Increase and Adaptation Prospects  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1. Adaptation Capacity Index (x-axis) Low-income developing countries Emerging market economies Advanced economies Low-income developing countries, where the effect of temperature increase is estimated to have the most pernicious effect, tend to have much lower climate change adaptation capacity and readiness.  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 2. Adaptation Readiness Index (x-axis) Effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output Effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output Sources: Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The  gure depicts the estimated effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output at horizon 0 against countries  score for adaptation readiness and adaptation capacity. A higher score indicates better adaptation capacity and more readiness.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 142 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Tropical cyclones, commonly known as hurricanes in the Atlantic and as typhoons in the northwest Pacific, are one of the most destructive forces of nature.1 They caused damage of $548 billion (constant 2010 dollars) worldwide during 2000 14 (Interna- tional Disasters Database [EM-DAT]; Guha-Sapir, Below, and Hoyois 2015), almost three-quarters of which occurred in advanced economies.2 This box estimates the effect of tropical cyclones on economic activity and discusses the possible consequences of climate change through its effects on tropical cyclones under an unconstrained greenhouse gas emissions scenario (Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5). Measuring Tropical Cyclones and Empirical Estimation Several studies have examined the macroeconomic impact of tropical cyclones, typically finding signif- icant economic damage.3 The analysis in this box The author of this box is Sebastian Acevedo. 1A tropical cyclone is a rotating, organized system of clouds and thunderstorms that originates over tropical or subtropical waters and has a closed low-level circulation (NOAA 2017b). Hurricane-strength winds (greater than 64 knots) can extend beyond 200 miles for the largest storms. 2Storms cause more absolute damage in advanced economies because their capital stocks tend to be more valuable; however, as a percentage of GDP, damage is generally higher in small states and low-income developing countries. The EM-DAT reports damage for about half of the disasters caused by storms. Acevedo (2016) finds that, in the Caribbean, economic damage caused by tropical cyclones could be 1.6 to 3.6 times higher than reported. 3Raddatz (2009); Fomby, Ikeda, and Loayza (2013); and Acev- edo (2014) use data from the EM-DAT to estimate the effects of different types of natural disasters (including storms) on growth, while a parallel body of literature (Strobl 2012; Bertinelli and Strobl 2013; Hsiang and Jina 2014) uses wind-field models to estimate the effects of storm winds on growth. Bakkensen and Barrage (2016) use maximum wind speed at landfall, which is closer to the approach used here. combines detailed data on maximum sustained wind speed and settlements  population to construct a com- prehensive database of tropical storms that took place near centers of economic activity.4 Between 1950 and 2016, 4,597 storms passed within 100 miles of a city, affecting 3,113 cities in 132 countries or territories. Tropical cyclones affect countries of different sizes, from small islands in the Caribbean and the Pacific to large countries such as China, Mexico, and the United States. When a storm strikes a small country, it generally affects a large portion of its territory and population, while the impact in larger countries can be contained to relatively smaller areas. To account for this difference, the wind variable the maximum sustained wind in knots within 100 miles of a country (Windi,t) is weighted by the share of the popula- tion exposed to all tropical cyclones in a year (Pi,t). Storms also differ in the speed at which they move, with slow-moving storms being potentially more destructive. Thus, the wind variable is also weighted by the share of a country s time endowment exposed to all storms within a year (TEi,t), in which the time endowment is given as the product of the number of hours in a year and the number of cities in a coun- try. Table 3.1.1 summarizes the key elements of the cyclone variables. To estimate the effect of tropical cyclones on per capita output, the analysis extends the local projection empirical approach used in the chapter to include the 4The International Best Track Archive for Climate Steward- ship contains data on 7,140 tropical cyclones, with information on maximum sustained wind speed between 1950 and 2016 (Knapp, Applequist, and others 2010; Knapp, Kruk, and others 2010). These data are combined with the CIESIN (2016) settle- ments  population in 2000, which contains data for 67,682 cities that range in population from one person to 18.5 million people. Table 3.1.1. Characteristics of the Average Tropical Cyclone by Country Group MSW within 100 Miles (knots) Exposed Population Exposed Time Endowment Distance (miles) World 51.30 0.34 0.0005 77.05 Advanced Economies 58.56 0.28 0.0004 77.78 Emerging Market Economies 49.84 0.28 0.0004 76.27 Low-Income Developing Countries 42.45 0.20 0.0003 79.66 Small States 47.02 0.58 0.0009 71.26 Islands 54.43 0.49 0.0007 75.69 Sources: CIESIN GRUMPv1 Settlement Points r01; Ibtracs v03r09; and IMF staff calculations. Note: Maximum sustained winds (MSW) one minute average in knots per hour. Exposed population as a share of total population. Exposed time endowment as a share of the total hours available in each country (24 hours   365 days   cities). Distance is the average distance from each city (within 100 miles of the storm) to the storm position where the wind was at its maximum. Box 3.1. The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 143 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 wind variable weighted by the share of population and time exposed. The specification estimated is as follows: yi,t + h   yi,t   1 =   1  h  ( Wind  i,t   P  i,t   TE  i,t )  +   2  h  ( Wind  i,t   1   P  i,t   1   TE  i,t   1 )  +   j = 1  h   1     3  h    ( Wind  i,t + h   j   P  i,t + h   j   TE  i,t + h   j )  +   1  h   ci,t +   2  h  ci,t   1 +   j = 1  h   1     3  h   ci,t + h   j +   1  h  yi,t   1+   i  h  +   r,t  h   +   i,t  h  , (3.1.1) in which h indexes the estimation horizon,   i  h  are country fixed effects,   r,t  h   are region-year fixed effects, yi,t is the log of GDP per capita, and ci,t refers to average annual temperature and precipitation and their squared terms. The results presented in Table 3.1.2 indicate that if the wind speed increased by one knot throughout the entire country (that is, the entire population is exposed), and for an entire year, real GDP per capita would decline by 26.7 percent the year the storm strikes. This, of course, is not a very useful indicator of the effect of a typical storm on a country; a better measure is the marginal effect of increasing wind speed as captured by    P  i,t   TE  i,t . Findings Tropical cyclones have a significant negative effect on output, with the biggest impact felt in small states and islands that are generally more exposed to this type of storm (Figure 3.1.1).5 By income group, advanced econ- omies are the hardest hit by tropical cyclones because they tend to be exposed to higher wind speeds. The estimates are not only statistically, but also economically, significant. Seven years after an average storm strikes, per capita output is almost 1 percent lower than if the storm had not happened, with 2.5 times larger losses experienced by small states (Figure 3.1.2).6 The effects of storms are very per- sistent: even after 20 years, the economy has not fully recovered from the shock.7 Notably, the effect of tropical cyclones on economic activity is separate and in addition to the effects of temperature (Table 3.1.2). Introducing the wind variable does not materially change the coefficients on temperature and precipita- tion for the same sample of countries. Climate Change and Tropical Cyclones Climate scientists predict that, with climate change, there will be fewer tropical cyclones that form, but the 5For a discussion of small states  vulnerability to natural disas- ters and climate change, see IMF (2016b). 6A storm strike includes any tropical cyclone that passed within 100 miles of a city in a country. 7Hsiang and Jina (2014) find a similar response; in their case, the decline in GDP is much larger, but the partial recovery starts after 15 years. Table 3.1.2. Effect of Weather and Wind Shocks on Economic Activity Real GDP per Capita Growth (1) (2) (3) Temperature 1.347*** 0.931*** 0.920*** (0.357) (0.222) (0.223) Temperature2  0.051***  0.038***  0.037*** (0.011) (0.010) (0.010) Precipitation 0.110 0.051 0.047 (0.104) (0.104) (0.106) Precipitation2  0.003  0.002  0.001 (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) Wind   Population   Time Endowment  26.750** (12.912) Adjusted R 2 0.14 0.18 0.18 Number of Countries 189 96 96 Number of Observations 8,815 4,696 4,696 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: All regressions control for country and region-year fixed effects; lags and forwards of temperature, precipitation, and their squared terms; and lag of growth. Column (3) also controls for the contemporaneous wind variable, as well as its lags and forwards. Column (1) replicates the chapter s baseline specification (column (5) in Annex Table 3.3.1). Columns (2) and (3) include only countries exposed to tropical cyclones. Standard errors clustered at the country level. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. Box 3.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 144 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 ones that do will be more intense and destructive (Knutson and others 2010). In the unmitigated climate change scenario (Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5), sea surface temperature in 2090 2100 is expected to increase by 2.6 C relative to 1995 2005, which suggests that the maximum wind speed of trop- ical cyclones could increase by 9 percent.8 The analysis in this box suggests that the average country would suffer an additional 0.1 percent of per capita output loss every time it is hit by an average tropical cyclone, with smaller states experiencing 0.2 percent greater damage (Figure 3.1.2). 8Sea surface temperature is a key ingredient in the formation and development of tropical cyclones (Landsea 2004). A 1 C increase in sea surface temperature raises maximum wind speed by 3.5 percent (Knutson and Tuleya 2004).  0.10  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  0.10  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  0.10  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  0.10  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  0.10  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 3.1.1. Effect of Tropical Cyclone Exposure on Real GDP per Capita (Percent; years on x-axis) 1. World 2. Advanced Economies 3. Emerging Market Economies 4. Low-Income Developing Countries 5. Small States  0.10  0.08  0.06  0.04  0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 6. Islands Estimate 90 percent con dence interval Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Cumulative impact of a one-knot increase in tropical cyclone winds on real GDP per capita. Horizon 0 is the year of the shock. Figure 3.1.2. Cumulative Effect of Average Tropical Cyclone on Real GDP per Capita after Seven Years (Percent) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Cumulative effect after seven years on real GDP per capita of the average tropical cyclone that each country group is exposed to in terms of maximum wind speed, exposed population, and exposed time endowment. RCP = Representative Concentration Pathways.  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 World Advanced economies Emerging markets Low-income developing countries Small states Islands Average 1950 2016 RCP 8.5 Box 3.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 145 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 To illustrate how policies can help moderate the consequences of weather shocks in low-income coun- tries, this box uses the Debt, Investment, and Growth (DIG) model developed by Buffie and others (2012) and simulates the macroeconomic effects of tempera- ture increases under various assumptions for key policy variables.1 As demonstrated empirically in the chapter, in hot countries, an increase in temperature reduces productivity. Moreover, a temperature increase could precipitate the loss of productive land. Consequently, the analysis calibrates the weather damage to total fac- tor productivity and private capital to broadly match the estimated response of GDP to a 1 C increase in temperature in a representative low-income country with a baseline temperature of 25 C and examines how this damage can be shaped by macroeconomic and structural policies (Figure 3.2.1).2 Policy Space and the Role of Institutions Weather shocks can weigh significantly on the public purse of low-income countries. Government revenues can be adversely affected by the reduction in agricultural and industry output at the same time that spending may need to be ramped up to deliver support to affected households if weather shocks compromise food security, to rebuild transport or communication infrastructure if they are damaged by natural disasters, and potentially to retrain the workforce. Because fiscal space is often tight in many low-income countries, expanding transfers from advanced economies for instance, through the transfers agreed to under the Paris Agreement could strengthen countries  ability to reduce the impact of weather shocks. Model simula- tions suggest that receiving additional transfers used to build up public investment for three years, starting a The authors of this box are Manoj Atolia, Claudio Baccianti, Ricardo Marto, and Mico Mrkaic. 1The DIG model is a real, neoclassical, dynamic open econ- omy framework with two production sectors that use public and private capital as input and many features that are pertinent to low-income countries, such as low public investment efficiency, limited fiscal space, and capital adjustment costs. The model is also used to simulate the long-term effects of climate change in the section of the chapter titled  Long-Term Effects of Tempera- ture Increase A Model-Based Approach.  2For simplicity, the traded and nontraded sectors are assumed to react equally to weather shocks. The findings are robust to this modeling choice. Most other parameters are calibrated as in Buf- fie and others (2012), except the real interest rate on public debt, which is lower than in the original paper because of the decline in global interest rates. See Annex 3.5 for further details.  3  2  1 0 1  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  3  2  1 0 1  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 3.2.1. Role of Policies: A Model- Based Analysis (Real GDP, deviation from steady state; years on x-axis) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The baseline assumes no additional grants in panels 2 and 3, low adjustment cost in panel 4, no hysteresis in panel 5, and no adaptation in panel 6. In panel 2, additional grants amount to 0.5 percent of GDP in low grants scenario, and 1 percent of GDP in high grants scenario. In panel 3, all simulations, except the baseline, assume high additional grants. 1. Baseline 2. Role of Fiscal Space  3  2  1 0 1  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  3  2  1 0 1  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3. Role of Public Sector Ef ciency 4. Role of Capital Adjustment Costs  3  2  1 0 1  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7  3  2  1 0 1  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 5. Role of Hysteresis 6. Role of Fiscal Incentives for Adaptation Baseline Low grants High grants Baseline High cost Medium cost Perfect ef ciency Typical ef ciency Low ef ciency Medium hysteresis High hysteresis Baseline With adaptation Baseline Baseline Box 3.2. The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 146 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 year after the weather shock, could limit the dam- age of weather shocks to output (Figure 3.2.1, panel 2). Additional transfers of 1 percent of the recipient country s GDP reduce the depth of the recession by about 0.5 percent throughout the simulation period. Encouragingly, because the transfers increase the stock of public infrastructure, thereby boosting productive capacity in both sectors, they increase output not only in the short term, but also in the long term. Additional transfers benefit the recipient country, but the size of the benefit depends crucially on the efficiency of investment in public sector infrastruc- ture, in particular, and on the quality of public sector governance in general. Efficiency of public invest- ment is low in many low-income countries, with estimates of the share of expenditures on public infra- structure that truly increase the stock of public cap- ital ranging from 20 percent to 60 percent (Hulten 1996; Pritchett 2000; Foster and Briceno-Garmendia 2010). The results of the simulations show that, in countries with high public investment efficiency, the receipt of additional transfers can effectively dampen the adverse consequences of a weather shock (Figure 3.2.1, panel 3). In countries with low public investment efficiency, however, there is little differ- ence between receiving and not receiving additional transfers. In sum, the simulation shows convincingly that low-income countries must continue to improve the efficiency of public investment and strengthen their institutional frameworks to reap the full benefit of having buffers to counteract the effects of chang- ing weather conditions. Policies that Ease Factor Reallocation and Structural Transformation Weather shocks disrupt production, especially in certain sectors of the economy, and adjusting to these shocks would require reallocating workers and capital across and within sectors. The speed and cost at which these factors of production can be reallo- cated will influence how fast the economy can recover after adverse shocks to total factor productivity or the stock of capital. In low-income countries, reallocation of capital (and factors of production in general) can be ham- pered by rigid economic environments and subopti- mal policies, for example, limited access to financial markets, bureaucratic impediments (such as difficulties in obtaining building permits), and legal uncertain- ties.3 Simulations indicate that higher costs of capital reallocation slow the recovery from weather shocks (Figure 3.2.1, panel 4).4 The speed at which affected workers can be reallo- cated to alternative productive activities also matters. Unemployment can cause hysteresis or permanent  scarring  of productivity, given that workers lose skills during long unemployment or underemploy- ment episodes. This in turn could have long-lasting consequences for economic performance. In the DIG model, this channel is captured in the sensitivity of productivity to lagged negative output gaps.5 The results from simulations that vary this sensitivity suggest that hysteresis could significantly prolong and deepen the effects of weather shocks. Hence, policies should aim to preserve human capital, including by instituting programs that provide incentives to the unemployed to participate in human-capital-preserving activities, such as public works projects, as in the Ethiopian Productive Safety Net Program, dis- cussed in Box 3.3. Investment in Adaptation Strategies In addition to the general macroeconomic and struc- tural policies discussed above, governments, households, and firms engage in direct investments in adaptation strategies in response to changing weather conditions (for example, by planting more-heat-resistant crops or investing in green infrastructure). Many adaptation measures, however, have the nature of public goods. Setting up an early-warning system for extreme heat, instituting information campaigns about water con- servation, or increasing vegetation in public areas and other green infrastructure investments all have nonrival 3In the DIG model, the ease of factor reallocation is captured in the cost of private capital adjustment parameter. The cost of capital adjustment is inversely proportional to elasticity of invest- ment with respect to Tobin s q, in which higher elasticity implies lower capital adjustment costs. 4The quantitative impact appears small, but the simulation should be seen as a qualitative guide only. The size of the GDP decline depends on the cost of capital adjustment as well as on the shape and timing of the shock. If the climate shock results mostly in the destruction of private capital and, to a lesser extent in lowering total factor productivity, then the recovery is slower and damage to GDP larger because of slower rebuild- ing of capital. 5The size of the effect is calibrated by using the estimated elasticity of current wages to lagged hours worked by Altu  and Miller (1998). Their estimated elasticity of 0.2 stands for the high degree of hysteresis in the model specification. Box 3.2 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 147 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 and nonexcludable payoffs. Because households and firms are unable to internalize the full social benefits, government involvement may be needed to provide incentives to private agents to undertake adaptation efforts toward socially optimal levels. In an extension of the DIG model, the government introduces fiscal incentives for the adoption of resilience-improving technologies and finances the provision of public goods related to weather risks, which lowers the sensitivity of output to temperature increases. Assuming that private adaptation expenditure falls 20 percent short of the social optimum, and that government policy aims at restoring optimality, simulations suggest that over 20 years, each $1 spent on adaptation by the government reduces total weather damage by $2. The mechanism behind this finding is private investment s response to the reduced weather-related productivity losses, which boosts GDP in the medium and long term. The simu- lation illustrates a general principle that improving resil- ience through public adaptation spending can reduce weather-driven downturns and accelerate recoveries (Figure 3.2.1, panel 6). Box 3.2 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 148 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Adverse effects of weather shocks and climate change have motivated local communities and countries to adapt and counter these unfavorable consequences. As demonstrated in Figure 3.12, a wide range of strategies could dampen the negative impacts of weather shocks and natural disasters by reducing exposure and vulner- ability or by transferring and sharing weather-related risks. The purpose of this box is to showcase some examples of successful coping strategies. Social Safety Nets Approximately 85 percent of the Ethiopian pop- ulation is employed in agriculture, mostly on small family-owned farms. Climate change and associated droughts, delayed rains, and flooding weigh on agri- cultural productivity and food security. Furthermore, in some areas, the land has become degraded due to overuse. Consequently, approximately 10 percent of the rural population is chronically food insecure. To assist the at-risk population, the Ethiopian government and international partners instituted the Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) in 2006. The PSNP provides cash or food to households unable to feed themselves all year, particularly in the lean season (June August). The aid is contingent on active partici- pation in local productivity-enhancing or environmental programs for example, land rehabilitation, improve- ment of water sources, and construction of infrastruc- ture such as roads and hospitals. A complementary program, the Household Asset Building Program, which targets the same households as the PSNP, helps house- holds diversify their income sources and increase pro- ductive assets, including by offering technical assistance, with the goal of achieving lasting food security. With more than 7.6 million participants (or almost 8 percent of the Ethiopian population) and 47,000 small community projects every year, the PSNP is the largest climate change adaptation program in Africa. The community projects, which are mostly devoted to environmental restoration, are offering measurably positive results. The PSNP has reduced soil loss by more than 40 percent and improved the quality and quantity of available water. Studies suggest that land productiv- ity has consequently increased by up to 400 percent. In addition, the PSNP has reduced the damage from seasonal flooding. The program has also improved the The authors of this box are Claudio Baccianti and Mico Mrkaic. food security of vulnerable households beneficiaries of the PNSP experienced a 25 percent smaller drop in consumption relative to those that were not covered by the program in the aftermath of droughts (Porter and White 2016). The PSNP has also reduced the number of people in need of humanitarian interven- tion and the cost of such intervention. Finally, the PSNP has increased savings of vulnerable households and has facilitated improved access to educational and health services. Technology Adoption High temperatures significantly lower labor produc- tivity and could lead to adverse health outcomes such as increased incidence of hyperthermia and worsening chronic cardiovascular or respiratory diseases and mortality, as demonstrated in a large body of work and the analysis in this chapter. Governments and individ- uals have various options for reducing these adverse economic and health impacts, such as green infrastruc- ture (to increase the presence of vegetation in cities) and specific construction technologies (for example, roofs that are highly solar reflective). Among all options, modern air-conditioning, invented at the turn of the 20th century, is the most common solution adopted by households and firms to deal with excessive heat. The benefits of climate control, both in the work- place and for health outcomes, are well documented. In a 1957 survey, 90 percent of American firms named cooled air as the single biggest boost to their produc- tivity (Cooper 2002), and Singapore s founding father, Lee Kuan Yew, credited air-conditioning as the most important factor in his country s development success. The dramatic decline in heat-related mortality over the 20th century in the United States has also been attributed to the adoption of residential air condition- ing (Barreca and others 2016). Nevertheless, the negative effects of air-conditioning cannot be ignored. Increased adoption of indoor cli- mate control increases energy consumption and green- house gas emissions. Exhaust from air-conditioning machines and facilities can give rise to local pockets of hot air, which can present significant negative exter- nalities for nearby populations. High up-front costs and infrastructure requirements make this technology out of reach for poor and vulnerable populations, especially in low-income developing countries.1 1As of 2012, slightly more than one-third of households had access to electricity in the median low-income developing country. Box 3.3. Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 149 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Intelligent planning and implementation of air-conditioning could reduce some of the negative spillovers of this otherwise effective strategy for adapt- ing to rising temperatures. A case in point is district cooling a centralized air-conditioning system  which has been adopted in major cities in advanced economies and is currently under construction in the Gujarat International Finance Tec-City, a new business district in Gujarat, India. With district cooling, chilled water is produced at a central source and is distributed to final consumers through underground pipes. A centralized cooling system has clear environ- mental and economic advantages over decentralized air-conditioning. The centralized production of chilled water consumes 35 to 50 percent less energy than individual air cooling units, reducing cost and pollution. Higher energy efficiency, in turn, eases the pressure the diffusion of air-conditioning puts on the local electricity sector, which often lags the rapidly growing demand for energy in emerging market and developing economies. Finally, district cooling elimi- nates the up-front cost for final users, making indoor climate control more accessible. As in the provision of other types of infrastructure, such as energy and water distribution, public sector involvement could speed up the development and expansion of district cooling systems, which could be held back by low energy prices, insufficient demand density, economic uncertainty, and other risks related to the substantial up-front investment. The gov- ernment of Gujarat has taken direct control of the construction of the cooling distribution network, as have the governments of the Republic of Korea, Qatar, and Singapore. Climate-Smart Public Infrastructure Investment Flash floods in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, have caused considerable property damage, impassable traffic congestion, contamination of the water supply, and loss of human life. To alleviate these problems, the authorities embarked on an ambitious dual-purpose infrastructure project that would help with both traffic and flood water management. The Stormwater Management and Road Tunnel (SMART Tunnel) is a dual-purpose structure designed to combat flash floods. A three-level tunnel combines a two-level road tunnel and a storm drainage system underneath. Under normal conditions, the drainage level is closed and the tunnel is used as an ordinary road traffic tunnel. However, the tunnel is designed so that one or both traffic-carrying levels can be tempo- rarily repurposed by being allowed to flood for use as storm drains. During moderate storms, the system reallocates the lower traffic level to carry storm water, while the top level can still be used by motorists. If the rainfall is expected to be extreme, both traffic-carrying levels can be closed to traffic, evacuated, and used as drains. Cost-benefit analysis has demonstrated the effec- tiveness of the tunnel system. At a cost of about $500 million, it is expected to prevent more than $1.5 billion in flood damage and reduce the costs of traffic congestion by more than $1 billion over the next 30 years. Early-Warning Systems and Evacuation Programs Situated in the Ganges delta, Bangladesh is one of the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Annual floods typically inundate about one-fifth of the country, leading to loss of life and property damage.2 Over the past 70 years, storms have caused thou- sands of deaths and millions of tons of crop damage, and, because of climate change, the problems are expected to worsen. After the extraordinary damage caused by Cyclone Sidr, the authorities and international partners embarked on the Emergency Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project (ECRRP).3 The goals of the ECRRP are to improve agricultural infrastructure and long-term disaster preparedness, including by building and reconstructing cyclone shelters and reinforcing embankments. The program has meaningfully reduced the risk of cyclone exposure of the vulnerable popu- lation by rebuilding about 240 cyclone shelters and repairing more than 100 kilometers of embankments. The ECRRP has also helped increase agricultural resilience to climate shocks and helped improve the livelihoods of the affected populations. In addition to providing farmers with agricultural equipment, saline-tolerant rice seeds, and training in crop diver- sification for better farm management, investments in grain silos and livestock protection have reduced the exposure of the agricultural production chain to weather-related shocks. 2In extreme years, floods can affect up to three-quarters of the land area in Bangladesh. 3The cyclone destroyed 1.5 million houses and damaged 1.3 million tons of crops. Box 3.3 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 150 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Multilateral Risk-Sharing Mechanisms Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility Caribbean countries are regularly affected by tropi- cal storms, extreme rainfall, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions. Because these shocks are, at least in part, uncorrelated, risk sharing in the form of a regional insurance pool can offer welfare improvements relative to self-insurance or purchase of reinsurance by indi- vidual countries. The Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) is the world s first regional risk-pooling financial institution, offering insur- ance for the most prevalent natural disasters in the region. It was formed in 2007 and currently includes 17 members.4 The CCRIF insures against tropical cyclones, excessive rainfall, and earthquakes. All 17 participating countries can purchase up to $100 million of coverage for each category of risk. The program is designed to finance emergency response, over the weeks and months after the disaster, rather than provide compre- hensive insurance against asset losses or infrastructure damages. The insurance is parametric payouts are based on parameterized models for each category of insured events: tropical cyclones, excessive rainfall, and earthquakes. For example, the payout after an earthquake is proportional to its intensity, location, and estimated losses. Predetermined payouts, based on publicly observable data, obviate the need for time-consuming and costly damage assessments and insurance adjustments. A downside of parametric insurance in response to the effects of basis risk; that is, calculated payouts might not match the actual damage.5 During 2007 15, the CCRIF made 13 payouts to eight members in the total amount of $38 million, most of which was in response to the effects of tropical 4Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, and the Turks and Caicos Islands joined at the inception; Nicaragua joined in 2015. The CCRIF is contemplating expanding beyond the Caribbean. 5Indemnity insurance avoids this problem, but suffers from costly assessments and adjustments. cyclones. The payouts ranged from 0.1 to 0.3 percent of GDP for the recipient country. While the payouts do not cover all losses, they offer important support to insured countries, including from the rapid disburse- ment of funds payouts have been disbursed, at the latest, two weeks after the insured event. In addition, CCRIF members are given complete freedom regard- ing the use of the funds received. The CCRIF has proved to be an effective risk-  pooling mechanism. Its effectiveness is recognized by both the insured countries, which can obtain coverage at a lower cost than they could individually from commercial insurers, and from the participants in the reinsurance market. African Risk Capacity The African Risk Capacity (ARC) is a mutual insurance facility whose aim is to strengthen food security. The ARC, a Specialized Agency of the African Union, was established in 2012 to help African Union members insure against crop failure caused by extreme weather events, such as droughts and floods, by pooling climate-related risks. Initially, 18 African Union mem- bers signed the establishment agreement; since then, membership has grown to more than 35 countries. The ARC provides parametric insurance. When an insured event occurs, the payout is based on models and satellite input data to predict the extent of crop failures and the associated costs. Using parametric instead of indemnity insurance accelerates the payouts, which is of particular importance to the most vulner- able populations. By pooling their risks, participating countries reduce the cost of insurance by about half, given that drought is very unlikely to affect the whole country pool. Evidence points to the benefits of the ARC, but challenges remain. The ARC has reduced the volatility of food consumption for the most vulnerable house- holds. Furthermore, it has helped reduce the need for fire sales of assets in distressed regions. However, the risk pool is still relatively small (for example, in comparison with the CCRIF) and could be expanded further to better diversify the risks. In addition, misallocation of insurance may decrease with accumu- lated experience. Box 3.3 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 151 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Financial markets can reduce the adverse conse- quences of weather shocks by reallocating the costs and risks of such shocks to those most willing and able to bear them. Insurance products, such as weather derivatives, can help households and firms vulnerable to short-term fluctuations in temperature and pre- cipitation hedge their idiosyncratic weather exposure. Catastrophe (Cat) bonds can help disperse catastrophic weather risk to capital markets. However, the degree to which financial markets can mitigate the impacts of weather shocks hinges on the level of insurance penetration and on the capacity to correctly price weather-related risks. This box reviews recent develop- ments in the market for weather-related financial prod- ucts and provides new evidence on the extent to which stock markets efficiently price weather-related risks. Insurance Recent studies highlight the important role that insurance markets could play in facilitating economic recovery in the aftermath of weather-related natural disasters. A higher degree of insurance penetration can limit the fiscal burden of natural disasters (Lloyd s 2012) and reduce their negative macroeconomic consequences (Von Peter, Dahlen, and Saxena 2012), especially in countries with strong institutions (Breck- ner and others 2016). Parametric insurance products, developed in the early 2000s, also hold promise for providing protection from various weather-related risks to households and firms in low-income countries.1 Overcoming important barriers to the provision of traditional insurance to small farmers, these prod- ucts minimize transaction costs, are easy to enforce, and limit potential adverse selection and moral hazard issues. Yet, insurance penetration, as captured in non-life insurance premiums as a percentage of GDP, remains low, especially in developing economies (Figure 3.4.1). And despite its advantages, the take-up of parametric insurance has been disappointing (Hallegatte and The author of the box is Alan Xiaochen Feng. 1Unlike traditional indemnity insurance for natural hazards, parametric insurance products offer payments that are based on a publicly observable index, such as rainfall or temperature. While their design offers numerous advantages over traditional prod- ucts, parametric insurance can leave a fair amount of residual risk uncovered ( basis risk ), given that the actual loss may differ from the payment received by contract holders. others 2016). Many factors have likely contributed to the slow adoption of the novel financial instruments, including limited financial literacy or experience with similar financial products, insufficient understanding of the product, high cost, and residual basis risk (see, among others, Cole and others 2012, 2013; Karlan and others 2014). Catastrophe Bonds The market for Cat bonds, a financial instrument that transfers catastrophe risk from the issuing primary insurers and reinsurance companies to the capital markets, has grown rapidly in recent years, reaching an outstanding volume of nearly $30 billion at the end of 2016 (Figure 3.4.2).2 Cat bonds are attractive to investors because they have relatively higher yields and low correlation with the returns of most other finan- cial assets. The low-interest-rate environment since 2Cat bonds pay interest, principal, or both during normal times, but absorb losses if a predefined catastrophe occurs. They were first introduced in the mid-1990s, in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 1980 85 90 95 2000 05 10 14 North America Japan Western Europe Africa Latin America and the Caribbean Eastern Europe South and East Asia Figure 3.4.1. Insurance Penetration: Non-Life Insurance Premium (Percent of GDP) Sources: Haver Analytics; Swiss Re, Sigma database; and IMF staff calculations. Box 3.4. Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 152 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 the global financial crisis, as well as new regulations that recognize the relief of capital through Cat bond issuance, have potentially contributed to the growth of the Cat bond market. Cat bonds have become an increasingly popular tool for private insurance and reinsurance companies in Europe, Japan, and the United States to transfer away their risk exposures to earthquakes, storms, and hurricanes. As discussed in the chapter, low-income developing countries and small states are especially vulnerable to catastrophic risks. Mexico, in 2006, was the first coun- try to issue Cat bonds; since then, several low-income developing countries have issued Cat bonds covering hurricanes, earthquakes, and other extreme events. The World Bank issued its first-ever Cat bond in 2014 to provide reinsurance to the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, a risk-pooling facility designed to limit the financial impact on 16 Caribbean country governments after possible earthquakes and hurri- canes (see also Box 3.3). A similar arrangement the Extreme Climate Facility is being developed by the African Risk Capacity (see Box 3.3) to allow for the issuance of Cat bonds to alleviate the impact of extreme weather conditions on member Afri- can countries. Do Financial Markets Correctly Price Weather-Related Risks? The optimal level of insurance against abnormal weather conditions requires accurate assessments of weather-related risk. There is growing evidence that investors in financial markets do not fully understand, at least immediately, the impact of weather shocks on output and productivity. Hong, Li, and Xu (2016) show that the stock indices of the food industry in the United States and in a few other advanced economies respond to changes in drought indices only with a delay. This finding suggests that markets do not incorporate weather information into prices until several months later, perhaps after the losses incurred are reflected in food companies  annual reports. The 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 1997 2000 03 06 09 12 15 17 Source: Artemis Insurance-Linked Securities and Catastrophe Bond Market Report (www.artemis.bm). Note: Years ending June 30. Figure 3.4.2. Catastrophe Bond Market (Billions of US dollars) Issued Outstanding  2  1 0 1 2 3  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 One-year-ahead standardized return Temperature, annual deviation from country average Sources: Datastream; Peng and Feng (forthcoming); and IMF staff calculations. Note: One-year-ahead food and beverages sector returns are regressed on annual average temperature (deviation from the country average, degrees Celsius). Sample is restricted to countries with an average annual temperature above 15 C. Figure 3.4.3. Temperature Shocks and Stock Price Predictability: Food and Beverages Sector y =  0.41x + 0.18 R 2 = 0.08 Box 3.4 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 153 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 initial underreaction to weather shocks may indicate the possibility of underinsurance, even in the presence of easily accessible insurance products. The analysis in this box examines the response of investors to temperature variations. As demon- strated in the chapter, an increase in temperature in countries with relatively hot climates has a negative effect on output and productivity, especially in certain sectors of the economy. Using data on equity market returns across 17 sectors in 42 countries and annual fluctuation in temperature, the analysis studies whether financial markets correctly price in these adverse temperature effects. If markets are efficient, fluctuations in temperature should have no predictive power on equity returns because stock prices instantaneously reflect the impact of tempera- ture shocks on firm performance. Empirical analysis suggests that this is not the case. Higher temperature can predict negative future (12-month-ahead) stock returns for the food and beverages sector, suggesting that investors respond to temperature shocks with a delay (Figure 3.4.3).3 These effects are particularly strong for countries at lower latitudes (for example, those with average annual temperature greater than 15 C) and are insignificant for industrial, technology, utilities, and oil and gas sectors. The predictability of stock returns in the food and beverages sector suggests that the impact of temperature shocks on productivity is not well priced by investors until sev- eral months later (possibly only after earnings reports reflect these losses), consistent with the hypothesis of underreaction to these shocks. 3The one-year-ahead equity return for the food and beverages sector is regressed on current-year average temperature in the country, controlling for country-year fixed effects as well as the dividend yield of the sector. Equity returns are normalized by the standard deviation of yearly sector returns in each country. Results are robust to controlling for one-year-ahead average tem- perature in the country. Similar effects are found for retail and personal goods sectors (Peng and Feng forthcoming). Box 3.4 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 154 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 As argued in the chapter, climate change may have very long-lived effects on economic performance, although the exact magnitudes depend on many factors, including economic agents  adaptability and the ability of the economy to structurally adjust. Empirically, it is very difficult to disentangle whether weather shocks have permanent level or growth effects on output based on recent data (since 1950); if they reflect permanent growth rather than level effects, then the consequences may be many times larger than the initial effects, but this impact would manifest only over a very long time. This box reviews a relatively new and growing liter- ature that attempts to directly assess whether historical climate can have a large and permanent effect on economic performance. Enabled by the rising avail- ability and granularity of historical data, the literature examines the relationship between modern outcomes and historical climate, starting from the hypothesis that historical events (potentially in the very deep past) interact with the physical environment and can have permanent effects on economic development and performance.1 Leveraging the exogeneity of historical climate, Bluedorn, Valentinyi, and Vlassopoulos (2009) estimate the reduced-form relationship between a The author of this box is John C. Bluedorn. 1Nunn (2014) provides an excellent exposition of the idea, which is central to recent empirical research on historical development. country s temperature over different periods from 1730 to 2000 and its modern income per capita, uncovering some striking patterns. A simple bivariate regression confirms the strong negative correlation between income in 2000 and the average temperature during 1970 99 (Table 3.5.1, regression 1). However, after controlling for historical average temperature in the 18th and 19th centuries, a time-varying and non- monotonic effect of temperature on current country incomes is revealed, with 18th century temperature exhibiting a positive and large effect while 19th cen- tury temperature shows an even larger negative effect (Table 3.5.1, regression 2). Interestingly, once histor- ical climate is introduced, 20th century temperature no longer shows a strong, negative association with current income, suggesting that it may be serving as a proxy for the combined effects of historical climate, rather than capturing a direct impact of the current temperature level in the simple regression. What might account for the estimated nonmono- tonic relationship between temperature and income? Bluedorn, Valentinyi, and Vlassopoulos (2009) postulate that it could reflect interactions between temperature and historical events across centuries. For example, the large negative effect of 19th century temperature on current incomes could be linked to a slower diffusion of technologies from the United Kingdom and Europe, which were at the technological frontier then, and generally at the cooler end of the global temperature distribution. If the technologies these countries developed were more suitable for Table 3.5.1. Effect of Historical Climate on Current Real Output Sample Mean Temperature Mean Temperature 1970 99 R 2 1970 99 1830 59 1730 59 R 2 N (1) (2) Full Sample  0.061** 0.16 0.177  2.100* 1.864** 0.27 167 (0.011) (0.073) (0.315) (0.301) Visual Outliers Excluded  0.058** 0.15 0.179  2.591** 2.353** 0.24 162 (0.011) (0.180) (0.484) (0.446) Sub-Saharan Africa Excluded  0.026* 0.04 0.126**  1.660** 1.505** 0.16 128 (0.011) (0.047) (0.262) (0.257) Neo-Europes Excluded  0.057** 0.14 0.169*  2.652** 2.423** 0.25 163 (0.011) (0.068) (0.461) (0.453) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Dependent variable is log real GDP per capita in 2000, purchasing power parity adjusted. Robust standard errors appear underneath coefficient estimates in parentheses. Visual outliers are Australia, Bolivia, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and the United States. Neo-Europes = Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States. N = number of countries in the cross-sectional sample. See Bluedorn, Valentinyi, and Vlassopoulos (2009). * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01. Box 3.5. Historical Climate, Economic Development, and World Income Distribution  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 155 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 cooler climates, the negative correlation between 19th century temperature and current incomes could arise from historically slower technological adoption. Alter- native interpretations are possible, such as a negative relationship between historical temperature and the quality of institutions adopted in European colonies in the 19th century (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001). The positive effect of 18th century temperature on current incomes is more difficult to interpret. Fenske and Kala (2015) provide a compelling hypothesis for Africa, where the level of a region s participation in the 18th century slave trade may have been shaped by climate conditions. Given the adverse effects higher temperatures have on agricultural productiv- ity and mortality in hotter climates, as documented in the chapter, Fenske and Kala (2015) argue that a region s slave supply costs fell when temperatures were lower, leading to greater slave exports, which, in turn, is strongly associated with poorer incomes today (Nunn 2008). Climate may have also affected the timing of transitions along the economic development path. Ashraf and Michalopoulos (2015) argue that climatic volatility thousands of years ago affected the willing- ness of human societies to experiment with farming as a solution to unpredictable foraged food sources. They find a statistically significant and robust hump-shaped relationship between the standard deviation of historically experienced temperatures in a region and the timing of the adoption of agriculture areas with more volatile climate (assuming that the volatility was not so large as to precipitate social collapse) tended to make the transition to farming earlier, partly account- ing for differences in income today. Andersen, Dalgaard, and Selaya (2016) consider another characteristic of climate the historical intensity of ultraviolet radiation (UV-R) experienced in a location. They argue that higher UV-R intensity affects mortality and thereby the willingness to engage in human capital investment. This, in turn, affected the time at which a society experienced the fertility transition (the decline of fertility associated with a rise in incomes; see Galor 2011). A slower fertility transi- tion is associated with lower incomes at the country level today. In a mix of empirical and theoretical work, they find a positive relationship between UV-R and the transition timing, consistent with the link they hypothesize. As shown by these studies, historical climate can have very long-lived effects on economic development through its interaction with historical events. Box 3.5 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 156 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Although the primary focus of the chapter is the macroeconomic consequences of climate change and potential for adaptation in low-income countries, only a concerted global effort to cut greenhouse gas emissions and slow the pace of rising temperatures can limit the long-term threat of climate change. This box reviews recent developments in climate change mitiga- tion efforts and describes the crucial role fiscal policies could play in abating climate change and mobilizing financing for mitigation and adaptation, drawing on recent IMF work.1 The 2015 Paris Agreement In December 2015 parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change agreed to the aspirational goal of containing global warming to 2 C above preindustrial levels (and to strive to keep warming to 1.5 C), thus laying the foundation for meaningful progress on addressing climate change at the global level. Mitigation pledges were submitted by 195 countries in their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the 2015 Paris Agreement, with many pledges aiming to reduce emissions in 2030 by about 30 percent relative to emissions in some baseline year. Starting in 2018 parties are required to report progress on meeting mitigation pledges every two years, and to submit updated (and preferably more stringent) NDCs every five years. The pledges are not legally binding, how- ever, and there is some risk of backtracking, given that the United States is withdrawing from the agreement. The Paris Agreement strengthens previous com- mitments by developed economies to jointly mobi- lize $100 billion a year by 2020 for adaptation and mitigation in developing economies. By 2025 the parties to the agreement are expected to set a new collective quantifiable goal from a floor of $100 billion a year many developing countries  more ambitious mitigation commitments are contingent on receiving external finance. The Role of Fiscal Instruments in Climate Change Mitigation It is widely accepted that carbon pricing charging for the carbon emissions from fossil fuels should be The author of this box is Ian Parry. 1See, for example, Chapter 4 of the October 2008 World Economic Outlook; Parry, de Mooij, and Keen (2012); Parry, Morris, and Williams (2015); Farid and others (2016); and Parry and others (2016). front and center in implementing mitigation pledges in both advanced and emerging market economies. Charging for carbon emissions increases the price of energy from fossil fuels (especially carbon-intensive coal) and provides incentives for mitigation, including replacing coal with less-carbon-intensive natural gas as well as carbon-free renewables and nuclear energy. In addition, carbon pricing stimulates improve- ments in energy efficiency, reduces the demand for energy-consuming products, and promotes innovation (for example, in the areas of carbon capture and stor- age technologies). Carbon pricing can be implemented through carbon taxes or emissions trading systems. Carbon taxes are imposed on fossil fuels in proportion to the fuel s carbon content. Implementing carbon taxes is a straightforward extension of already-established taxes on fossil fuels and can be easily administered in most countries. Emissions trading systems put an upper limit on emissions by issuing emissions allowances. Firms are required to obtain allowances to cover their emissions, and the trading of allowances among emitters establishes the price of emissions. Emissions trading systems are typically implemented downstream on power generators and large industrial firms and need to be accompanied by other measures to cover smaller sources of emissions, for example, from vehi- cles and buildings. China China, the largest emitter of carbon dioxide (CO2), accounted for 29 percent of global emissions in 2013. According to IMF estimates, phasing in an emissions tax of $70 a ton of CO2 in China by 2030 would raise the prices of coal, electricity, and road fuels by about 70 percent, 15 percent, and 7 percent, respectively, and reduce 2030 emissions by about 30 percent, relative to the no-tax scenario (Figure 3.6.1, panel 1). An alternative with almost equal effectiveness would simply involve the addition of a carbon charge to existing taxes on domestic and imported coal. An emissions trading system would be about 40 percent less effective than a carbon tax. Given that China is moving ahead with an emissions trading system in any case, combining it with an up-front coal charge (perhaps with rebates for entities covered by the emissions trading system) would ensure more comprehensive pricing. Despite being less effective than carbon taxes, an emissions trading Box 3.6. Mitigating Climate Change  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 157 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 system is nonetheless much more effective than a variety of other mitigation policies, such as incentives for energy efficiency or renewables and taxes on road fuels and electricity. Coal and carbon taxes, if phased in between 2017 and 2030, would also substantially reduce air pollution in China and save almost 4 million lives. The emis- sions trading system is about half as effective in this regard, with about 2 million lives saved (Figure 3.6.1, panel 2). The carbon tax would also raise substantial revenues of about 3 percent of GDP in 2030. In other countries, typically less coal intensive than China, reduced CO2 emissions, lower domestic air pollution, and increased fiscal revenues would be less striking (in proportionate terms). However, the key policy lessons would remain unchanged: carbon taxes are the most effective mitigation instrument. Furthermore, carbon taxes because of their domestic environmental and fiscal benefits can be (up to a point) in countries  own interests. Easing the Transition to Carbon Pricing At the domestic level, undesirable effects of carbon pricing need to be mitigated to ease its adoption. Some carbon-intensive industries might become uneconomical as a result of carbon pricing, and their employees will require help with retraining and re allocation to other sectors. Using a fraction of reve- nues from carbon pricing to enhance social safety nets and to offer other forms of fiscal relief to low-income households would smooth the transition as well.2 At the international level, policymakers might consider imposing carbon price floor requirements for large emitters to reinforce the Paris Agreement and provide some reassurance against losses in competitive- ness. Countries could elect to set carbon prices above the floor for fiscal or domestic environmental reasons, thus becoming environmental leaders a prototype for this type of arrangement is the recently announced requirement that Canadian provinces phase in a price of Can$50 a ton of CO2 by 2022. Progress on Climate Mitigation Carbon pricing mechanisms have proliferated  about 40 national governments and more than 20 2For example, Parry and others (2016) and Parry, Mylonas, and Vernon (2017) show that, at least initially, this assistance will require about 10 percent or less of the carbon pricing revenues. subnational governments have implemented, or are implementing, some form of carbon pricing. Much more remains to be done, however. Only 12 per- cent of global greenhouse gases are currently priced (although China s emissions trading system will double this figure). Current prices are also too low. CO2 prices for emissions trading systems are less than $15 a ton of CO2, and carbon taxes are mostly less than $25 a ton, with the notable exceptions of Canada and the Scandinavian countries (World Bank, Ecofys, and Vivid Economics 2016). In contrast, average global prices of about $40 $80 a ton by 2020 would be consistent with limiting projected warming to 2 C (Stern and Stiglitz 2017). This shortfall in appropriate pricing could result in large-scale future climate change and underscores the pressing need for adaptation investment. 0 1 2 3 4 2015 20 25 30 0 10 20 30 Carbon tax Coal excise Emissions trading system Electricity excise Renewable subsidy Reducing CO2 intensity: power Energy ef ciency: electricity Road fuel tax Energy ef ciency: vehicles Energy ef ciency: buildings/industry Figure 3.6.1. Effectiveness of Mitigation Policies in China 1. CO2 Reduction in 2030 below Business as Usual (Percent) 2. Reduction in Air Pollution Deaths (Millions) Emissions trading system Difference between coal excise and emissions trading system Difference between carbon tax and coal excise Source: Parry and others (2016). Note: The price is $70 per ton of CO2 for emissions trading system, coal excise, and carbon tax. CO2 = carbon dioxide. Box 3.6 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 158 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The Role of Fiscal Instruments in Climate Finance Financing needs for climate adaptation investment in developing economies have been estimated at upward of $80 billion a year until 2050 (Margulis and Narain 2010), which greatly exceeds current finance from advanced economies. The volume of public and private climate finance mobilized by developed econo- mies for developing economies reached $62 billion in 2014 (of which only 15 percent was for adaptation), compared with the $100 billion goal set in 2009 and reiterated in the Paris Agreement (OECD 2015b). On equity grounds, there is some appeal in linking climate finance donations from advanced economies to their contribution to climate change. If the Group of Twenty economies, excluding the five members with lowest per capita income, donated $5 for each ton of projected CO2 emissions, an additional $70 bil- lion for climate finance could be raised in 2020.3 Funding these contributions from national budgets would provide a more robust source of finance than apportioning a fraction of revenues from future (and highly uncertain) carbon pricing. The onus, however, is on recipient countries to carefully cost and prioritize adaption projects and to attract finance through resil- ient macro-fiscal frameworks and strong governance. 3IMF staff calculations, assuming emissions are reduced linearly over time to meet countries  Paris Agreement mitigation pledges. Carbon charges for international aviation and maritime fuels are another promising source of climate finance a $30 a ton CO2 charge on these fuels could raise revenues of $25 billion in 2020, even with full compensation for developing economies (Farid and others 2016). Box 3.6 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 159 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex 3.1. Data Sources and Country Groupings Data Sources The primary data sources for this chapter are the IMF World Economic Outlook database and the World Bank World Development Indicators database. The main data sources on temperature and precipitation are the University of East Anglia s Climate Research Unit (historical data, 1901 2015) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections data set (forecast, present 2100). All data sources used in the chapter s analysis are listed in Annex Table 3.1.1. For real GDP per capita, investment, and imports, the sources are listed in the order in which they are spliced (which entails extending the level of a primary series using the growth rate of a secondary series). Data Definitions The main historical temperature and precipitation series used in the chapter s analysis are constructed by aggregating grid cell data at 0.5   0.5 degree resolu- tion (approximately 56 kilometers   56 kilometers at the equator) to the level of individual countries or subnational regions at annual or monthly frequency. Annex Table 3.1.1. Data Sources Indicator Source Temperature, Historical Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase Five AR5 Atlas subset; Marcott and others (2013); Matsuura and Willmott (2007); National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS); Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) Climate Change Atlas; Shakun and others (2012) Temperature and Precipitation, Forecast (Grid level) NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections data set (NEX-GDDP) Temperature and Precipitation, Historical (Grid level) University of East Anglia, Climate Research Unit (CRU TS v.3.24); University of Delaware (UDEL v.4.01) Population 2010, 1990, 1950 (Grid level) Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN v.3 and v.4); History Database of the Global Environment (HYDE v3.2); Klein and others (2016) Population 2015 and Projected Population 2100 United Nations World Population Prospects database, 2015 Revision CO2 Emissions Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center Temperature Forcings Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center; NASA GISS; Roston and Migliozzi (2015) Natural Disasters Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, International Disaster Database (EM-DAT) Global Ocean Temperature NOAA (2017a) Migration Global Bilateral Migration Database, World Bank Group;  zden and others (2011) Real GDP per Capita IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, World Development Indicators database Subnational GDP per Capita Gennaioli and others (2014) Crop Production Index Food and Agriculture Organization; World Bank, World Development Indicators database Sectoral Real Value Added (Agriculture, manufacturing, services) World Bank, World Development Indicators database Sectoral Labor Productivity Groningen Growth and Development Centre 10-Sector Database; Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries (2015) Real Gross Capital Formation IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, World Development Indicators database Real Imports of Goods and Services IMF, World Economic Outlook database; World Bank, World Development Indicators database Infant Mortality Rate World Bank, World Development Indicators database Human Development Index United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report database Consumer Price Index IMF, World Economic Outlook database Debt-to-GDP Ratio IMF, Historical Public Debt database Reserves Minus Gold Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2017); External Wealth of Nations database, updated to 2015 Net Official Development Assistance and Official Aid Received World Bank, World Development Indicators database Personal Remittances Received World Bank, World Development Indicators database Exchange Rate Regime Indicator Reinhart and Rogoff (2004); Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2008), updated to 2015 Adaptation Readiness and Capacity Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative; Chen and others (2015) Domestic Financial Sector Liberalization Index Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2008) Quinn-Toyoda Capital Control Index Quinn (1997); Quinn and Toyoda (2008) Human Capital Index Penn World Tables 9.0 Paved Roads Kilometers per Capita Calder n, Moral-Benito, and Serv n (2015); World Bank, World Development Indicators database; Chapter 3 of the October 2014 World Economic Outlook Revised Combined Polity Score (Polity2) Polity IV Project Gini Coefficient Standardized World Income Inequality Database Source: IMF staff compilation.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 160 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The estimates are weighted by grid-level population (exploring three alternatives: population distribu- tion as of 1950, 1990, and 2010) to account for differences in population density (Dell, Jones, and Olken 2014). Temperature and precipitation projections are from two of the four scenarios, called Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP), constructed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The RCP 4.5 scenario assumes increased attention to the environment with slow growth of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions until 2050 and a decline of emissions thereafter, resulting in a mean temperature increase of 1.8 C by 2081 2100 relative to 1986 2005 (in a range of 1.1 C 2.6 C, with a greater than 50 percent chance of an increase exceeding 2 C by 2100). In the RCP 8.5 scenario, CO2 emissions continue to grow unconstrained, and the average 2081 2100 tempera- ture is expected to be 3.7 C higher (in a range of 2.6 C 4.8 C) relative to 1986 2005. The chapter uses the average of the maximum and minimum daily tem- perature and total daily precipitation data from 2005 and projections for 2050 and 2100 at the 0.25 x 0.25 degree resolution, averaged across the 21 models of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 for each scenario. Annual temperatures are computed as the average of the daily temperature; annual precipita- tion is the sum of daily precipitation. Country Groupings Annex Table 3.1.2. Country and Territory Groups Advanced Economies Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong SAR,* Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Macao SAR,* Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Puerto Rico, San Marino,* Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China,* United Kingdom, United States Emerging Market Economies Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas,* Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kosovo,* Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Macedonia FYR, Malaysia, Maldives,* Marshall Islands,* Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia,* Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru,* Oman, Pakistan, Palau,* Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Seychelles,* South Africa, Sri Lanka, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,* Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela Low-Income Developing Countries Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo, C te d Ivoire, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Kenya, Kiribati,* Kyrgyz Republic, Lao P.D.R., Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Moldova, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia,* South Sudan, Sudan, S o Tom  and Pr ncipe, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Countries and Territories with Average Annual Temperature above 15 C Algeria, American Samoa, Angola, Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cura ao,* Cyprus, C te d Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guadeloupe,* Guatemala, French Guiana,* Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao P.D.R., Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Martinique,* Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Montserrat, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Reunion,* Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, S o Tom  and Pr ncipe, Tanzania, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Turks and Caicos,* Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Virgin Islands (US), West Bank and Gaza, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe Countries with Province-Level Data Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Korea, Kyrgyz Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Macedonia FYR, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam Countries with Sectoral-Level Data Argentina, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Hong Kong SAR,* India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Korea, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, Philippines, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan Province of China,* Tanzania, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela, Zambia Source: IMF staff compilation. * Not included in the main regression analysis.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 161 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex 3.2. Weather Shocks and Natural Disasters Although there is a clear link between weather con- ditions and the occurrence of extreme weather events, the relationship between weather shocks and natural disasters extreme events associated with significant economic damage and loss of life has not been stud- ied in detail. The analysis in this section examines how weather conditions influence the frequency of various types of weather-related natural disasters. A logit panel specification with country fixed effects is used to estimate the effect of the weather variables   c  i,t  (temperature and precipitation) on the probabil- ity of a natural disaster taking place in country i in a given month t.  Pr (   disaster  i,t  = 1 )  =   (  1   c  i,t  +   2   c  i,t  2   +   1   Dev  i,t  T   +   2  Dev  i,t  P   +   3  Dev  i,t  Ocean +   1  ln ( GDP )  i,t   12  +   2   ln ( Pop )  i,t   12 +   i  +   i,t ), (3.1) in which the nonlinear function  ( ) = exp( )/ (1+exp( )) captures the effect of the regressors on the probability of a natural disaster. Country fixed effects (  i ) capture time-invariant country characteristics, such as the size and geographic location of the country and its topology, that may influence the exposure and vulnerability of countries to different types of disas- ters.51 The specification controls for the level of real GDP per capita and population, as well as for global weather conditions specifically the deviation in global ocean surface temperature from the 1901 2000 average that might affect the incidence of disasters. The sample includes monthly data during 1990 2014 for 228 countries and territories on more than 8,000 weather-related disasters. Equation (3.1) is estimated separately for each type of natural disaster, improv- ing on Thomas and Lopez (2015), who perform a similar exercise on annual data, but group together all disasters. Annex Table 3.2.1 presents the estimation results for each disaster type. Weather conditions have a 51Given the large time dimension of the sample (each country has about 300 observations), a panel logit specification is preferred to conditional logit models because it allows for the estimation of predicted and marginal effects accounting for country fixed effects. The results are robust to the use of conditional logit regression models developed by Chamberlain (1980) to avoid the incidental parameters problem that may arise from estimating fixed effects with a small time sample. very strong impact on the occurrence of disasters. More precipitation reduces the occurrence of disas- ters caused by droughts, wildfires, and heat waves, but increases the probability of disasters triggered by floods, landslides, cold waves, tropical cyclones, and other storms. The effects of temperature are also as expected, with higher temperatures resulting in more disasters caused by droughts, wildfires, heat waves, tropical cyclones, and other storms, but reducing the probability of cold waves. The results also show that precipitation has nonlinear effects on the probability of most disasters. Interestingly, the estimations suggest that the weather conditions over the preceding 12 months have a significant effect on the occurrence of most types of disasters. Weather anomalies during the previous year, as captured in the cumulative deviation of temperature and precipitation from its monthly 10-year average, are important determinants of all types of disasters, except those caused by landslides or tropical cyclones, which are entirely a function of short-term weather patterns. Epidemics, however, are not affected by short-term weather conditions, but respond to temperature deviations in the year before the event is triggered. To quantify the likely impact of climate change, the analysis combines the estimation results and projected temperature and precipitation in 2050 and 2100 under Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5 to predict the likelihood of each type of natural disaster. These predicted probabilities in 2050 and 2100 are compared with the predicted incidence of natural disasters over 2010 14 in Figure 3.6. Annex 3.3. Empirical Analysis of the Macroeconomic Effects of Weather Shocks and the Role of Policies This annex provides further details on the empiri- cal model used to quantify short- and medium-term effects of weather on economic activity to identify the channels through which these effects occur, investigate evidence or lack thereof of adapta- tion over time, and study the role of various policy measures in attenuating the effects of tem- perature shocks. The baseline analysis uses Jord s (2005) local projection method to trace out the impulse response functions of various outcomes to weather shocks based on the following equation:  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 162 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 3.2.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Natural Disasters, 1990 2014 Dependent Variable Drought Epidemic Flood Landslide Wildfire Cold Wave Heat Wave Tropical Cyclone Other Storms (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Precipitation  0.002*** 0.000 0.022*** 0.018***  0.023*** 0.014***  0.009*** 0.012*** 0.012*** (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) Precipitation2 0.000*** 0.000  0.000***  0.000*** 0.000***  0.000** 0.000***  0.000*  0.000** (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) Temperature 0.024* 0.009 0.051***  0.010 0.109***  0.286*** 0.282* 0.168***  0.063*** (0.013) (0.012) (0.020) (0.025) (0.012) (0.049) (0.144) (0.039) (0.014) Temperature2  0.000 0.000  0.001  0.000 0.001  0.007*** 0.005  0.001 0.000 (0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.005) (0.001) (0.001) Precipitation Deviations (12 months)  0.005***  0.000 0.001*** 0.001  0.001*  0.001*  0.003*** 0.000 0.000 (0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000) (0.000) Temperature Deviations (12 months) 0.037* 0.024**  0.008  0.013 0.022  0.042*** 0.026 0.003 0.033*** (0.019) (0.012) (0.006) (0.013) (0.020) (0.015) (0.019) (0.009) (0.007) Global Ocean Temperature Deviations  0.127 1.014** 0.274 0.028 1.566* 1.098 0.861  1.441*** 0.395 (1.002) (0.486) (0.298) (0.578) (0.870) (0.781) (1.025) (0.549) (0.370) Log GDP per Capitat   12  0.975*  0.589**  0.059 0.033  1.029 2.486*** 0.045  0.076  0.303 (0.500) (0.267) (0.158) (0.383) (0.711) (0.627) (0.382) (0.302) (0.279) Log Populationt   12 0.869 2.361*** 2.575*** 0.650 0.821  1.026 0.273 2.617*** 0.058 (0.878) (0.364) (0.318) (0.662) (1.211) (1.392) (1.267) (0.582) (0.575) Constant 10.481* 5.529* 1.646  5.050 9.982  31.876***  9.242** 0.504 3.519 (6.145) (3.087) (1.896) (4.746) (8.525) (7.772) (4.416) (3.683) (3.352) Number of Observations 29,976 35,772 43,632 19,620 18,732 17,844 12,924 20,652 33,684 Number of Countries 101 120 147 66 63 61 44 69 114 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The dependent variable is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if a natural disaster of a particular type is taking place. All specifications control for country fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 163 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 yi,t + h   yi,t   1 =   1  h    c  i,t  +   2  h    c  i,t  2   +   1  h    c  i,t   1  +   2  h    c  i,t   1  2   +   j = 1  h   1     1  h    c  i,t + h   j  +   j = 1  h   1     2  h    c  i,t + h   j  2   +   1  h  yi,t   1 +   i  h  +   r,t  h   +   i,t  h  , (3.2) in which i indexes countries, t indexes years, and h indexes the estimation horizon (from horizon 0, which represents the contemporaneous regression, up to horizon 7). Regressions for each horizon are estimated separately. The dependent variable is the cumula- tive growth rate of the outcome of interest between horizons t   1 and t + h, measured as difference in the natural logarithms (yi,t). Following Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a), the estimated regression has a quadratic specification in the weather variables ci,t , which comprise average annual temperature (T) and precipitation (P). The regressions control for one lag of the dependent and weather variables and for forwards of the weather variables, as suggested by Teulings and Zubanov (2014). Country fixed effects (  i  h ) control for all time-invariant country differences, such as lati- tude, initial macroeconomic conditions, and average growth rates, while time fixed effects interacted with region dummies (  r,t  h  ) control for the common effect of all annual shocks across countries within a region. The analysis also explores an alternative fixed-effects structure proposed by Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a), which includes time fixed effects (  i  h ) and country-specific linear and quadratic time trends (  i  h  t  +     i  h   t  2 ) to account for within-country changes over time, such as demographic shifts, instead of the region-year fixed effects (  r,t  h  ) of the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. To avoid bias associated with  bad controls  (or overcontrolling), the specification is purposefully parsimonious: many of the determinants of growth, typically included in standard growth regressions (for example, institutional quality, educational achievement, policies, and so forth), may themselves be shaped by weather shocks, as documented below, and are thus not part of the baseline estimation. Within this estimation framework, the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on the level of output at horizon h can be obtained by differentiating equation (3.2) with respect to temperature:      ( y  i,t + h     y  i,t   1 )  ___________    T  i,t    =   1  h   + 2   2  h    T  i,t  . (3.3) Evaluating equation (3.3) for each horizon separately and using the 2015 annual average temperature  T  i,2015  allows us to obtain the impulse response functions of per capita GDP to a temperature shock for each coun- try. The marginal effect of an increase in precipitation is computed analogously. The threshold temperature at which the effect on the outcome variable switches from positive to negative can be obtained by setting equation (3.3) to zero. The Effect of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity Annex Table 3.3.1 presents the key results for the effect of weather shocks on per capita output, along with numerous robustness checks. Panel A contains the estimated coefficients for the weather variables at hori- zon 0 (that is, the contemporaneous effects of weather shocks); panel B shows the effect of a 1 C increase in temperature estimated at the median 2015 temperature for advanced economies (median T = 11 C), emerging market economies (median T = 22 C), and low-income developing countries (median T = 25 C) on impact and after seven years. Similarly, panel C shows the effect of a 100 millimeter increase in precipitation estimated at the median 2015 precipitation for advanced economies, emerging market economies, and low-income develop- ing countries on impact and after seven years. Annex Table 3.3.1 begins by replicating Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel s (2015a) specification and establishes its robustness to using alternative sources of weather data; alternative population weights that are used to aggregate gridded weather data at the country level; alternative sets of fixed effects; and alternative samples, controls, and estimation approaches. Column (1) estimates the speci- fication used in Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a) and includes country-specific linear and quadratic time trends, University of Delaware weather data, and 1990 popula- tion weights in the chapter s substantially larger sample (the chapter expands the sample both geographically and temporally by about 25 percent). Column (2) uses an alternative source of weather data, the University of East Anglia Climate Research Unit instead of the University of Delaware, and obtains similar coefficients on the tempera- ture and precipitation variables. The choice of population weights used to aggregate gridded weather data to the country level could play an important role given that migration within and across country borders is one of the potential strategies for cop- ing with adverse weather conditions. Given that histori- cal data show an increase in average annual temperatures starting in the 1970s (Figure 3.3), column (3) presents results with 1950 population weights to account for migration responses that could have already taken place. Following Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), column (4) and column (5) (main specification for the chapter)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 164 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 3.3.1. Effect of Weather Shocks on Output A. Real Output per Capita Growth (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Temperature 1.399*** 1.443*** 1.428*** 1.343*** 1.347*** 1.248*** 1.342*** 1.249***  1.154*** (0.359) (0.367) (0.366) (0.355) (0.357) (0.339) (0.355) (0.380) (0.320) Temperature2  0.049***  0.049***  0.048***  0.052***  0.051***  0.044***  0.051***  0.044*** (0.012) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.010) (0.011) (0.011) Precipitation 0.056 0.103* 0.163* 0.045 0.110 0.127 0.119 0.082 0.005 (0.097) (0.061) (0.085) (0.058) (0.104) (0.103) (0.104) (0.112) (0.034) Precipitation2  0.002  0.002**  0.004**  0.001  0.003  0.003  0.003  0.002 (0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) Any Disaster  0.406** (0.180) Threshold Temperature ( C) 14 15 15 13 13 14 13 14 Weather Source UDEL CRU CRU CRU CRU CRU CRU CRU CRU Population Weight 2010 2010 1950 2010 1950 1950 1950 1950 1950 Year Fixed Effects Y Y Y N N N N N N Region x Year Fixed Effects N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Country Time Trends Y Y Y N N N N N N At Least 20 Years of Data N N N N N Y N N N Adjusted R 2 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.11 0.09 Number of Countries 177 198 189 198 189 184 189 189 127 Number of Observations 8,147 9,114 8,815 9,114 8,815 8,756 8,815 8,917 6,135 B. Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 0 AE (T=11 C) 0.331* 0.370* 0.365* 0.197 0.218 0.280 0.217 0.277 (0.196) (0.196) (0.195) (0.191) (0.196) (0.190) (0.195) (0.212) EM (T=22 C)  0.736**  0.703***  0.697***  0.949***  0.911***  0.687***  0.907***  0.695*** (0.309) (0.223) (0.223) (0.266) (0.264) (0.228) (0.263) (0.243) LIDC (T=25 C)  1.027***  0.996***  0.987***  1.261***  1.219***  0.951***  1.214***  0.960*** (0.370) (0.268) (0.267) (0.318) (0.315) (0.270) (0.313) (0.287) Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 7 AE (T=11 C) 0.898 0.889 0.822 0.457 0.558 0.560 0.552 0.023 (0.705) (0.701) (0.697) (0.744) (0.752) (0.744) (0.751) (0.478) EM (T=22 C)  1.173  0.957  1.048  1.117*  1.115*  1.088*  1.138*  0.547 (0.852) (0.665) (0.651) (0.604) (0.591) (0.595) (0.589) (0.386) LIDC (T=25 C)  1.738*  1.461*  1.558**  1.547**  1.571**  1.537**  1.599**  0.702 (1.002) (0.761) (0.745) (0.686) (0.667) (0.670) (0.664) (0.450) C. Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 0 AE (P=800 mm per year) 0.018 0.066 0.101* 0.028 0.066 0.076 0.073 0.050 (0.067) (0.046) (0.059) (0.046) (0.071) (0.070) (0.071) (0.077) EM (P=900 mm per year) 0.013 0.061 0.093* 0.026 0.060 0.070 0.067 0.046 (0.063) (0.045) (0.056) (0.045) (0.067) (0.066) (0.067) (0.072) LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year) 0.004 0.052 0.078 0.022 0.049 0.057 0.056 0.038 (0.057) (0.041) (0.050) (0.042) (0.059) (0.058) (0.059) (0.064) Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Real Output per Capita Level at Horizon 7 AE (P=800 mm per year) 0.304 0.171 0.179  0.173  0.187  0.207  0.209  0.287 (0.198) (0.216) (0.227) (0.214) (0.223) (0.225) (0.224) (0.229) EM (P=900 mm per year) 0.295 0.166 0.174  0.156  0.166  0.187  0.188  0.267 (0.188) (0.205) (0.215) (0.200) (0.209) (0.210) (0.210) (0.216) LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year) 0.278 0.155 0.164  0.121  0.126  0.148  0.146  0.227 (0.169) (0.185) (0.192) (0.174) (0.182) (0.182) (0.183) (0.191) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.2), with separate regressions for each horizon. Panel A reports the estimated coefficients on the weather variables for hori- zon 0. Panels B and C show the marginal impact of a change in temperature and precipitation computed as per equation (3.3) at the median temperature (T) and median precipitation (P) of advanced economies (AE), emerging markets (EM), and low-income developing countries (LIDC) contemporaneously (horizon 0) and cumulatively seven years after the shock. The specifications in columns (1) (8) control for country fixed effects; lags and forwards of temperature, precipitation, and their squared terms; and lag of growth. Column (8) shows results from estimating an autoregressive distributed lag model with seven lags of the weather variables and their squared terms. Column (9) reports the coefficients on temperature and precipitation from a linear specification estimated on a sample of countries with average temperature above 15 C, also including controls for country fixed effects and lag of growth. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level. CRU = University of East Anglia, Climate Research Unit; mm = millimeter; UDEL = University of Delaware. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 165 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 present results for the baseline specification with region-year fixed effects instead of country-specific time trends. Column (6) limits the sample to countries with at least 20 years of data. Column (7) controls separately for the occurrence of natural disasters given that temperature and pre- cipitation fluctuations might affect economic activ- ity through their effect on the incidence of natural disasters, as discussed in Annex 3.2. Controlling for natural disasters does not materially alter the estimated coefficients on temperature and precipitation.52 In columns (1) (7), impulse responses were estimated using Jord s (2005) local projection method. This approach is advocated by Stock and Watson (2007), among others, as a flexible alternative that does not impose the dynamic restrictions embedded in vector autoregressions (autoregressive distributed lag) specifica- tions and is particularly suited to estimating nonlinearities 52To further explore the robustness of these results, weather variables were transformed using natural logarithms or normalized by subtracting the country mean and dividing by the country standard deviation. Availability of data on subnational per capita GDP and annual average temperature and precipitation allows us to estimate the same regression at a subnational level using province fixed effects. Through all three specifications the main finding persists: there is a nonlinear relationship between temperature and economic perfor- mance (results available on request). in the dynamic response. Column (8), however, tests the robustness of the findings to using the autodistributed lag model with seven lags of the weather variables and their squared terms, as in Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), who test different models from no lags up to 10 lags and find that, across different lag specifications, results are broadly consistent in magnitude and statistical significance. Across all specifications, the estimated coefficient on temperature is positive, and the coefficient on tem- perature squared is negative, confirming the nonlinear relationship between growth and temperature shocks uncovered by Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015a). At low temperatures, an increase in temperature boosts growth, whereas at high temperatures, an increase in temperature hurts growth, with the threshold average annual temperature estimated to be about 13 C 15 C. As an additional robustness check, column (9) pres- ents results of a linear regression without the squared terms of the weather variables in which the sample is limited to countries with average annual temperature above 15 C. Indeed, within the sample of relatively hot countries, the coefficient on temperature is negative and statistically significant. The effect of temperature increase across the globe is shown in Figure 3.8 panel 1 at grid level; in panel 2, where countries are rescaled in proportion to their 2015 population; and in Annex 0.80 to 1.63 0.43 to 0.80 0.33 to 0.43  0.50 to  0.32  0.97 to  0.50  1.30 to  0.97  1.68 to  1.30 Insigni cant effect No data Sources: Natural Earth; ScapeToad; United Nations World Population Prospects database: the 2015 revision; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The map depicts the contemporaneous effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output computed as per equation (3.3) using recent 10-year average country-level temperature together with estimated coef cients in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5). Each country is rescaled in proportion to the projected population as of 2100. Using projected population as of 2100, 76 percent of world population will live in countries that experience a negative impact from 1 C increase. Gray areas indicate the estimated impact is not statistically signi cant. Annex Figure 3.3.1. Effect of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe, with Countries Rescaled in Proportion to Their Projected Population as of 2100 (Percent)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 166 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Figure 3.3.1, where countries are rescaled in proportion to projected 2100 population. There is no consistently significant relationship between precipitation and per capita GDP growth across the various specifications. The lack of robust relationship could reflect potentially larger measurement error in the precipitation variable, as discussed in Auffhammer and others (2011), which could be further amplified by temporal aggregation. For example, if the only channel through which precipitation affects aggregate outcomes is through its effect on agriculture, then only precipita- tion during crops  growing period poorly proxied by annual precipitation may be relevant. Annex Table 3.3.1 also reveals the very persistent effects of temperature shocks. The lower half of panel B presents the cumulative effects of a 1 C increase in temperature estimated at the median temperature of advanced, emerging market, and low-income devel- oping countries seven years after the shock. All but one specification show evidence of a long-lasting and potentially deepening adverse impact of temperature shocks on per capita output at the temperatures experi- enced by the median low-income developing country. To examine how widespread the effects of tempera- ture may be, equation (3.2) is estimated using sectoral value added and agricultural production as the out- comes of interest. Real value added of the agricultural, manufacturing, and services sectors from the World Bank s World Development Indicators database is com- plemented with an index of crop production volume compiled by the United Nations Food and Agricul- ture Organization. Results are presented in Annex Table 3.3.2. There is a concave relationship between temperature and output in both the agricultural and manufacturing sectors, whereas services value added appears to be relatively protected from the effects of higher temperature. In other words, at the median temperature of low-income countries, an increase in temperature significantly reduces agricultural value added and crop production and lowers manufactur- ing output. It is important to note that, unlike aggregate output, agricultural production is significantly affected by pre- cipitation in addition to temperature shocks. Although the results suggest a concave relationship between agri- cultural output and precipitation, at the typical levels of precipitation of all three country groups, an increase in precipitation unambiguously improves agricultural productivity. The effects of precipitation are also short lived; agricultural output seven years down the line is not affected by a precipitation shock today, which is different from the effect of temperature. Channels The chapter examines the potential channels through which temperature shocks affect the macroeconomy in a broad and long-lasting manner by studying the relationship between temperature and each of the main components of the aggregate production function. Investment As hypothesized by Fankhauser and Tol (2005), weather shocks could have long-lasting effects on output if they influence investment decisions, and hence capital input. Equation (3.2) is estimated using real gross fixed capital formation as the outcome of interest. The analysis also examines weather s impacts on imports, given the tight link between imports and investment. Results, presented in Annex Table 3.3.3, columns (1) (2), confirm the idea that temperature shocks suppress investment. Although the uncertainty surrounding the estimated contemporaneous effects is large, seven years after a temperature increase, both investment and imports are significantly lower in coun- tries with relatively hot climates (see also Figure 3.10). Labor Input The analysis also examines whether labor supply may be affected by temperature increases. Using infant mortality as the outcome of interest, equation (3.2) is estimated, uncovering a convex relationship between temperature and current (or future) labor supply (Annex Table 3.3.3, column [3]). In hot countries, an increase in temperature raises infant mortality instan- taneously, with the effect growing over time. In these countries, higher temperatures also have a negative effect on a broader measure of human well-being the Human Development Index, a weighted average of per capita income, educational achievement, and life expectancy (column [4]). Productivity Motivated by the body of evidence of reduced human cognitive and physical performance at high temperatures from laboratory experiments and country-specific studies, the analysis examines whether reduced labor productivity may underpin the negative temperature aggregate output relation- ship in countries with hot climates. If this is indeed  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 167 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 the case, sectors where workers are more exposed to heat should see a bigger decrease in labor pro- ductivity when temperatures rise in relatively hot countries. The analysis uses the Groningen Growth and Development Centre 10-sector database, which provides sectoral real value added and employment in 40 countries over 1950 2012, and Graff Zivin and Neidell s (2014) classification of sectors into those that are  heat-exposed  and others to estimate the following specification:53 53According to Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014), who follow definitions from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, heat-exposed industries include agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting, construction, mining, transportation, and utilities  as well as manufacturing, in which facilities may not be climate controlled in low-income countries and production processes often generate considerable heat. Annex Table 3.3.2. Effect of Weather Shocks on Sectoral Output A. Dependent Variable Agriculture Manufacturing Services Crop Production (1) (2) (3) (4) Temperature 0.283 1.281  0.268 3.860* (0.871) (1.035) (0.585) (2.085) Temperature2  0.043*  0.051*  0.007  0.151*** (0.023) (0.027) (0.016) (0.050) Precipitation 0.705*** 0.108  0.000 1.287*** (0.228) (0.149) (0.111) (0.332) Precipitation2  0.015***  0.002  0.001  0.028*** (0.005) (0.003) (0.002) (0.007) Adjusted R 2 0.10 0.13 0.12 0.09 Number of Countries 174 168 174 185 Number of Observations 5,847 5,225 5,730 8,836 B. Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0 AE (T=11 C)  0.664 0.152  0.423 0.547 (0.464) (0.532) (0.303) (1.077) EM (T=22 C)  1.610***  0.977**  0.578*  2.767*** (0.431) (0.439) (0.298) (0.664) LIDC (T=25 C)  1.868***  1.285**  0.621*  3.671*** (0.517) (0.538) (0.362) (0.820) Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7 AE (T=11 C) 2.070*** 1.642  0.220 1.177 (0.753) (1.798) (1.445) (0.889) EM (T=22 C)  0.498  0.926 0.054  0.509 (0.654) (0.939) (0.734) (0.812) LIDC (T=25 C)  1.198  1.626 0.129  0.969 (0.769) (1.117) (0.910) (0.985) C. Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0 AE (P=800 mm per year) 0.458*** 0.076  0.013 0.835*** (0.149) (0.105) (0.075) (0.223) EM (P=900 mm per year) 0.428*** 0.072  0.015 0.778*** (0.139) (0.100) (0.071) (0.210) LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year) 0.366*** 0.065  0.018 0.665*** (0.121) (0.090) (0.063) (0.185) Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7 AE (P=800 mm per year)  0.228 0.024  0.141  0.237 (0.257) (0.390) (0.286) (0.284) EM (P=900 mm per year)  0.213 0.030  0.125  0.217 (0.243) (0.371) (0.269) (0.267) LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)  0.184 0.041  0.094  0.177 (0.217) (0.332) (0.235) (0.235) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.2) using the same specification as in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5), for different dependent variables, with separate regressions estimated for each horizon. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level. Panel A reports the estimated coefficients on the weather variables for horizon 0. Panels B and C show the marginal impact of a change in temperature and precipitation com- puted as per equation (3.3) at the median temperature (T) and median precipitation (P) of advanced economies (AE), emerging markets (EM), and low-income developing countries (LIDC) contemporaneously (horizon 0) and cumulatively seven years after the shock. mm = millimeter. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 168 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 3.3.3. Effect of Weather Shocks on Productivity, Capital, and Labor A. Dependent Variable Capital Input Labor Input Labor Productivity Investment Imports Infant Mortality HDI Non-Heat Exposed Heat Exposed (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Temperature 0.850 0.467  0.147 0.269*** 0.246 1.902* (2.042) (0.943) (0.117) (0.078) (0.681) (1.002) Temperature2  0.045  0.068** 0.005*  0.008***  0.010  0.087*** (0.059) (0.033) (0.003) (0.002) (0.018) (0.026) Precipitation  0.377  0.654**  0.001 0.000 0.047 0.272 (0.398) (0.271) (0.024) (0.018) (0.201) (0.195) Precipitation2 0.003 0.006 0.001  0.000  0.003  0.008* (0.009) (0.007) (0.001) (0.000) (0.005) (0.004) Adjusted R 2 0.03 0.08 0.64 0.31 0.03 Number of Countries 169 178 182 181 40 Number of Observations 6,093 6,866 8,685 3,864 17,848 B. Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0 AE (T=11 C)  0.138  1.029**  0.028 0.094** 0.030  0.003 (0.976) (0.455) (0.067) (0.043) (0.396) (0.502) EM (T=22 C)  1.126  2.525*** 0.092*  0.082  0.185  1.909*** (1.064) (0.753) (0.055) (0.056) (0.412) (0.363) LIDC (T=25 C)  1.395  2.934*** 0.124*  0.129*  0.244  2.428*** (1.331) (0.919) (0.063) (0.067) (0.478) (0.456) Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7 AE (T=11 C) 1.812 2.361  0.364 0.609** 0.305  1.142 (2.029) (1.494) (0.427) (0.259) (1.183) (0.986) EM (T=22 C)  4.225**  2.439* 0.569  0.237  0.063  1.642 (1.803) (1.303) (0.375) (0.175) (1.114) (1.119) LIDC (T=25 C)  5.871***  3.747** 0.824*  0.467**  0.163  1.778 (2.074) (1.516) (0.426) (0.195) (1.306) (1.365) C. Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 0 AE (P=800 mm per year)  0.329  0.558*** 0.008  0.007  0.009 0.148 (0.262) (0.180) (0.015) (0.013) (0.133) (0.136) EM (P=900 mm per year)  0.323  0.547*** 0.009  0.008  0.016 0.132 (0.246) (0.170) (0.015) (0.012) (0.125) (0.130) LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)  0.311  0.523*** 0.011  0.010  0.030 0.101 (0.216) (0.151) (0.013) (0.011) (0.109) (0.118) Impact of a 100 mm per Year Increase in Precipitation on Dependent Variable Level at Horizon 7 AE (P=800 mm per year)  0.478  0.984** 0.071  0.102*  0.295 0.072 (0.689) (0.498) (0.163) (0.061) (0.832) (0.554) EM (P=900 mm per year)  0.423  0.961** 0.074  0.097*  0.265 0.041 (0.649) (0.472) (0.149) (0.057) (0.776) (0.524) LIDC (P=1,100 mm per year)  0.313  0.914** 0.080  0.087*  0.206  0.022 (0.573) (0.422) (0.123) (0.050) (0.666) (0.467) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Columns (1 4) present results from estimating equation (3.2) using the same specification as in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5), for different dependent variables. Specification in column (5) presents results from estimating equation (3.4) where an indicator for heat exposed sectors is interacted with tempera- ture and precipitation, their squared terms, and their lags and forwards; also controlling for country-sector and region-year fixed effects, and lag of growth. Separate regressions are estimated for each horizon. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level. Panel A reports the estimated coefficients on the weather variables for horizon 0. Panels B and C show the marginal impact of a change in temperature and precipitation computed as per equation (3.3) at the median temperature (T) and median precipitation (P) of advanced economies (AE), emerging markets (EM), and low-income developing countries (LIDC), contemporaneously (horizon 0) and cumulatively seven years after the shock. HDI = Human Development Index; mm = millimeter. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 169 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 yi,s,t + h   yi,s,t   1 =   1  h    c  i,t  +   2  h    c  i,t  2   +   1  h    c  i,t   1  +   2  h    c  i,t   1  2   +   j = 1  h   1     1  h    c  i,t + h   j  +   j = 1  h   1     2  h    c  i,t + h   j  2    +   1  h    c  i,t     H  s  +   2  h    c  i,t  2     H  s  +   1  h    c  i,t   1    H  s  +   2  h    c  i,t   1  2     H  s  +   j = 1  h   1     1  h    c  i,t + h   j    H  s  +  j = 1  h   1     2  h    c  i,t + h   j  2     H  s  +   1  h  yi,s,t   1 +   i,s  h   +   r,t  h   +   i,s,t  h  , (3.4) in which yi,s,t is the log of real sectoral value added per worker,  H  s  is an indicator for sectors that are  heat-exposed,    i,s  h   are country-sector fixed effects, and     r,t  h   are region-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Annex Table 3.3.3, specification (5) summarizes the results of this estimation. At higher temperatures, an increase in temperature significantly lowers labor productivity in heat-exposed industries. Temperature increases, however, have no discernible effect on the productivity of workers in non-heat-exposed sectors, even in countries with hot climates. The Role of Policies and Institutional Settings To study the extent to which macroeconomic and structural policies and country characteristics mediate the effect of weather shocks, the analysis extends the empirical approach described above by allowing the response of per capita output to weather shocks to vary with various proxies for these policies. The estimated specification augments equation (3.2) to include an interaction term between the weather shock and the policy variable: yi,t + h   yi,t   1 =   1  h   ci,t +   1  h  (ci,t   pi,t   1) +   1  h   pi,t   1 +    2  h  ci,t   1 +   2  h  (ci,t   1   pi,t   2) +   2  h   pi,t   2  +   j = 1   h   1     3  h ci,t + h   j +   1  h  yi,t   1 +   i  h  +   r,t  h   +   i,t  h  . (3.5) The sample is restricted to countries with average annual temperature exceeding 15 C, in which an increase in temperature has a statistically significant linear negative impact on economic activity, as in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (9). Consequently, the weather shock ci,t refers to average annual temperature and precipitation. Most of the policy variables pi,t are lagged to minimize reverse causality concerns and are included one at a time. As emphasized in the chapter, it is difficult to interpret causally the coefficients on the interaction terms, given that the variation in policies and institu- tions across countries and over time is not random. Policies and institutions could also be correlated with relevant country attributes that are not controlled for in the regression. Moreover, policy data availability varies significantly in both temporal and country coverage, resulting in sizable differences in the estimation sample. For ease of interpretation, in the baseline results, each policy variable is transformed into an indicator variable depending on whether, in year t, the country is above or below the median value of this particular policy in the estimation sample.54 An exception to this approach is the measurement of buffers. A country is considered to have (1) fiscal buffers if public debt as a share of GDP is less than the 75th percentile, (2) monetary buffers if annual inflation is less than 10 percent, (3) high inter- national reserves if international reserves minus gold can cover at least four months of imports, (4) high foreign aid if foreign aid inflows as a share of GDP are in the 75th percentile, and (5) high remittances if per capita remittances in real dollars received are greater than the 75th percentile. For exchange rate policy, the analysis uses an indicator if the de facto exchange rate regime of a country is not pegged based on the coarse classification of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). Annex Tables 3.3.4 and 3.3.5 present the main find- ings. For each policy, the tables report the estimated effect of a 1 C increase in temperature on per capita output at horizons 0 through 7, where the policy is not in place and where the policy is in place. The tables also report the p-value of a statistical test of the dif- ference between the effect of temperature in different policy scenarios. The short-term negative effects of temperature shocks tend to be larger in countries with lower buffers, as evidenced by the larger estimated responses in columns (2), (5), and (8) in Annex Table 3.3.4. However, the differences are typically not statistically significant, and in the few cases in which they are (fiscal buffers, foreign aid, and remittances), they tend to be very short lived. Exchange rate regime, however, seems to be significantly associated with the extent of damage caused by weather shocks. Countries with nonpegged exchange rates tend to recover faster from these shocks. A similar pattern was documented by Ramcharan (2009), who finds that exchange rate flexi- bility helps economies adjust better in the aftermath of windstorms and earthquakes. 54Results from an alternative specification in which the policy variables are used in their continuous forms rather than transformed into indicators are available on request.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 170 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 3.3.4. Role of Policy Buffers (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on per Capita Output Public Debt Inflation International Reserves Low High P-value Low High P-value High Low P-value Horizon 0  1.057***  1.460*** 0.09  1.183***  1.275*** 0.40  1.015**  1.171*** 0.52 (0.387) (0.352) (0.295) (0.322) (0.414) (0.314) Horizon 1  1.029**  1.627*** 0.24  0.952***  0.985** 0.87  0.556  0.782** 0.36 (0.471) (0.466) (0.362) (0.425) (0.492) (0.395) Horizon 2  0.914*  1.695** 0.24  0.933**  0.907** 0.87  0.952**  1.030*** 0.58 (0.492) (0.690) (0.375) (0.416) (0.390) (0.382) Horizon 3  1.597***  2.159*** 0.34  1.279***  1.333*** 0.79  1.182***  1.140*** 0.78 (0.525) (0.758) (0.419) (0.429) (0.404) (0.411) Horizon 4  1.512**  1.986** 0.46  1.355**  1.487** 0.55  1.404***  1.440*** 0.85 (0.704) (0.972) (0.560) (0.571) (0.522) (0.522) Horizon 5  0.899  1.341 0.42  1.014*  1.181* 0.46  1.390**  1.270** 0.66 (0.758) (0.936) (0.583) (0.628) (0.609) (0.603) Horizon 6  1.075  1.277 0.68  1.315**  1.572** 0.32  1.524**  1.362** 0.55 (0.844) (0.867) (0.626) (0.675) (0.614) (0.597) Horizon 7  0.552  0.633 0.87  0.842  1.032 0.52  1.566**  1.353** 0.49 (0.819) (0.859) (0.610) (0.628) (0.629) (0.611) Adjusted R 2 0.15 0.12 0.09 Number of Countries 119 122 127 Number of Observations 4,492 5,365 6,135 Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on per Capita Output Foreign Aid Remittances Exchange Rate Flexibility High Low P-value High Low P-value Not Pegged Pegged P-value Horizon 0  0.840**  1.194*** 0.06  1.345***  1.449*** 0.34  1.183***  1.436*** 0.16 (0.380) (0.334) (0.337) (0.312) (0.321) (0.315) Horizon 1  0.996**  1.132*** 0.59  1.212***  1.472*** 0.13  0.792*  1.249*** 0.08 (0.448) (0.396) (0.389) (0.410) (0.426) (0.415) Horizon 2  0.958**  0.979** 0.94  0.799*  1.030** 0.31  0.575  1.191** 0.08 (0.433) (0.401) (0.436) (0.456) (0.483) (0.503) Horizon 3  0.931*  1.020** 0.74  1.271**  1.488*** 0.45  0.769  1.342** 0.20 (0.551) (0.475) (0.530) (0.499) (0.574) (0.600) Horizon 4  0.724  1.061* 0.32  1.260*  1.348** 0.77  0.975  1.853** 0.08 (0.672) (0.539) (0.678) (0.664) (0.781) (0.801) Horizon 5  0.772  0.913* 0.70  1.182*  1.287** 0.76  0.408  1.556* 0.04 (0.635) (0.534) (0.691) (0.644) (0.830) (0.851) Horizon 6  0.753  1.108* 0.36  1.571*  1.860** 0.45 0.011  1.109 0.06 (0.731) (0.598) (0.842) (0.751) (0.828) (0.780) Horizon 7  0.620  0.863* 0.59  0.900  1.179 0.49  0.220  1.418* 0.05 (0.677) (0.499) (0.749) (0.731) (0.871) (0.852) Adjusted R 2 0.16 0.14 0.10 Number of Countries 120 115 115 Number of Observations 5,175 3,441 3,942 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.5) on a sample of countries with average annual temperature above 15 C. In the regressions, indicators for policy measures are interacted with temperature, precipitation, and their lags, controlling for country and region-year fixed effects, lags of growth and policy measure, forwards of temperature and precipitation. Separate regressions are estimated for each horizon. Regression summary statistics are reported for horizon 0. In all specifi- cations, standard errors are clustered at the country level. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 171 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex Table 3.3.5. Role of Structural Policies and Institutions (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on per Capita Output Domestic Financial Sector Reform Index International Finance Restrictions Human Capital High Low P-value Low High P-value High Low P-value Horizon 0  1.540***  1.631*** 0.59  0.766**  1.139*** 0.07  1.039***  1.152*** 0.63 (0.437) (0.439) (0.293) (0.275) (0.291) (0.349) Horizon 1  1.539***  1.853*** 0.17  0.906**  1.054*** 0.50  0.891**  1.250*** 0.25 (0.518) (0.598) (0.391) (0.367) (0.411) (0.420) Horizon 2  0.413  0.923 0.15  0.622  1.090** 0.10  0.669  1.092** 0.27 (0.538) (0.711) (0.434) (0.472) (0.437) (0.494) Horizon 3  0.964  1.724** 0.06  1.089**  1.359*** 0.39  1.065**  1.250** 0.64 (0.712) (0.854) (0.462) (0.487) (0.475) (0.491) Horizon 4  0.325  1.118 0.10  1.601***  1.757*** 0.69  1.345**  1.686*** 0.49 (0.829) (0.855) (0.502) (0.529) (0.527) (0.576) Horizon 5  0.707  1.561* 0.13  1.790**  2.180*** 0.41  1.161  1.590** 0.46 (0.844) (0.868) (0.702) (0.761) (0.699) (0.704) Horizon 6  0.644  1.412* 0.22  1.608***  1.868*** 0.59  1.009  1.689** 0.34 (0.805) (0.807) (0.594) (0.615) (0.685) (0.724) Horizon 7  0.071  0.847 0.27  1.525**  1.975*** 0.39  0.657  1.236* 0.44 (0.888) (0.818) (0.682) (0.718) (0.736) (0.715) Adjusted R 2 0.24 0.13 0.12 Number of Countries 46 74 89 Number of Observations 1,455 3,434 4,582 Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on per Capita Output Physical Capital Political Regime Index Inequality High Low P-value High Low P-value Low High P-value Horizon 0  0.773***  0.861*** 0.66  1.370***  1.452*** 0.73  1.336***  1.559*** 0.07 (0.294) (0.302) (0.328) (0.293) (0.431) (0.390) Horizon 1  0.782*  0.777* 0.99  1.132***  1.392*** 0.27  1.034*  1.240** 0.26 (0.405) (0.423) (0.393) (0.367) (0.580) (0.588) Horizon 2  0.550  0.690 0.69  1.110***  1.729*** 0.01  0.814  1.024* 0.35 (0.442) (0.459) (0.416) (0.433) (0.584) (0.591) Horizon 3  0.430  0.820 0.30  1.374***  1.929*** 0.03  0.947  1.386* 0.09 (0.411) (0.497) (0.466) (0.464) (0.714) (0.738) Horizon 4  0.543  1.175** 0.15  1.599***  2.095*** 0.09  0.819  1.391* 0.06 (0.464) (0.573) (0.566) (0.601) (0.827) (0.820) Horizon 5  0.953  1.677** 0.17  1.587**  2.044*** 0.15  0.699  1.634* 0.01 (0.625) (0.755) (0.671) (0.705) (0.899) (0.877) Horizon 6  0.381  1.546** 0.09  1.416**  2.128*** 0.06  1.061  2.067** 0.01 (0.586) (0.691) (0.679) (0.704) (0.930) (0.913) Horizon 7  0.548  1.610* 0.14  1.325*  2.320*** 0.02  0.233  1.320 0.01 (0.645) (0.815) (0.751) (0.788) (1.060) (0.998) Adjusted R 2 0.13 0.10 0.28 Number of Countries 114 106 95 Number of Observations 3,905 5,056 1,798 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: The table presents results from estimating equation (3.5) on a sample of countries with average annual temperature above 15 C. In the regressions, indicators for policy measures are interacted with temperature, precipitation, and their lags, controlling for country and region-year fixed effects, lags of growth and policy measure, forwards of temperature and precipitation. Separate regressions are estimated for each horizon. Regression summary statistics are reported for horizon 0. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the country level. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 172 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The medium-term negative effects of temperature shocks tend to be smaller in countries with better structural policies and institutions (Annex Table 3.3.5). Standard errors are again quite large, and it is often difficult to reject the hypothesis that policies do not have an effect, but the point estimates of the effect of temperature shocks in the outer horizons are substan- tially larger in columns (2), (5), and (8). This evidence is in line with findings in the literature on the role of policies in attenuating the effects of natural disasters. See, among others, Kahn (2005); Noy (2009); Cavallo and others (2013); Felbermayr and Gr schl (2014); and Breckner and others (2016) for the role of institu- tional strength and democracy; Noy (2009); Von Peter, Dahlen, and Saxena (2012); McDermott, Barry, and Tol (2013); Felbermayr and Gr schl (2014); and Breckner and others (2016) for the role of financial markets; and Noy (2009); Raddatz (2009); and Von Peter, Dahlen, and Saxena (2012) for the role of development status. The Role of Development The chapter examines whether the overall level of development attenuates the negative effects of tem- perature shocks in hot countries, using subnational cross-country data. Combining subnational growth data from roughly 1,460 provinces and states across 79 countries from Gennaioli and others (2014) and annual temperature and precipitation data at the same level of aggregation, the analysis confirms that there is a nonlinear relationship between subnational growth and temperature by estimating equation (3.2). It then zooms in on the set of provinces and states with average temperature greater than 15 C to examine whether economic activity in the  hot  states or provinces of advanced economies responds to a temperature increase in the same way as in states or provinces of emerging market and developing economies with a similar average temperature. Equation (3.5) is estimated with pi,t taking the value of 1 for states or prov- inces located in advanced economies. pi,t is also interacted with lag of growth,   i  h  denote state or province fixed effects, and region-year fixed effects,   r,t  h  , are allowed to vary across advanced and non-advanced economies. Standard errors are clustered at the province level. Annex Table 3.3.6 presents the estimated effects of a 1 C increase in temperature at horizons 0 to 7 in all subnational regions with temperature greater than 15 C in column (1). The subsequent columns present the estimated effects for subnational regions in advanced and non-advanced economies, as well as the Annex Table 3.3.6. Role of Development: Evidence from Subnational Data Impact of a 1 C Increase in Temperature on per Capita Output Full Sample Advanced Economies Non-Advanced Economies P-value (1) (2) Horizon 0  0.705***  0.025  0.727*** 0.01 (0.174) (0.159) (0.210) Horizon 1  0.908*** 0.320  0.978*** 0.00 (0.263) (0.232) (0.315) Horizon 2  0.599** 0.952***  0.768** 0.00 (0.290) (0.350) (0.357) Horizon 3  0.543 1.089***  0.875** 0.00 (0.340) (0.339) (0.429) Horizon 4  0.752* 0.736*  1.130** 0.01 (0.386) (0.385) (0.499) Horizon 5  1.246*** 0.485  1.321** 0.04 (0.460) (0.510) (0.588) Horizon 6  1.156** 0.005  1.596** 0.10 (0.478) (0.526) (0.646) Horizon 7  1.333** 0.145  1.496** 0.13 (0.527) (0.601) (0.714) Adjusted R 2 0.18 0.20 Number of Countries 44 7 37 Number of Provinces 607 51 556 Number of Observations 16,148 16,148 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Regression (2) presents results from estimating equation (3.5) using subnational data on a sample of provinces with average annual temperature above 15 C. In the regression, the indicator for whether a province is located in an advanced economy is interacted with temperature, precipitation, their lags, lag of growth, and region-year fixed effects; controlling for province fixed effects and forwards of temperature and precipitation. Separate regressions are estimated for each horizon. Regression summary statistics are reported for horizon 0. In all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the province level. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 173 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 p-value of a test of their difference. The negative effects of temperature shocks are felt much more heavily in non-advanced economies. Annex 3.4. The Impact of Weather Changes and Natural Disasters on International Migration This annex provides additional details on the empirical analysis of the effect of temperature shocks and natural disasters on international migration. The analysis relies on data from  zden and others (2011) on emigrant stocks for 117 economies with average temperature greater than 15 C between 1980 and 2015. Migrant stocks, which are available at 10-year intervals, are differ- enced to compute net emigrant flows in each decade. Building on Cattaneo and Peri (2016), the analysis estimates the following specification:  Emigrant  i,d  =   +  T  i,d  +    T  i,d     LIDC  i    +  P  i,d  +    P  i,d     LIDC  i  +  Disaster  i,d   +    Disaster  i,d     LIDC  i  +   i  +   r,d  +   d     LIDC  i  +   i,d ,  (3.6) in which i indexes countries, d indexes decades,55 Emigrant is the net flow of emigrants over the decade as a percentage of the total population of the origin (source) country, T is the average temperature and P the average precipitation for the decade, and Disaster is the average number of natural disasters for each 55The 2010 decade includes data up to 2015. country-decade. The latter three variables are further interacted with a dummy identifying low-income devel- oping countries (LIDC) to capture potential differences in the emigration response to the weather fluctuations and natural disasters. As in Cattaneo and Peri (2016), the regression further controls for country fixed effects (  i ), region-decade fixed effects (  r,d ), and decade fixed effects interacted with the LIDC dummy. The random error term   i,d  is clustered at the country level.56 The specification is purposefully parsimonious. Controls typically included as determinants of migrations, such as population size, sociopolitical environment, and others, could themselves be affected by weather fluctu- ations and natural disasters. In a robustness check, the exercise controls for the incidence of war, an important push factor for emigration, although arguably this could be yet another channel through which weather fluctuations trigger movements of people (see Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel 2015b). Annex Table 3.4.1 reports the main findings from estimating equation (3.6). Higher average temperatures 56Following Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), the specifica- tion includes only fixed effects as controls, since other potential controls, such as population size or sociopolitical environment, may themselves be affected by agricultural productivity a key channel through which weather shocks may influence emigration  potentially producing a bias in the estimation by introducing an overcontrolling problem. The only exception is a dummy for wars (see Beaton and others 2017), which is included in some of the specifications and confirms the robustness of the findings. Annex Table 3.4.1. Effect of Weather Shocks and Natural Disasters on Emigration, 1980 2015 Percent of Emigrants in Total Population (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) Temperature 3.963 8.008* 8.067* 8.134* 8.127* 8.074* (2.522) (4.477) (4.476) (4.357) (4.480) (4.287) Precipitation  0.206  0.477  0.484  0.484  0.491  0.492 (0.710) (0.880) (0.878) (0.881) (0.878) (0.880) Temperature   LIDC  7.475*  7.672*  7.788*  7.571*  7.634* (4.253) (4.255) (4.092) (4.249) (4.088) Precipitation   LIDC 0.935 0.918 0.929 0.972 0.992 (1.022) (1.018) (1.024) (1.039) (1.033) Number of Natural Disasters 0.228* 0.228* 0.458 0.465* (0.138) (0.136) (0.281) (0.269) War 0.409  0.418 (2.283) (3.771) Number of Natural Disasters   LIDC  0.358  0.359 (0.309) (0.296) War   LIDC 1.216 (4.034) Adjusted R 2 0.04 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 Number of Observations 337 337 337 337 337 337 Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: All specifications include country-of-origin fixed effects, decade-region fixed effects, and decade fixed effects interacted with a dummy for low-income developing country (LIDC). Standard errors are clustered at the country level. * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 174 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 over a decade do not have a significant effect on emi- gration in the full sample of countries (column [1]). However, once the response is allowed to vary across broad groups of countries, the results suggest that in countries that are not classified as low income, higher temperature is indeed associated with greater emigra- tion flows (column [2]). A 1 C increase in average decadal temperature leads to an increase in the share of net emigrants of about 8 percentage points (which is equivalent to one standard deviation in the sample investigated).57 Similarly, more natural disasters over a decade also increase net emigration flows, especially in countries not classified as low income.58 Annex 3.5. Model-Based Analysis The model used to analyze the long-term impact of climate change and simulate the effects of policies in Box 3.2 is developed and presented in Buffie and others (2012). It is commonly known as the Debt, Investment, and Growth (DIG) model and has served as a workhorse in many IMF studies of low-income countries. The DIG is an optimizing intertemporal model with perfect foresight. It describes a two-sector small open economy model with private and pub- lic capital, learning by doing, and endogenous fiscal policies. Public capital is productive and is used in the production function in both sectors. Government spending can raise output directly by augmenting the stock of public capital and can crowd in and crowd out private investment. Firms operate Cobb-Douglas technologies to com- bine labor, private capital, and public capital (infra- structure) into output in the traded and nontraded sectors. The evolution of total factor productivity (TFP) is exogenous in both sectors. Firms face separate prices for exports, and imports and are assumed to be profit maximizing. Consumers supply labor and derive utility from consuming the domestic traded good, the foreign traded good, and the domestic nontraded good. 57The flow of emigrants as a share of population in countries that are not classified as low income in this sample is 2.5 percent, on average, with a standard deviation of 8.1 percentage points. For low-income countries, these statistics are 0.6 percent and 2.2 per- centage points, respectively. 58Results (not shown here and available on request) are robust to the use of other proxies for low-income countries, such as a dummy identifying the countries in the bottom quartile of the average GDP per capita distribution of the country sample during the full sample period analyzed. These goods are combined into a constant elasticity of substitution basket, and savers maximize the pres- ent value of their lifetime utility. The model breaks Ricardian equivalence by including both savers and hand-to-mouth consumers. The government spends on transfers, debt service, and (partially inefficient) infrastructure investment. It collects revenue from the consumption value-added tax and from user fees for infrastructure services. The deficit is financed through domestic borrowing, exter- nal concessional borrowing, or external commercial borrowing. Policymakers accept all concessional loans offered by official creditors. The borrowing and amor- tization schedule for these loans is fixed exogenously. Debt sustainability requires that the value-added tax and transfers eventually adjust to cover the entire defi- cit, given the exogenously determined upper limit on taxes and lower limit on transfers. The model incor- porates shocks to the government external debt risk premium (or world interest rates). The majority of the model parameters are set to the same values as in Buffie and others (2012), with few exceptions, mostly to reflect the decline in global interest rates, the projection of trend GDP growth in low-income countries, and the sample median of public-debt-to-GDP ratios. The parameters that differ from the ones in Buffie and others (2012) are pre- sented in Annex Table 3.5.1. Simulating the Long-Term Impact of Climate Change To trace the long-term impact of climate change, the model incorporates the estimated relationship between temperature and per capita output discussed in Annex 3.3 and presented in Annex Table 3.3.1, column (5). The effect is assumed to occur through temperature s effect on TFP; therefore, the estimated parameters are rescaled so that the model matches the empirically estimated decline of GDP if temperature increases by 1 C.59 The temperature during 2017 2100 is assumed to follow one of two alternative scenarios: Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 or RCP 8.5. The temperature increases during 2017 2100 are calculated for the median low-income country in the sample and are equal to 2.0 C and 3.9 C for RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, respectively. 59Estimates of the damage to GDP cannot be used directly given that GDP is endogenous.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 175 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 There are two sources of uncertainty in the simulation the uncertainty of RCP projections and the uncertainty of the effect of temperature on TFP. Both sources of uncertainty are combined in the analysis as follows. The upper-bound scenario is simulated assuming that the temperature increase is equal to the lowest 5th percentile for each RCP.60 To account for the uncertainty of estimated param- eters, the TFP parameters are set to the conditional expected value for the upper 50 percent of the TFP distribution. The worst lower-bound scenario is sim- ulated analogously. Modeling Structural Transformation Structural transformation is generated in the DIG model by introducing diverging trends in sectoral TFP growth, along the lines of Ngai and Pissarides (2007). In their model, faster productivity growth in the traded goods sector goes along with a decline in the relative price of traded versus nontraded goods. Given complementarity in final demand, production in the former sector relative to the latter does not increase in the same proportion. The value share of the traded goods sector eventually shrinks, even in the presence of international trade. While this approach relies on only one potential driver of structural transformation, it generates the desired increase in employment and nominal-value-added shares of the nontraded goods sector, which is mostly composed of services. The gap in sectoral TFP growth rates is set to replicate the average increase in the service share of value added in low-income developing countries in 1990 2015, which has risen at the rate of 2.5 percentage points a decade. Given this calibration, in the scenario without rising 60Here, the 5 95 percent confidence intervals for the temperature increases are 1.2 C to 2.8 C and 2.8 C to 5.1 C for RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, respectively. temperatures, the employment share of nontraded goods increases from the baseline value of 42.27 per- cent to 65 percent over 90 years. Modeling Optimal Adaptation Box 3.2 extends the original DIG model to incor- porate direct investment in adaptation strategies. The main addition is the inclusion of private adaptation and public subsidies to private adaptation, whereas damages are modeled as before. In the absence of any adaptation measure, increased temperature causes gross damage, denoted by  G  D  jt , at time t in sector j. The gross damage is expressed as a fraction of sec- toral output:  g  d  jt  =   G  D  jt  _  q  jt    = f  ( T  ) . Gross damage can be reduced by investing in adap- tation. Firm i s capacity to adapt to climate change is denoted by  O  i,jt . It is increasing in firm i s protection expenditures  A  D  i,jt  as well as in the total sectoral pro- tection expenditures     AD   jt  =   0  1    A  D  i,jt  di .61 The residual damage for firm i in sector j is   i,jt  =   g  d  jt  _____________  O  i,jt   ( A  D  i,jt ,     AD   jt )      , in which the marginal damage reduction from adap- tation spending is decreasing. The positive parameter   is the elasticity of damage reduction to the level of adaptation. If the cost of a unit of protection is equal to  P  AD,t  and the functional form for the capacity to adapt is   O  i,jt ( A  D  i,jt ,     AD   jt ;  )  = A  D  i,jt      AD   jt      (with  0       1 ), then cost minimization by firms in the symmetric 61Many adaptation measures have the nature of public goods; hence, firms benefit from total sectoral protection spending. Annex Table 3.5.1. Parameterization of the Debt, Investment, and Growth Model Parameter Value (percent) Initial Return on Infrastructure Investment 30 Public Domestic Debt-to-GDP Ratio 10 Public Concessional Debt-to-GDP Ratio 30 Public External Commercial Debt-to-GDP Ratio 5 Oil Revenues-to-GDP Ratio 2 Real Interest Rate on Public Domestic Debt 7 Real Interest Rate on Public External Commercial Debt 4 Trend per Capita Growth Rate 2.8 Sources: Buffie and others (2012); and IMF staff calculations.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 176 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 equilibrium  A  D  i,jt  =     AD   jt  determines the optimal level of adaptation expenditure for each firm  A  D  i,jt  =  (    G  D  jt  ____  P  AD,t   )    1 _________ 1 +  ( 1 +  )      The optimal level of firm-specific residual damage is then   jt  =   g  d  jt  _______ A  D  jt   ( 1 +  )   ,  which can be shown to be socially suboptimal. The social planner s cost function,  TotD  i,jt ,  differs from that of individual firms  Tot  D  i,jt  SP  = G  D  jt   ( A  D  jt  SP )   ( 1 +  )  +  P  AD,t  A  D  jt  SP  . Minimizing the social cost gives socially optimal adaptation expenditures  A  D  jt  SP  =  [ ( 1 +  )    G  D  jt  ____  P  AD,t   ]    1 _________ 1 +  ( 1 +  )      It can be shown that private agents invest less than the socially optimal amount. The adaptation spending gap (as a fraction of the socially optimal adaptation spending) is equal to  1    (    1 ____ 1 +    )    1 _________ 1 +  ( 1 +  )      . It can also be shown that the socially optimal amount of adaptation expenditures can be achieved if subsidies in the amount of    ,jt  per unit cost of protec- tion are paid by the government to the firms    ,jt  =     _____  ( 1 +  )    . Annex 3.6. Reduced Form Approach to Estimating Potential Long-Term Effects of Climate Change Indicative evidence of the potential impacts of climate change and their distribution across the globe could also be gleaned by combining the estimated sensitivity of per capita output to temperature increase (Annex Table 3.3.1, column [5]), baseline annual temperatures, and projected temperature changes for each geographic location. As in the modeling exercise, this analysis takes the most conservative approach and assumes temperature increases have a permanent level, rather than growth, effect on per capita output. The estimated cumulative impact on 2100 per capita GDP under the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios are presented in Annex Figure 3.6.1. It is important to note that this exercise captures the likely impact of one particular aspect of climate change, namely temperature increases. The macroeconomic effects of many expected or possible events (such as higher incidence of natural disasters, rising sea levels, ocean acidification, and the like) are not quantified in this exercise. Furthermore, the analysis abstracts from cross-border spillovers that may arise if climate change triggers more frequent epidemics, famines, and other natural disasters along with social unrest, armed conflict, and associated refugee flows. The analysis suggests that the projected warming will have uneven effects across the globe. However, the increase in temperature, especially under the RCP 8.5 scenario, will push many advanced economies beyond the threshold temperature level, thus triggering direct economic losses for these countries as well.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 177 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 References Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel. 2008.  A New Database of Financial Reforms.  IMF Working Paper 08/266, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001.  The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.  American Economic Review 91 (5): 1369 401. Acevedo, Sebastian. 2014.  Debt, Growth, and Natural Disasters: A Caribbean Trilogy.  IMF Working Paper 14/125, Interna- tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.  . 2016.  Gone with the Wind: Estimating Hurricane and Climate Change Costs in the Caribbean.  IMF Working Paper 16/199, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Altu , Sumru, and Robert A. Miller. 1998.  The Effect of Work Experience on Female Wages and Labour Supply.  Review of Economic Studies 65 (1): 45 85. Andersen, Thomas Barnebeck, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, and Pablo Selaya. 2016.  Climate and the Emergence of Global Income Differences.  Review of Economic Studies 83 (4): 1334 63. Anthoff, David, and Richard Tol. 2010.  FUND Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation and Distribution.  Annex Figure 3.6.1. The Long-Term Impact of Temperature Increase on Real per Capita Output across the Globe (Percent) 1. RCP 4.5 Scenario 2. RCP 8.5 Scenario Sources: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP); World Bank Group Cartography Unit; and IMF staff calculations. Note: The maps depict the effect of the projected increase in temperature between 2005 and 2100 under RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 scenarios on real per capita output in 2100. Gray areas indicate the estimated impact is not statistically signi cant. RCP = Representative Concentration Pathways. 12 + 8 4 0  4 18 + 12 6 0  6  12  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 178 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 https:// yosemite .epa .gov/ ee/ epa/ eerm .nsf/ vwAN/ EE -0564 -101  .pdf/ $file/ EE -0564 -101 .pdf. Ashraf, Quamrul, and Stelios Michalopoulos. 2015.  Climatic Fluctuations and the Diffusion of Agriculture.  Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (3): 589 609. Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon M. Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. 2011.  Global Climate Models and Climate Data: A User Guide for Economists.  Unpublished. Baez, Javier, German Caruso, Valerie Mueller, and Chiyu Niu. 2017.  Heat Exposure and Youth Migration in Central Amer- ica and the Caribbean.  American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 107 (5): 446 50. Bakkensen, Laura, and Lint Barrage. 2016.  Do Disasters Affect Growth? A Macro Model-Based Perspective on the Empirical Debate.  Working Paper, Department of Economics, Brown University, Providence, RI. Barreca, Alan I. 2012.  Climate Change, Humidity, and Mortal- ity in the United States.  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 63 (1): 19 34.  , Karen Clay, Olivier Desch nes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph Shapiro. 2016.  Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature-Mortality Rela- tionship over the 20th Century.  Journal of Political Economy 124 (1): 105 59. Barrios, Salvador, Luisito Bertinelli, and Eric Strobl. 2006.  Climatic Change and Rural-Urban Migration: The Case of Sub-Saharan Africa.  Journal of Urban Economics 60 (3): 357 71.  , Luisito Bertinelli, and Eric Strobl. 2010.  Trends in Rainfall and Economic Growth in Africa: A Neglected Cause of the African Growth Tragedy.  Review of Economics and Statistics 32 (2): 350 66. Barrios, Salvador, Ouattara Bazoumana, and Eric Strobl. 2008.  The Impact of Climatic Change on Agricultural Production: Is It Different for Africa?  Food Policy 33: 287 98. Baum, Anja, Andrew Hodge, Aiko Mineshima, Marialuz Moreno Badia, and Ren  Tapsoba. 2017.  Can They Do It All? Fiscal Space in Low-Income Countries.  IMF Working Paper 17/110, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Beaton, Kimberly, Svetlana Cerovic, Misael Galdamez, Metodij Hadzi-Vaskov, Franz Loyola, Zs ka K cz n, Bogdan Liss- ovolik, Jan Kees Martijn, Yulia Ustyugova, and Joyce Wong. 2017.  Migration and Remittances in Latin America and the Caribbean: Engines of Growth and Macroeconomic Stabi- lizers?  IMF Working Paper 17/144, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Bertinelli, Luisito, and Eric Strobl. 2013.  Quantifying the Local Economic Growth Impact of Hurricane Strikes: An Analysis from Outer Space for the Caribbean.  Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 52: 1688 97. Black, Richard, Stephen R. G. Bennett, Sandy M. Thomas, and John R. Beddington. 2011.  Migration as Adaptation.  Nature 478: 447 49. Bluedorn, John, Akos Valentinyi, and Michael Vlassopoulos. 2009.  The Long-Lived Effects of Historic Climate on the Wealth of Nations.  CEPR Discussion Paper 7572, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London. Bohra-Mishra, Pratikshya, Michael Oppenheimer, and Solo- mon M. Hsiang. 2014.  Nonlinear Permanent Migration Response to Climatic Variations but Minimal Response to Disasters.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (27): 9780 85. Boustan, Leah P., Matthew E. Kahn, and Paul W. Rhode. 2012.  Moving to Higher Ground: Migration Response to Natural Disasters in the Early Twentieth Century.  American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102 (3): 238 44. Breckner, Miriam, Florian Englmaier, Till Stowasser, and Uwe Sunde. 2016.  Economic Development and Resilience to Natural Catastrophes Insurance Penetration and Institu- tions.  Unpublished. Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed M. Mobarak. 2014.  Underinvestment in a Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh.  Econometrica 82 (5): 1671 748. Buckley, Brendan M., Kevin J. Anchukaitis, Daniel Penny, Roland Fletcher, Edward R. Cook, Masaki Sano, Le Canh Nam, Aroonrut Wichienkeeo, Ton That Minh, and Truong Mai Hong. 2010.  Climate as a Contributing Factor in the Demise of Angkor, Cambodia.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (15): 6748 52. Buffie, Edward, Andrew Berg, Catherine Pattillo, Rafael Portillo, and Luis-Felipe Zanna. 2012.  Public Investment, Growth, and Debt Sustainability: Putting Together the Pieces.  IMF Working Paper 12/144, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. B ntgen, Ulf, Willy Tegel, Kurt Nicolussi, Michael McCormick, David Frank, Valerie Trouet, Jed O. Kaplan, Franz Herzig, Karl-Uwe Heussner, Heinz Wanner, J rg Luterbacher, and Jan Esper. 2011.  2500 Years of European Climate Variability and Human Susceptibility.  Science 331 (6017): 578 82. Burgess, Robin, Olivier Desch nes, Dave Donaldson, and Michael Greenstone. 2014.  The Unequal Effects of Weather and Climate Change: Evidence from Mortal- ity in India.  Unpublished. www .lse .ac .uk/ economics/  people/ facultyPersonalPages/ facultyFiles/ RobinBurgess/  UnequalEffectsOfWeatherAndClimateChange140514 .pdf. Burke, Marshall, and Kyle Emerick. 2016.  Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence from US Agriculture.  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3): 106 40. Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2015a.  Global Non-Linear Effect of Temperature on Economic Production.  Nature 527: 235 39.  . 2015b.  Climate and Conflict.  Annual Review of Economics 7: 577 617. Burke, Paul J., and Andrew Leigh. 2010.  Do Output Con- tractions Trigger Democratic Change?  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4): 124 57.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 179 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Cabezon, Ezequiel, Leni Hunter, Patrizia Tumbarello, Kazuaki Washimi, and Yigun Wu. 2015.  Enhancing Macroeconomic Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change in the Small States of the Pacific.  IMF Working Paper 15/125, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Calder n, C sar, Enrique Moral-Benito, and Luis Serv n. 2015.  Is Infrastructure Capital Productive? A Dynamic Het- erogeneous Approach.  Journal of Applied Econometrics 30 (2): 177 98. Carleton, Tamma A. 2017.  Crop-Damaging Temperatures Increase Suicide Rates in India.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (33): 8746 51.  , and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2016.  Social and Economic Impacts of Climate.  Science 353 (6304). Cashin, Paul, Kamiar Mohaddes, and Mehdi Raissi. 2017.  Fair Weather or Foul? The Macroeconomic Effects of El Ni o.  Journal of International Economics 106: 37 54. Cattaneo, Cristina, and Giovanni Peri. 2016.  The Migration Response to Increasing Temperatures.  Journal of Development Economics 122: 127 46. Cavallo, Edurardo, Sebastian Galiani, Ilan Noy, and Juan Pan- tano. 2013.  Catastrophic Natural Disasters and Economic Growth.  Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (5): 1549 61. Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN) Columbia University. 2016. Gridded Population of the World, Version 4 (GPWv4): Population Count. NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), Pal- isades, NY. http:// dx .doi .org/ 10 .7927/ H4X63JVC. Accessed March 15, 2017.  , United Nations Food and Agriculture Programme (FAO), and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT). 2005. Gridded Population of the World, Version 3 (GPWv3): Population Count Grid. NASA Socioeco- nomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), Palisades, NY. http:// dx .doi .org/ 10 .7927/ H4639MPP. Accessed March 15, 2017. Chamberlain, Gary. 1980.  Analysis of Covariance with Qualita- tive Data.  Review of Economic Studies 47: 225 38. Chaney, Eric. 2013.  Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion, and Political Power.  Econometrica 81: 2033 53. Chen, Chen, Ian Noble, Jessica Hellmann, Joyce Coffee, Martin Murillo, and Nitesh Chawla. 2015. University of Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index. Country Index Technical Report. Chen, Joyce J., Valerie Mueller, Yuanyuan Jia, and Steven Kuo-Hsin Tseng. 2017.  Validating Migration Responses to Flooding Using Satellite and Vital Registration Data.  Ameri- can Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 107 (5): 441 45. Cole, Shawn, Gautam Bastian, Sangita Vyas, Carina Wendel, and Daniel Stein. 2012.  The Effectiveness of Index-Based Micro-Insurance in Helping Smallholders Manage Weather-Related Risks.  London: Evidence for Policy and Practice Information and Co-ordinating (EPPI) Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, Univer- sity of London. Cole, Shawn, Xavier Gine, Jeremy Tobacman, Petia Topalova, Robert Townsend, and James Vickery. 2013.  Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India.  Ameri- can Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5: 104 35. Colmer, Jonathan. 2016.  Weather Labor Reallocation and Industrial Production: Evidence from India.  Unpublished, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Cook, John, Dana Nuccitelli, Sarah A. Green, Mark Richardson, B rbel Winkler, Rob Painting, Robert Way, Peter Jacobs, and Andrew Skuce. 2013.  Quantifying the Consensus on Anthropogenic Global Warming in the Scientific Literature.  Environmental Research Letters 8 (2). Cook, John, Naomi Oreskes, Peter T. Doran, William Anderegg, Bart Verheggen, Ed W. Maibach, J. Stuart Carlton, Stephan Lewandowsky, Andrew G. Skuce, Sarah A. Green, Dana Nuc- citelli, Peter Jacobs, Mark Richardson, B rbel Winkler, Rob Painting, and Ken Rice. 2016.  Consensus on Consensus: A Synthesis of Consensus Estimates on Human-Caused Global Warming.  Environmental Research Letters 11 (4). Cooper, Gail. 2002.  Air-Conditioning America: Engineers and the Controlled Environment, 1900 1960.  Johns Hopkins Studies in the History of Technology. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith. 2016.  Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million Fields around the World.  Journal of Political Economy 124 (1): 205 48. Cullen, H., P. B. deMenocal, S. Hemming, G. Hemming, F. H. Brown, T. Guilderson, and F. Sirocko. 2000.  Climate Change and the Collapse of the Akkadian Empire: Evidence from the Deep Sea.  Geology 28 (4): 379 82. Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012.  Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.  American Economic Journal: Macroeco- nomics 4 (3): 66 95.  . 2014.  What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New Climate Economy Literature.  Journal of Economic Liter- ature 52 (3): 740 98. Deryugina, Tatyana. 2011.  The Role of Transfer Payments in Mitigating Shocks: Evidence from the Impact of Hurricanes.  Munich Personal RePEc Archive (MPRA) Paper 53307, Munich.  , and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2014.  Does the Environ- ment Still Matter? Daily Temperature and Income in the United States.  NBER Working Paper 20750, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Desch nes, Olivier. 2012.  Temperature, Human Health and Adaptation: A Review of the Empirical Literature.  NBER Working Paper 18345, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.  , and Michael Greenstone. 2011.  Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctu- ations in Weather in the US.  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (4): 152 85.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 180 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Fankhauser, Samuel, and Richard Tol. 2005.  On Climate Change and Economic Growth.  Resource and Energy Econom- ics 27: 1 17. Farid, Mai, Michael Keen, Michael Papaioannou, Ian Parry, Catherine Pattillo, and Anna Ter-Martirosyan. 2016.  After Paris: Fiscal, Macroeconomic, and Financial Implications of Climate Change.  IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/01, Interna- tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Felbermayr, Gabriel, and Jasmin Gr schl. 2014.  Naturally Negative: The Growth Effects of Natural Disasters.  Journal of Development Economics 111: 92 106. Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer. 2010.  Linkages among Climate Change, Crop Yields, and Mexico US Cross-Border Migration.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (32): 14257 62. Feng, Shuaizhang, Michael Oppenheimer, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2012.  Climate Change, Crop Yields, and Internal Migration in the United States.  NBER Working Paper 17734, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Fenske, James, and Namrata Kala. 2015.  Climate and the Slave Trade.  Journal of Development Economics 112: 19 32. Fomby, Thomas, Yuki Ikeda, and Norman Loayza. 2013.  The Growth Aftermath of Natural Disasters.  Journal of Applied Econometrics 28 (3): 412 34. Foster, Vivien, and Cecilia Briceno-Garmendia. 2010. Africa s Infrastructure: A Time for Transformation. Africa Development Forum. Washington, DC: World Bank. https:// openknowledge .worldbank .org/ handle/ 10986/ 2692. Galor, Oded. 2011. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Garg, Teevrat, Maulik Jagnani, and Viz Taraz. 2017.  Human Capital Costs of Climate Change: Evidence from Test Scores in India.  Unpublished. Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez De Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2014.  Growth in Regions.  Journal of Economic Growth 19 (3): 259 309. Gerling, Kerstin. Forthcoming.  The Macro-Fiscal Aftermath of Weather-Related Disasters in Developing Asia: Do Loss Dimensions Matter?  IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.  , Maria Moreno Badia, and Priscilla Toffano. Forth- coming.  A Primer on the Macro-Fiscal Impact of Natural Disasters.  IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Graff Zivin, J. S., Solomon M. Hsiang, and Matthew J. Neidell. 2015.  Temperature and Human Capital in the Short- and Long-Run.  NBER Working Paper 21157, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Graff Zivin, J. S., and Matthew J. Neidell. 2014.  Tempera- ture and the Allocation of Time: Implications for Climate Change.  Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1): 1 26. Gray, Clark L., and Valerie Mueller. 2012a.  Drought and Population Mobility in Rural Ethiopia.  World Development 40 (1): 134 45.  . 2012b.  Natural Disasters and Population Mobility in Bangladesh.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (16): 6000 05. Guha-Sapir, Debarati, Regina Below, and Philippe Hoyois. 2015.  EM-DAT: The CRED/OFDA International Disaster Data- base.  Universit  Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. www .emdat .be. Guo, Y., A. Gasparrini, B. Armstrong, S. Li, B. Tawatsupa, A. Tobias, E. Lavigne, M. de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, M. Leone, X. Pan, S. Tong, L. Tian, H. Kim, M. Hashizume, Y. Honda, YL Guo, CF Wu, K. Punnasiri, SM Yi, P. Mich- elozzi, PH Saldiva, and G. Williams. 2014.  Global Variation in the Effects of Ambient Temperature on Mortality: A Systematic Evaluation.  Epidemiology 25 (6): 781 89. Hallegatte, St phane. 2009.  Strategies to Adapt to an Uncer- tain Climate Change.  Global Environmental Change 19 (2): 240 47.  , Mook Bangalore, Laura Bonzanigo, Marianne Fay, Tamaro Kane, Ulf Narloch, Julie Rozenberg, David Treguer, and Adrien Vogt-Schilb. 2016.  Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on Poverty.  Climate Change and Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank. Hallegatte, St phane, Jean-Charles Hourcade, Patrice Dumas. 2007.  Why Economic Dynamics Matter in Assessing Climate Change Damages: Illustration on Extreme Events.  Ecological Economics 62: 330 40. Hallegatte, St phane, Franck Lecocq, and Christian de Perthuis. 2011.  Designing Climate Change Adaptation Policies: An Economic Framework.  Policy Research Working Paper 5568, World Bank, Washington, DC. Hallegatte, St phane, and Julie Rozenberg. 2017.  Climate Change through a Poverty Lens.  Nature Climate Change 4: 250 56. Hauer, Mathew E., Jason M. Evans, and Deepak R. Mishra. 2016.  Millions Projected to Be at Risk from Sea-Level Rise in the Continental United States.  Nature Climate Change 6: 691 95. Haug, Gerald H., Detlef G nther, Larry C. Peterson, Daniel M. Sigman, Konrad A. Hughen, and Beat Aeschlimann. 2003.  Climate and the Collapse of Maya Civilization.  Science 299 (5613): 1731 35. Heal, Geoffrey, and Jisung Park. 2016.  Temperature Stress and the Direct Impact of Climate Change: A Review of an Emerging Literature.  Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 10 (2): 347 62. Hong, Harrison, Frank Li, and Jiangmin Xu. 2016.  Climate Risks and Market Efficiency.  NBER Working Paper 22890, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Hope, Chris. 2011.  The PAGE09 Integrated Assessment Model: A Technical Description.  Cambridge Judge Business School Working Papers 4/11. Hornbeck, Richard. 2012.  The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.  American Economic Review 102 (4): 1477 507.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 181 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017  , and Suresh Naidu. 2014.  When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and Economic Development in the Ameri- can South.  American Economic Review 104 (3): 963 90. Hsiang, Solomon M. 2016.  Climate Econometrics.  Annual Review of Resource Economics 8: 43 75.  , and Amir Jina. 2014.  The Causal Effect of Environ- mental Catastrophe on Long-Run Economic Growth: Evi- dence from 6,700 Cyclones.  NBER Working Paper 20352, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Hsiang, Solomon M., and Daiju Narita. 2012.  Adaptation to Cyclone Risk: Evidence from the Global Cross-Section.  Climate Change Economics 3 (2). Hulten, Charles R. 1996.  Infrastructure Capital and Economic Growth: How Well You Use It May Be More Important Than How Much You Have.  NBER Working Paper 5847, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2008.  Exchange Rate Arrangements Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?  NBER Working Paper 23134, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2013.  Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.  Sum- mary for Policymakers. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.  . 2014.  Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.  Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2015.  Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects in Low-Income Developing Countries.  Policy Paper, Washington, DC.  . 2016a.  Enhancing Resilience to Natural Disasters in Sub-Saharan Africa.  In Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington DC, October.  . 2016b.  Small States  Resilience to Natural Disas- ters and Climate Change: Role for the IMF.  Board Paper, Washington, DC.  . 2017.  Seychelles: Climate Change Policy Assessment.  IMF Country Report 17/162, Washington, DC. Jennings, Steve. 2011.  Time s Bitter Flood: Trends in the Num- ber of Reported Natural Disasters.  Oxfam Policy and Practice: Climate Change and Resilience 7 (1): 115 47. Jord ,  scar. 2005.  Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.  American Economic Review 95 (1): 161 82. Kahn, Matthew. 2005.  The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: The Role of Income, Geography and Institutions.  Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (2): 271 84. Karlan, Dean S., Robert Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Chris- topher Udry. 2014.  Agricultural Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2): 597 652. Kelley, Colin P., Shahrzad Mohtadi, Mark A. Cane, Richard Seager, and Yochanan Kushnir. 2015.  Climate Change in the Fertile Crescent and Implications of the Recent Syrian Drought.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (11): 3241 46. Kim, Nam Kyu. 2014.  Revisiting Economic Shocks and Coups.  Journal of Conflict Resolution 60: 3 31. Klein Goldewijk, Kees, Arthur Beusen, Jonathan Doelman, and Elke Stehfest. 2016.  New Anthropogenic Land Use Estimates for the Holocene; HYDE 3.2.  Earth System Science Data. Knapp, Kenneth, Scott Applequist, Howard Diamond, James Kossin, Michael Kruk, and Carl Schreck. 2010. NCDC International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS) Project, Version 3. Revision 09. NOAA, National Centers for Environmental Information. Knapp, Kenneth, Michael Kruk, David Levinson, Howard Dia- mond, and Charles Neumann. 2010.  The International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS): Unifying Tropical Cyclone Best Track Data.  Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91: 363 76. Knutson, Thomas, John McBride, Johnny Chan, Kerry Eman- uel, Greg Holland, Chris Landsea, Isaac Held, James Kossin, A. Srivastava, and Masato Sugi. 2010.  Tropical Cyclones and Climate Change.  Nature Geoscience 3: 157 63. Knutson, Thomas, and Robert Tuleya. 2004.  Impact of CO2-Induced Warming on Simulated Hurricane Intensity and Precipitation: Sensitivity to the Choice of Climate Model and Convective Parameterization.  Journal of Climate 17: 3477 95. Kudamatsu, Masayuki, Torsten Persson, and David Str mberg. 2012.  Weather and Infant Mortality in Africa.  CEPR Discussion Paper 9222, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London. Landsea, Christopher. 2004.  Hurricane FAQ: Why Do Tropical Cyclones Require 80 F (26.5 C) Ocean Temperatures to Form?  NOAA, Hurricane Research Division of the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, Miami, FL. http:// www .aoml .noaa .gov/ hrd/ tcfaq/ A16 .html. Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2017.  Inter- national Financial Integration in the Aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.  IMF Working Paper 17/115, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Lanzafame, Matteo. 2014.  Temperature, Rainfall, and Eco- nomic Growth in Africa.  Empirical Economics 46 (1): 1 18. Lee, Minsoo, Mai Lin Villaruel, and Raymond Gaspar. 2016.  Effects of Temperature Shocks on Economic Growth and Welfare in Asia.  ADB Economics Working Paper 501, Asian Development Bank, Mandaluyong City, Philippines. Lee, Tien Ming, Ezra M. Markowitz, Peter D. Howe, Chia-Ying Ko, and Anthony A. Leiserowitz. 2015.  Predictors of Public Climate Change Awareness and Risk Perception around the World.  Nature Climate Change 5: 1014 20.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 182 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Lemoine, Derek. 2017.  Expect above Average Temperatures: Identifying the Economic Impact of Climate Change.  NBER Working Paper 23549, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Lloyd s. 2012. Global Underinsurance Report. London: October 2012. Lobell, David B., Wolfram Schlenker, and Justin Costa-Roberts. 2011.  Climate Trends and Global Crop Production since 1980.  Science 333 (6042): 616 20. Marchiori, Luca, Jean-Francois Maystadt, and Ingmar Schum- acher. 2012.  The Impact of Weather Anomalies on Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa.  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 63 (3): 355 74. Marcott, Shaun A., Jeremy D. Shakun, Peter U. Clark, and Alan C. Mix. 2013.  A Reconstruction of Regional and Global Temperature for the Past 11,300 Years.  Science 339 (6124): 1198 201. Margulis, Sergio, and Urvashi Narain. 2010. The Costs to Devel- oping Countries of Adapting to Climate Change: New Methods and Estimates The Global Report of the Economics of Adapta- tion to Climate Change Study. Washington: World Bank. Matsuura, Kenji, and Cort J. Willmott. 2007.  Terrestrial Air Temperature: 1900 2006 Gridded Monthly Time Series (Ver- sion 1.01) 2009.  http:// climate .geog .udel .edu/ ~climate/ html  _pages/ Global2 _Ts _2009/ README .global _t _ts _2009 .html. McDermott, Thomas K. J., Frank Barry, and Richard S. J. Tol. 2013.  Disasters and Development: Natural Disasters, Credit Constraints, and Economic Growth.  Oxford Economic Papers 66 (3): 750 73. Mueller, Valerie, Clark Gray, and Katrina Kosec. 2014.  Heat Stress Increases Long-Term Human Migration in Rural Paki- stan.  Nature Climate Change 4: 182 85. Munshi, Kaivan. 2003.  Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the US Labor Market.  Quarterly Jour- nal of Economics 118 (2): 549 99. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2017a.  Climate at a Glance: Global Time Series.  National Centers for Environmental Information, NOAA, Department of Commerce, Washington, DC. http:// www .ncdc .noaa .gov/ cag/ .  . 2017b.  Tropical Cyclone Climatology.  National Hur- ricane Center, NOAA, Department of Commerce, Washing- ton, DC. http:// www .nhc .noaa .gov/ climo/ . Ngai, L. Rachel, and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2007.  Struc- tural Change in a Multi-Sector Model of Growth.  American Economic Review 97 (1): 429 43. Nordhaus, William D. 2010.  Economic Aspects of Global Warming in a Post-Copenhagen Environment.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (26): 11721 26. Nordhaus, William D., and Andrew Moffat. 2017.  A Survey of Global Impacts of Climate Change: Replication, Survey Meth- ods and a Statistical Analysis.  NBER Working Paper 23646, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Nordhaus, William D., and Paul Sztorc. 2013.  DICE 2013R: Introduction and User s Manual.  www .dicemodel .net. Noy, Ilan. 2009.  The Macroeconomic Consequences of Disas- ters.  Journal of Development Economics 88 (2): 221 31. Nunn, Nathan. 2008.  The Long-Term Effects of Africa s Slave Trades.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1): 139 76.  . 2014.  Historical Development.  In Handbook of Economic Growth (2), edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, 347 402. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2015a. Climate Change Risks and Adaptation: Link- ing Policy and Economics. Paris: OECD Publishing.  . 2015b.  Climate Finance in 2013 14 and the USD 100 Billion Goal.  A report by the OECD in collaboration with Climate Policy Initiative, Paris.  zden,  a lar, Christopher Parsons, Maurice Schiff, and Terrie L. Walmsley. 2011.  Where on Earth Is Everybody? The Evolution of Global Bilateral Migration, 1960 2000.  World Bank Economic Review 25 (1): 12 56. Park, Jisung. 2016.  Will We Adapt? Temperature Shocks, Labor Productivity, and Adaptation to Climate Change in the United States.  Unpublished. Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.  . 2017.  Heat Stress and Human Capital Production.  Unpublished, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. Parry, Ian W. H., Ruud de Mooij, and Michael Keen. 2012. Fiscal Policy to Mitigate Climate Change: A Guide for Policy- makers. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. Parry, Ian W. H., Adele Morris, and Roberton Williams, editors. 2015. Implementing a US Carbon Tax: Challenges and Debates. London: Routledge. Parry, Ian W. H., Victor Mylonas, and Nate Vernon. 2017.  Reforming Energy Policy in India: Assessing the Options.  IMF Working Paper 17/103, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Parry, Ian W. H., Baoping Shang, Philippe Wingender, Nate Vernon, and Tarun Narasimhan. 2016.  Climate Mitigation in China: Which Policies Are Most Effective?  IMF Working Paper 16/148, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Peng, Wei, and Alan Feng. Forthcoming.  Underreacting to Climate Shocks: Evidence from Global Stock Markets.  Porter, Catherine, and Emily White. 2016.  Potential for Application of a Probabilistic Catastrophe Risk Modelling Framework to Poverty Outcomes: General Form Vulnerability Functions Relating Household Poverty Outcomes to Hazard Intensity in Ethiopia.  Policy Research Working Paper 7717, World Bank, Washington, DC. Pritchett, Lant. 2000.  The Tyranny of Concepts: CUDIE (Cumulated, Depreciated, Investment Effort) Is Not Capital.  Journal of Economic Growth 5 (4): 361 84. Quinn, Dennis P. 1997.  The Correlates of Change in Interna- tional Financial Regulation.  American Political Science Review 91 (3): 531 51.  , and A. Maria Toyoda. 2008.  Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to Growth?  Review of Financial Studies 21 (3): 1403 49.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 183 CHAPTER 3 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Raddatz, Claudio. 2009.  The Wrath of God: Macroeconomic Costs of Natural Disasters.  Policy Research Working Paper 5039, World Bank, Washington, DC. Ramcharan, Rodney. 2009.  Does the Exchange Rate Regime Matter for Real Shocks? Evidence from Windstorms and Earth- quakes.  Journal of International Economics 73 (1): 31 47. Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004.  The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 1 48. Roston, Eric, and Blacki Migliozzi. 2015.  What s Really Warm- ing the World?  Bloomberg Business Week, June 24. Schlenker, Wolfram, and David B. Lobell. 2010.  Robust Negative Impacts of Climate Change on African Agriculture.  Environmental Research Letters 5 (1). Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009.  Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages to US Crop Yields under Climate Change.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (37): 15594 98. Schmidt-Traub, Guido. 2015.  Investment Needs to Achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.  SDSN Working Paper, United Nations, New York. Sepp nen, Olli, William J. Fisk, and David Faulkner. 2003.  Cost Benefit Analysis of the Night-Time Ventila- tive Cooling in Office Building.  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. Sepp nen, Olli, William J. Fisk, and Q. H. Lei. 2006.  Room Temperature and Productivity in Office Work.  LBNL-60952. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. Shakun, Jeremy D., Peter U. Clark, Feng He, Shaun A. Marcott, Alan C. Mix, Zhengyu Liu, Bette Otto-Bliesner, Andreas Schmittner, and Edouard Bard. 2012.  Global Warming Pre- ceded by Increasing Carbon Dioxide Concentrations during the Last Deglaciation.  Nature 484: 49 54. Somanathan, E., Rohini Somanathan, Anant Sudarshan, and Meenu Tewari. 2017.  The Impact of Temperature on Pro- ductivity and Labor Supply: Evidence from Indian Manufac- turing.  Unpublished. Stern, Nicholas Herbert. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge University Press.  . 2015. Why Are We Waiting? The Logic, Urgency, and Promise of Tackling Climate Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  , and Joseph Stiglitz. 2017.  Report of the High-Level Commission on Carbon Pric- ing.  https:// static1 .squarespace .com/ static/  54ff9c5ce4b0a53decccfb4c/ t/ 59244eed17bffc0ac256cf16/  1495551740633/ CarbonPricing _Final _May29 .pdf. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2007.  Why Has US Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (S1): 3 33. Strobl, Eric. 2012.  The Economic Growth Impact of Natural Disasters in Developing Countries: Evidence from Hurricane Strikes in the Central American and Caribbean Regions.  Journal of Development Economics 97 (1): 130 41. Teulings, Coen N., and Nikolay Zubanov. 2014.  Is Economic Recovery a Myth? Robust Estimation of Impulse Responses.  Journal of Applied Econometrics 29 (3): 497 514. Thomas, Vinod, and Ramon Lopez. 2015.  Global Increase in Climate-Related Disasters.  ADB Economics Working Paper 466, Asian Development Bank, Manila. Timmer, Marcel P., Gaaitzen de Vries, and Klaas de Vries. 2015.  Patterns of Structural Change in Developing Countries.  In Routledge Handbook of Industry and Development, edited by John Weiss and Michael Tribe, 65 83. London: Routledge. Tol, Richard S. 2009.  The Economic Effects of Climate Change.  Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (2): 29 51.  . 2014.  Correction and Update: The Economic Effects of Climate Change.  Journal of Economic Perspectives 28 (November): 221 26. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2016. The Adaptation Finance Gap Report 2016. United National Envi- ronment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya. Usery, E. Lynn, Jinmu Choi, and Michael P. Finn. 2007.  Modeling Sea-Level Rise Effects on Population Using Global Elevation and Land-Cover Data.  US Geological Survey, Cen- ter of Excellence for Geospatial Information Science (CEGIS) Working Paper.  . 2009.  Modeling Sea-Level Rise and Surge in Low-Lying Urban Areas Using Spatial Data, Geographic Information Systems, and Animation Methods.  In Geospatial Techniques in Urban Hazard and Disaster Analysis, edited by Pamela Showal- ter and Yongmei Lu, 11 30. Dordrecht: Springer. Von Peter, Goetz, Sebastian V. Dahlen, and Sweta Saxena. 2012.  Unmitigated Disasters? New Evidence on the Macroeco- nomic Cost of Natural Catastrophes.  BIS Working Paper 394, Bank for International Settlements, Basel. Wang, Sun Ling, Eldon Ball, Richard Nehring, Ryan Williams, and Truong Chau. 2017.  Impacts of Climate Change and Extreme Weather on US Agricultural Productivity.  NBER Working Paper 23533, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Wargocki, Pawel, and David P. Wyon. 2007.  The Effects of Moderately Raised Classroom Temperatures and Classroom Ventilation Rate on the Performance of Schoolwork by Children (RP-1257).  HVAC&R Research 13 (2): 193 220. Weitzman, Martin. 2011.  Fat-Tailed Uncertainty in the Eco- nomics of Catastrophic Climate Change.  Review of Environ- mental Economics and Policy 5 (2): 275 92. World Bank. 2013. Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts, and the Case for Resilience. A report for the World Bank by the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and Climate Analytics. Washington, DC: World Bank.  , Ecofys, Vivid Economics. 2016. State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2016. Washington, DC: World Bank.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 185 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Positive cross-country spillovers from collective fiscal action by the world s largest economies helped speed the recovery from the global financial crisis nearly a decade ago. But do fiscal spillovers still matter today? The answer is yes but the extent depends on circumstances in both the countries that generate fiscal shocks and in those that are recipients of the shocks. This chapter combines new empirical research and model-based simulations to show that fiscal spillovers tend to be low when a fiscal shock originates from a country without output gaps, but the impact intensifies when a source or recipient country is in recession and/or benefiting from accommodative mone- tary policy which suggests that spillovers are large when domestic multipliers are also large. The chapter also finds that spillovers from government spending shocks are larger than those associated with tax shocks, that the transmis- sion of fiscal shocks may be stronger among countries with fixed exchange rates, and that fiscal spillovers impact the external positions of source and recipient countries alike. Model-based simulations suggest that the cross-border effects of budget-neutral fiscal reforms are generally mod- est, though large reforms can trigger spillovers, especially if they affect cross-border investment decisions. Overall, this evidence draws attention to the cross-border repercussions of corporate tax reform in the United States, for example, or of an increase in public investment in Germany. Introduction What is the potential for fiscal policy to affect macroeconomic outcomes in other economies through cross-border spillovers? This question has been at the center of the policy debate, especially in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, when many countries experienced persistent economic slack, and monetary policy interest rates approached the effective lower bound. Fiscal stimulus was then advocated widely, especially in major economies with sufficient fiscal The authors of this chapter are Patrick Blagrave, Giang Ho, Ksenia Koloskova, and Esteban Vesperoni (lead author), with support from Sung Eun Jung and contributions from Jared Bebee, Ben Hunt, Adina Popescu, and Ippei Shibata. space. This was not least because excess capacity and low interest rates would help limit crowding out of private spending and the expected positive spill- overs would make collective efforts to boost activity more effective. More recently, the global effects of fiscal policy have been discussed amid possible changes in the macro- economic policy mix in Japan and the United States. Debate is also ongoing about the role of fiscal policies in addressing excess external imbalances, includ- ing whether euro area countries with excess current account surpluses should raise fiscal spending, which could also support growth in the currency union. Recent improvements in economic conditions in many countries and their implications for monetary policy raise questions about the size of potential spillovers from fiscal stimulus today. Cyclical positions have improved across the board over the past few years, although with differences across countries (Figure 4.1). For example, the United States is operating at close to full employment and, as a result, the Federal Reserve has begun to normalize monetary policy conditions. At the same time, although euro area economies and Japan are experiencing an encouraging cyclical recovery, output gaps remain negative in many of these countries and core inflation is stubbornly low, prompt- ing monetary authorities to commit to accommoda- tive policies for an extended period. As the chapter discusses, cyclical conditions and the associated ability or willingness of monetary policy to act, both in coun- tries emitting and receiving the fiscal shock, are key determinants of the magnitude of its impact.1 Consid- erations regarding fiscal space in source countries are also relevant if term premiums increase and financial conditions tighten following a fiscal stimulus, spillovers could be smaller. Against this backdrop, the chapter aims to answer the following questions: 1Throughout the chapter, countries from which fiscal shocks originate are referred to as  source  or  shock-emitting ; coun- tries affected by these shocks are referred to as  recipient  or  shock-receiving.  CROSS-BORDER IMPACTS OF FISCAL POLICY: STILL RELEVANT? 4 CHAPTER  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 186 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017   Are fiscal spillovers large from a global or regional perspective? How do they depend on the fiscal instruments involved (for example, government spending or taxes)? How do they depend on fiscal space in source countries?   To what extent does the size of fiscal spillovers depend on cyclical and monetary policy conditions, in both source and recipient countries?   How do fiscal spillovers depend on exchange rate regimes?   What is the impact of fiscal shocks on external positions and exchange rates in source and recipi- ent countries?   Do fiscal reforms generate spillovers, even if the reforms are budget neutral? The chapter sheds light on these issues by looking at the implications of fiscal policy changes in some major advanced economies for activity across a large group of advanced and emerging market economies. The empirical analysis is based on a newly constructed data set of government spending and tax revenue shocks for five systemic economies between the first quarter of 2000 and the second quarter of 2016, identified using the structural vector autoregression method- ology of Blanchard and Perotti (2002). Information from the five source-country shocks is combined using the strength of trade links with a range of advanced and emerging market recipient countries to assess global spillovers. To analyze the role that economic slack, constraints on monetary policy, and exchange rate regimes play in transmission, the chapter uses an econometric frame- work that can flexibly test for the presence of nonlinear effects. Model-based simulations then help to illustrate the complex cross-border transmission channels of fiscal shocks. This approach offers insights into poten- tial changes in the external positions of source and recipient countries, as well as the dynamic behavior of key macroeconomic variables, and elucidates spillovers from different types of fiscal reforms. The chapter s findings add to the existing empirical literature on fiscal spillovers by expanding the scope of the analysis. Previous empirical studies focus on a relatively small sample of recipient countries often those of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) or euro area (Beetsma and Giuliodori 2004; Beetsma, Klaassen, and Wieland 2006; Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2013; Nicar 2015; Blanchard, Erceg, and Lind  2016; Goujard 2017; Poghosyan 2017), and several studies consider only one fiscal instrument (government spending) and/ or only fiscal consolidation episodes. The chapter also adds to the literature, extending the analysis of eco- nomic slack, monetary policy accommodation, and the role of exchange rate regimes in determining spillovers from fiscal shocks. The chapter suggests that fiscal spillovers still matter, but their size depends on the type of fiscal action and on economic circumstances in both source and recipi- ent countries:   Fiscal spillovers are larger for spending shocks. On average, a 1 percent of GDP fiscal stimulus in a major advanced economy can raise output in recip- ient countries by 0.08 percent over the first year. But spillovers are larger for government spending shocks than for tax shocks, consistent with the liter- ature that points to higher domestic multipliers for spending shocks output in recipients can increase by 0.15 percent following a spending hike, versus 0.05 percent after a tax cut. Model simulations reinforce this message and provide more granular evidence for example, changes in public invest- ment tend to have larger cross-border effects than changes in public consumption. Figure 4.1. Output Gap in Selected Countries (Percent) 2009 2017  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 0 1 JPN USA DEU CAN ITA GBR FRA KOR ESP AUS TUR ARG MEX RUS ZAF BRA IND IDN CHN Source: IMF staff estimates. Note: Data labels in the  gure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 187 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017   Relatively weak cyclical positions imply larger spillovers. Although modest in normal times, spillovers are larger when cyclical conditions are weak, likely due to the reduced crowding-out effects of public spend- ing on private sector activity.   Monetary policy constraints also increase spillovers. When monetary policy in either source or recipient countries does not counteract fiscal shocks for example, because the effective lower bound is binding spillovers are much larger than during normal times.   Currency pegs between source and recipient coun- tries may amplify spillovers. There is some evidence suggesting that fiscal shocks tend to have larger spill- overs on recipient countries with currencies pegged to the source country s currency than on those with flexible exchange rates.   Fiscal policy can change external positions in source and recipient countries. Trade balances deteriorate in source countries following a fiscal expansion, with a consequent improvement in recipients  exter- nal positions.   An increase in term premiums may dampen spillovers. If fiscal stimulus at the source increases the term premium for instance, because of concerns about debt sustainability spillovers are somewhat lower compared with a constant term premium scenario.   Under some circumstances, fiscal reforms come with spillovers as well. Most budget-neutral fiscal reforms have limited cross-border effects, although large reforms can generate significant spillovers. For example, a reform that substantially reduces corporate income tax rates and is offset by higher consumption taxes in major economies can have repercussions in the rest of the world, including through higher global interest rates and cross-border reallocation of investment and profits. These results point to several important policy lessons that are relevant now. Although fiscal space is currently more limited, and improved cyclical condi- tions in many countries mean that spillovers from fis- cal policy are likely to be lower than during the global financial crisis, the analysis suggests that fiscal stimulus in major economies can nonetheless be important in lifting economic activity abroad, although not every- where. For example, given the cyclical position and gradually less accommodative monetary policy condi- tions in the United States, a US fiscal stimulus would likely have relatively modest cross-border spillovers, especially if stimulus takes the form of tax policy mea- sures. In the euro area where there is fiscal space in some countries stimulus could have larger spillovers. This is in the context of prospects for continued mone- tary policy accommodation and still-significant slack in some recipient countries. The impact on external imbalances would also depend on the source of fiscal stimulus, as stimulus in the United States is likely to increase imbalances, whereas stimulus in some surplus euro area coun- tries could reduce them. Where countries are con- sidering significant reductions in corporate income tax rates, the analysis suggests associated changes in investment-location and profit-reporting decisions by multinational corporations could have significant negative spillovers on activity and the fiscal position of nonreforming countries. Spillovers from Fiscal Policy A Conceptual Framework The cross-border impact of fiscal policy changes in a given country depends on their initial domestic effects and the transmission mechanisms of shocks. This means that factors affecting the source s domestic fiscal multiplier are relevant for determining spillovers on recipient countries. The fiscal shock is propagated through different channels primarily associated with trade links with the final impact also depending on the economic and policy conditions in the recipient countries (Figure 4.2). This section provides a brief overview of the domestic impact of fiscal shocks, out- lines their possible transmission channels, and discusses the factors affecting transmission. Domestic Impact of a Fiscal Shock A large body of literature on domestic fiscal multi- pliers suggests that cyclical and policy conditions play a role in the response of a domestic economy to fiscal shocks. In general, multiplier estimates vary signifi- cantly across countries, sample periods, and method- ologies. While a comprehensive summary is beyond the scope of this chapter (see, for example, Batini and others 2014), dynamic stochastic general equi- librium and structural vector autoregression models developed since the early 1990s suggest that the size of multipliers tends to be modest (between zero and one over the first year) in  normal times generally understood as circumstances in which the economy  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 188 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 does not have a significant output gap and depends on a number of structural characteristics, including a country s trade openness, exchange rate regime, labor market rigidities, and size of public debt.2 Outside normal times, multipliers can vary with the state of the business cycle (generally larger in a downturn than in an expansion, although the empirical evidence is not conclusive) or the degree of monetary accommodation (larger when monetary policy is unresponsive, such as at the effective lower bound).3 All else equal, a larger domestic multiplier should be associated with greater cross-border spillovers. The composition of the fiscal intervention  whether it is based on government spending or 2For example, see Cole and Ohanian (2004); Kirchner, Cima- domo, and Hauptmeier (2010); Corsetti, Meier, and M ller (2012); Gorodnichenko, Mendoza, and Tesar (2012); Born, Juessen, and M ller (2013); and Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Vegh (2013). A multiplier of one would suggest that a change in the fiscal balance translates dollar for dollar into a similar change in GDP. 3For example, see Erceg and Lind  (2010); Christiano, Eichen- baum, and Rebelo (2011); Eggertsson (2011); Woodford (2011); Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012a, 2012b); Owyang, Ramey, and Zubairy (2013); Nakamura and Steinsson (2014); Riera-Crichton, Vegh, and Vuletin (2015); Blanchard, Erceg, and Lind  (2016); and Canzoneri and others (2016). However, Ramey and Zubairy (forth- coming) found little evidence of state dependence of the government spending multiplier based on historical data from the United States. revenue measures also influences the size of the domestic multiplier. Many studies have found that, for advanced economies, short-term spending multipliers tend to be larger than revenue multipliers (for exam- ple, see a survey in Mineshima, Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Weber 2014). This has been explained using traditional Keynesian theory for example, while an additional dollar of government spending contrib- utes directly to higher aggregate demand, a dollar of tax cuts can be either spent or saved by firms and/ or households (that is, the marginal propensity to consume can be less than one). Recent empirical evi- dence using the narrative approach has found some- what larger tax multipliers than spending multipliers, although narrative-based evidence on the latter is pri- marily limited to defense-related spending.4 Yet other studies suggest that the relative magnitude of the 4The narrative method, pioneered by Romer and Romer (2010), makes use of narrative records, such as budget documents and speeches, to identify the size, timing, and principal motivation for fiscal actions. The Romer and Romer (2010) data set also divides fis- cal policy changes into those made for reasons related to prospective economic conditions and discretionary actions (for example, actions aimed at reducing public debt), thereby allowing for a causal analysis of the impact of fiscal policy on output. See also Ramey (2011); Cloyne (2013); Mertens and Ravn (2013); and Guajardo, Leigh, and Pescatori (2014). Figure 4.2. The Transmission of a Fiscal Shock Source: IMF staff compilation. Exchange Rate Regime Cyclical Position Monetary Policy Cyclical Position Monetary Policy Transmission Channels Trade Financial SOURCE Fiscal Shock RECIPIENT   Interest rates   Exchange rates   Term premium   Equity prices   Expenditure shifting   Expenditure switching  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 189 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 spending and revenue multipliers may differ between consolidation and expansion episodes and among different degrees of monetary accommodation.5 Channels of Cross-Border Transmission In standard open-economy macroeconomic models, a fiscal shock is transmitted abroad primarily through the trade channel, which consists of two effects:6   Expenditure shifting (sometimes referred to as  leakages ) refers to the direct impact of a fis- cal policy change on the source country s import demand through changes in domestic consumption and investment, which affects trading partners. Here, the marginal propensity to import by both the public and private sectors plays a key role if most spending changes are in nontradable sectors and do not translate into a higher or lower level of imports, spillovers from expenditure shifting may be smaller. Larger and more open economies tend to import more, suggesting that fiscal policy changes in these countries will have larger spillovers on others through the expenditure shifting channel.   Expenditure switching refers to the impact of a fiscal shock operating through changes in the real exchange rate, which can trigger substitution between domestic and foreign goods consumption. For example, in a Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch framework, fiscal expansion puts upward pressure on interest rates, the nominal exchange rate appreciates in the source country, and domestic prices increase.7 The resulting real appreciation boosts import demand as foreign goods become cheaper. This effect will be more significant, especially in the short term, when the nominal exchange rate is fully flexi- ble; where nominal exchange rates are fixed, relative price and hence real exchange rate adjustments can take longer. Either way, expenditure switching effects imply that a fiscal shock can have nontrivial cross-border spillovers, even if its domestic impact is muted, because the boost to import demand can occur without an increase in domestic income. In addition to the trade channel, the response of financial variables to a fiscal shock can trigger spillovers 5For example, see Eggertsson (2011); and Erceg and Lind  (2013). 6For example, see Fleming (1962); Mundell (1963); Dornbusch (1976); and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995). 7Notice that other frameworks can deliver different exchange rate predictions (see Obstfeld and Rogoff 1995). through changes in global financial conditions. A fiscal policy change in a large economy can impact global interest rates, exchange rates, and the slope of the yield curve the latter stemming from any perceived or actual impact of the policy change on long-term fiscal sustainability in the source country. The financial channel can work in the opposite direction to the trade channel. For example, the higher interest rates and exchange rate appreciation associated with an expan- sionary fiscal shock in the source country can increase the cost of foreign currency borrowing and worsen the balance sheets of corporations and households in recipient countries if there are currency mismatches, generating negative spillovers. Equity prices may also adjust, with cross-border repercussions. Overall, the relative strength of each transmission channel will depend on the extent of trade and finan- cial linkages between the source and recipient coun- tries. Thus, the net spillover impact of a fiscal shock is an empirical question. Factors Affecting the Transmission Like the domestic fiscal multiplier, cross-border spillovers from fiscal actions tend to vary with eco- nomic circumstances. Two factors play particularly important roles:   Cyclical position: The domestic multiplier and hence spillovers through expenditure shifting  may be larger when the source country has more economic slack. For example, a fiscal stimulus that boosts public employment would be more likely to crowd out private employment when labor markets are tight (Michaillat 2014), resulting in smaller domestic and spillover impacts; the same logic applies to the case of fiscal tightening. Another possibility is that a fiscal stimulus relaxes borrow- ing constraints (which tend to be tighter during a downturn), for example, by raising the value of collateralizable assets along with demand, helping to increase credit and investment (Canzoneri and others 2016). Somewhat similarly, if the recipient country is operating close to full capacity when an external fiscal shock hits, greater demand in tradable sectors may crowd out activity in the rest of the economy, resulting in a more muted impact on overall economic activity.   Monetary policy constraints: Whether monetary policy accommodates the fiscal shock matters, and it is relevant for both source and recipient countries.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 190 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Under normal circumstances, monetary policy reacts to counter the demand and price effects of a fiscal shock. However, when monetary policy is stuck at the effective lower bound, the domestic and spillover effects can be greater. For example, if nominal interest rates in the source country do not rise in response to higher expected inflation following an expansionary fiscal shock, real interest rates decline, crowding in domestic demand and increasing the multiplier (Blanchard, Erceg, and Lind  2016).8 In this case, the reduction in the real interest rate in the source country may lead its real exchange rate to depreciate, changing the direction of the expenditure switching effect. In a recipient country, when at the effective lower bound, monetary policy will do little to dampen the effect of the external shock. Aside from conjunctural factors, institutional or structural features such as the exchange rate regime can also affect the transmission of fiscal shocks and hence the size of spillovers. On one hand, most theoretical frameworks predict that lack of nominal exchange rate flexibility delays real exchange rate adjustments to a fiscal shock, dampening the expenditure switch- ing effect and hence the size of spillovers. On the other hand, currency pegs can strengthen expendi- ture shifting between the source and recipient for example, by reducing expected exchange rate volatility and cross-border transaction costs, which is helpful in forming trade relationships (Klein and Shambaugh 2006; Qureshi and Tsangarides 2010; Aglietta and Brand 2013) and potentially increase spillovers. This may be particularly relevant in currency unions, as long-standing economic and institutional integration and the use of a common currency can strengthen trade (Rose and van Wincoop 2001; Berger and Nitsch 2008). The exchange rate regime also matters for the transmission of fiscal shocks through the financial channel. For example, under flexible regimes, spillovers from an expansionary fiscal shock can be dampened if currency mismatches in balance sheets of households and corporations in the recipient country make depre- ciations contractionary. Ultimately, which of these considerations dominates is an empirical question. 8This insight works for both contractionary and expansionary shocks. Low interest rates prevent the central bank from counter- acting a contractionary shock by reducing rates further, while in the case of an expansionary shock, it may be fully accommodated if the central bank aims for a more accommodative stance than feasible; in either case, spillovers are amplified. Spillovers on Economic Activity: Empirical Evidence This section examines the relevance of fiscal spill- overs in practice and how they vary with economic circumstances. It does so by looking at a very broad sample of source and recipient countries and analyzing different types of shocks under both fiscal consolida- tions and expansions. It first describes the empirical strategy used to estimate spillovers and then presents the estimated impact on economic activity in recipi- ent countries. Empirical Strategy The baseline approach jointly identifies government spending and revenue shocks in five major advanced economies France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States using the structural vector autoregression methodology of Blanchard and Perotti (2002).9 A key assumption is that discretion- ary fiscal policy does not respond contemporaneously to unexpected changes in output, as it takes time for policymakers to assess the output shock and make spending and/or tax decisions, including passing and implementing new legislation. The assumption is more likely to hold in the short term, and therefore the identification uses quarterly data.10 The shocks identified by this approach offer a sensi- ble narrative of the fiscal policies adopted over the past several decades. Comparison of structural shocks with historical policy records (quantified using the narra- tive approach in the literature) shows that structural shocks can broadly reflect major policy changes in timing and order of magnitude. For example, for the United States, the structural tax shocks capture tax cuts enacted under the Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush administrations as well as their subsequent expiration. The same is true of tax hikes during the 1980s, which 9Although spillovers from fiscal policy in China are potentially important, data limitations prevent the inclusion of China as a source country in the empirical analysis. Later in the chapter, model-based simulations help shed light on the potential spillover effects from China s fiscal policy. 10Although the use of quarterly fiscal data comes with challenges, it is instrumental to implementing the identification method used by Blanchard and Perotti (2002). These data (in real terms and seasonally adjusted) are used for shock identification only and for major advanced economies with high-quality statistics. As discussed later in the chapter, it is also reassuring that alternative identification methods that do not rely on quarterly fiscal data yield similar results for spillovers.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 191 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 were put in place following the Greenspan Commis- sion s recommendations to shore up financing of the social security system (Figure 4.3).11 The structural shocks also have a statistically and economically significant domestic impact. Consistent with traditional Keynesian theory and previous empir- ical work that uses a similar methodology, estimates of domestic multipliers using the structural shocks tend to be larger for spending instruments (slightly above one) than for tax instruments (slightly below one). Some differences are seen in the size of domestic tax multipliers across the five source countries, with the multiplier of the United States being larger than that of European peers or Japan, possibly reflecting different tax structures and the specific tax instruments used (Blagrave and others, forthcoming). The spillover effects from the fiscal shocks are estimated using the local projections method.12 The econometric specification relates an economic outcome in a recipient country, such as the level of output, to a fiscal shock from the five source countries  constructed by pooling together shocks from source countries and weighting them by the strength of trade 11See Blagrave and others (forthcoming) for more examples. 12See Jord  (2005). links between the source and the recipient.13 The baseline specification controls for factors that affect the normal short-term dynamics of output in the recipient country, such as past growth rates and external demand developments. The specification is estimated using quarterly data from the first quarter of 2000 through the second quarter of 2016, and the sample of 55 advanced and emerging market economies represents almost 85 percent of world output. Thus, the panel estimation gives spillover estimates for an  average  country in the sample.14 For the panel estimation, the shocks are expressed as a share of recipient countries  output to facilitate aggregation across sources. For ease of interpretation of the economic magnitude, results are presented with shocks normalized to an average 1 percent of GDP change in the fiscal position across source countries (see details in Annex 4.2, which shows how panel results are rescaled using relative GDP levels and trade links). Spillovers on Economic Activity The results point to significant spillover effects from fiscal policy, especially from government spending shocks. Figure 4.4 shows the estimated response to a foreign fiscal shock of an average recipient coun- try s output over eight quarters. A shock to the fiscal balance henceforth referred to as the overall fiscal shock is constructed as a shock to government spend- ing minus a shock to tax revenues, such that a positive shock implies a reduction in the source country s fiscal balance (or an increase in the deficit). An overall fiscal shock would increase recipient output on impact, reaching a peak around the third quarter after the shock before starting to dissipate (Figure 4.4, panel 1). Estimations for specific fiscal instruments show that spillovers from a government spending shock are larger, more persistent, and more precisely estimated 13The use of trade links to weight the shock is instrumental to obtaining country-specific external fiscal shocks, but it does not preclude spillovers through channels other than trade given that the estimates capture the overall response of recipient-country GDP regardless of the channel of transmission. Combining shocks from several source countries is important to use the variability emanating from different sources, given that trade patterns differ. In particu- lar, while some source countries such as the United States can have a global impact, the impact of others is more regional; for example, Germany s and France s trading partners are more concen- trated in Europe. 14More details about the data and empirical methodology are provided in Annexes 4.1 and 4.2, respectively, as well as in Blagrave and others, forthcoming.  1.5  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1980 85 90 95 2000 05 10 15 Sources: Romer and Romer (2010); and IMF staff calculations. Figure 4.3. Tracking Tax Shocks in the United States (Percent of GDP) Blanchard-Perotti method Narrative method (Romer-Romer) (1) Tax hikes to put social security system on a sounder footing (2) Reagan tax cuts (3) 1986 Tax Reform Act (4) 1993 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (6) Expiration of 2003 tax relief (5) Bush tax cuts  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 192 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 than those from a tax shock of equal size (Figure 4.4, panels 2 and 3).15 This is consistent with the evidence pointing to larger domestic spending multipliers than domestic tax multipliers as discussed earlier. Data constraints prevent a more detailed empirical 15These effects are assumed to be symmetric during fiscal expan- sions and consolidations the panel analysis cannot disentangle a potential asymmetry from different policy actions. examination of spillovers from specific spending or tax instruments, such as government consumption or investment an issue assessed later in the chapter through model-based simulations. Spillovers are economically significant and in line with earlier estimates. For example, a 1 percent of GDP overall fiscal shock in an average major advanced economy would raise output in the average recipient country by about 0.08 percent over the first year. For a government spending increase of the same magni- tude, the average spillover impact in recipient countries increases to 0.15 percent over the first year; for a tax hike of similar size, output falls by about 0.05 percent (Figure 4.5). As expected, spillovers from fiscal shocks are substantially lower than domestic fiscal multipliers in source countries, but still relevant.16 These are of the same order of magnitude as those found in previous work for example, Beetsma, Klaassen, and Wieland (2006) although differences in country and time samples as well as shock identification make a direct comparison challenging.17 While the spillover estimates in this section are averages across different economic and policy conditions, subsequent analysis also shows that there is a large difference between estimates in normal times and those in times of economic slack, for example. Further analysis of components of recipient-country output corroborates the importance of trade for the transmission of fiscal shocks (Figure 4.6), consistent with the conceptual framework outlined above. In par- ticular, a positive fiscal shock from abroad is estimated to raise recipient-country bilateral exports to the source countries. With higher export demand, firms expand investment to build production capacity, generating a second-round effect on recipient-country investment, whereas the impact on consumption appears negligible. The boost to exports and investment increases imports, some of which come from source countries. With bilateral imports rising by much less than bilateral exports, however, the recipient s trade balance with the source countries improves following the fiscal shock. 16As discussed earlier, fiscal shocks in the chapter yield domestic spending multipliers slightly above one and tax multipliers slightly below one, on average, across the source countries. 17Beetsma and others (2006) find that a 1 percent of German (French) GDP shock to government spending results in a European GDP response of about 0.14 (0.08) percent after two years. For a tax shock, spillovers are about  0.05 ( 0.03) percent. Compared with studies that express shocks in units of recipient-country GDP (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko 2013; Goujard 2017), estimates are also broadly similar. A detailed comparison to the literature is provided in Blagrave and others, forthcoming.  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2. Spending Shock  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1. Overall Fiscal Shock  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 3. Tax Shock Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the respective shocks. Solid lines denote point estimates and dashed lines denote 90 percent con dence bands. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries. Figure 4.4. Dynamic Responses of Recipient Countries  Output to Fiscal Shocks (Impact on output level, percent; quarters on x-axis)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 193 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The empirical spillover estimates are robust to alter- native specifications and shock-identification strategies. For example, the baseline results do not change much with the inclusion of additional control variables (for example, the recipient-country short-term inter- est rate, output gap, unemployment rate, and fiscal stance).18 Estimates are also similar though slightly larger using a panel vector autoregression estimation methodology that allows for potential feedback effects of exchange rates and interest rates on output. In addi- tion, estimates using comparable fiscal shocks obtained from alternative identification strategies namely fore- cast errors and narrative approach also yield spillover estimates that are similar in size and dynamics. This provides reassurance that the baseline results are not driven by the structural vector autoregression method- ology for identifying fiscal shocks.19 Annex 4.3 gives more details about robustness tests. 18These robustness checks can be found in Blagrave and others (forthcoming). 19Forecast errors are constructed as the difference between actual and projected values of the relevant fiscal variable (spending or tax revenues). The shocks based on forecast errors are identified as resid- uals from a regression of the spending- or tax-based forecast errors on GDP forecast errors and lagged macroeconomic variables. Spillovers under Different Economic and Policy Conditions Business cycle and monetary policy conditions in both source and recipient countries, along with the bilateral exchange rate regime, can affect the magni- tude of spillovers from fiscal policy. As outlined earlier in the conceptual framework, these factors are expected to affect the domestic impact of fiscal shocks if Figure 4.5. Spillovers of Fiscal Shocks on Recipient Countries  Output (One-year average impact on output; percent)  0.10  0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 Overall  scal shock Spending shock Tax shock Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries.  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1. Consumption  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2. Investment 5. Domestic Demand 3. Bilateral Exports 4. Bilateral Imports 6. Bilateral Net Exports Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the shock. Solid lines denote point estimates, and dashed lines denote 90 percent con dence bands. Responses to an overall  scal shock are presented. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries. Figure 4.6. Dynamic Responses of Components of Recipient Countries  Output to a Fiscal Shock (Percent of output; quarters on x-axis)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 194 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 they pertain to the source country as well as their cross-border transmission. In general, a larger impact in the source country is expected to give rise to more significant spillovers. Cyclical Position and Monetary Policy Constraints To test how cyclical positions and monetary policy affect the impact of fiscal shocks, the baseline econometric framework is augmented to allow for potential regime dependence (see Annex 4.2 for details). The definitions of regimes are based on the prevailing output gap or the level of the short-term interest rate in either source or recipient countries. Specifically, a negative output gap is assumed to represent economic slack, and a short-term interest rate below the 25th percentile of the relevant cross-country distribution is a proxy for monetary policy constrained by the effective lower bound.20 Results are robust to using alternative definitions of slack, including the unemploy- ment gap or smooth-transition probability as in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013). For the effective lower bound, results are also robust to using an absolute interest rate threshold that is common to all countries. Consistent with theory and empirical findings in the domestic multiplier literature, spillovers are estimated to be larger during episodes of economic slack than in nor- mal times. For example, if the recipient country has slack when the external fiscal shock hits, its output would rise by 0.11 percent over the first year in response to a 1 per- cent of GDP overall fiscal shock in an average major advanced economy. By contrast, the response to the same shock would be almost halved to 0.06 percent when there is no economic slack (Figure 4.7, panel 1). Differ- ential effects are also observed when the source econ- omy has slack, compared with when it does not with estimates varying between 0.09 percent and 0.03 percent, respectively (Figure 4.7, panel 2). Spillovers can be even larger when monetary policy is constrained by the effective lower bound, either in the source or the recipient country (Figure 4.7, panels 1 and 2). For example, subject to a 1 percent of GDP overall fiscal shock in an average major advanced econ- omy, the response of recipient-country output can be more than four times greater when its interest rate is exceptionally lower than in normal times.21 Monetary 20Separate distributions are applied for advanced and emerging market economies. 21These results for both slack and effective lower bound cases, in both recipient and source countries also extend to disaggregated spending and tax shocks (see Blagrave and others, forthcoming, for more details). 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 Baseline Normal times1 Slack2 ELB2 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 Baseline No slack Slack No ELB ELB Figure 4.7. Spillovers under Various Economic and Policy Conditions (One-year average impact on output; percent) 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 Baseline No slack Slack No ELB ELB 1. Conditions in Recipient Countries 2. Conditions in Source Countries 3. Summary Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: ELB = effective lower bound. Slack is de ned as output gap below zero; and ELB corresponds to short-term interest rates in the bottom 25 percent of cross- country historical distribution. Responses to an overall  scal shock are presented. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries. 1Normal times refer to average of no slack and no ELB in both source and recipient countries. 2Average estimates for conditions in source countries and conditions in recipient countries.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 195 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 policy constraints in source countries have a similar effect on spillovers, as they can amplify the domestic impact of fiscal shocks. Although slack and the effec- tive lower bound have distinct mechanisms to amplify spillovers, it is often difficult to clearly distinguish the two states in empirical estimation because they can coincide in practice, as has occurred in recent years.22 This caveat should be kept in mind when interpreting the results. The response of GDP components under monetary policy constraints offers further insights into how a fiscal shock is transmitted to recipient countries (Figure 4.8). Faced with a positive fiscal shock from abroad, consumption and particularly investment  in a recipient country responds much more strongly when the domestic nominal interest rate is close to the effective lower bound, likely reflecting declining real interest rates associated with higher expected inflation. This is consistent with results from the- oretical models (see section on factors affecting transmission) and is confirmed by the results of the model-based simulations presented in the next section. The responses of exports to and imports from the source countries are also stronger when monetary policy accommodates the fiscal shock, in line with the domestic response of investment. Exchange Rate Regime As discussed in the section on factors affecting transmission, the exchange rate regime can also impact the size of fiscal spillovers. To investigate this question, this section analyzes whether the impact of a fiscal shock in the United States varies for recipient countries with fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes vis- -vis the US dollar. The United States with its global currency and systemic trade importance is a suitable source country for this exercise. Countries do not typically peg to the British pound or the Japanese yen. In the case of the euro, Germany s and France s trade importance is mostly within Europe, where most sample countries are 22In the post-2000 sample considered in this empirical exercise, about 26 percent of country-quarter observations fall under the defi- nition of  effective lower bound,  three-quarters of which coincide with economic slack. Similarly, about 55 percent of observations fall under the definition of  slack,  35 percent of which coincide with the effective lower bound. For example, many advanced economies experienced both severe slack and very low interest rates in the after- math of the global financial crisis. Japan, in particular, experienced both slack and effective lower bound for 84 percent of the observa- tions during the sample period.  0.3  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 4 6 8  0.3  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 4 6 8  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 4 6 8  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 2 4 6 8  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 2 4 6 8 1. Consumption under Normal Times  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 2 4 6 8 2. Consumption under Effective Lower Bound 3. Investment under Normal Times 4. Investment under Effective Lower Bound  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 2 4 6 8  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 2 4 6 8 5. Bilateral Exports under Normal Times 6. Bilateral Exports under Effective Lower Bound 7. Bilateral Imports under Normal Times 8. Bilateral Imports under Effective Lower Bound Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: Normal times = no effective lower bound. t = 0 is the quarter of the shock. Solid red lines denote point estimates under different conditions; dashed red lines denote 90 percent con dence bands; and solid blue lines represent the unconditional response. Effective lower bound corresponds to short-term interest rates in the bottom 25 percent of cross-country historical distribution. Responses to an overall  scal shock are presented. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries. Figure 4.8. Dynamic Reponses of Components of Recipient Countries  Output under Normal Times and Effective Lower Bound in Recipient Countries (Percent of output; quarters on x-axis)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 196 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 either euro area members or peg to the euro, not allowing for enough variation in the data to identify the effect for those with flexible regimes. The empirical framework is again modified to allow for regime dependence of the fiscal shock now originating only in the United States where the regime definition is based on the prevailing bilat- eral exchange rate arrangement between the United States and the recipient country in a particular period. Specifically, a  fixed  exchange rate regime is defined as encompassing de facto pegs or crawl- ing pegs, classified using two alternative methods: (1) Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) updated by Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017a, 2017b) henceforth called  Reinhart-Rogoff  classification; and (2) the IMF s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions ( IMF  classification).23 More details are provided in Annex 4.1. The evidence suggests that a government spending shock in the United States generates stronger and more persistent impacts on countries whose exchange rates are pegged to the US dollar than on those whose exchange rates are more flexible (Figure 4.9). This is the case regardless of which exchange regime classifi- cation is used. The difference in the output responses between fixed and flexible regimes is statistically sig- nificant on impact under both classifications and also during the second year under the Reinhart-Rogoff clas- sification. At the same time, no difference in spillovers is observed between fixed and flexible regimes from an overall fiscal shock or a tax shock (not shown). Taken at face value, this result seems to point to relatively weak expenditure switching effects in the transmission of spending shocks. This weakness could reflect that, for a significant portion of the sample, US monetary policy was constrained by the effective lower bound, limiting interest rate and hence exchange rate move- ments. Another possibility is that, as discussed earlier, trade integration may be stronger under pegs beyond what can be captured by the simple import ratios used in weighting the shocks. The Transmission of Fiscal Shocks  Model-Based Analysis To complement the empirical analysis, the chapter presents model-based simulations using a multiregion general equilibrium model the IMF s G20 Model. The model simulations are intended to be illustrative and offer further insights into the macroeconomic adjustment to fiscal shocks including the response of exchange and interest rates and more granularity on the impacts of various fiscal instruments. Overall, simulations serve as theory-based cross-checks on the empirical results and provide insights into how fiscal shocks are propagated.24 The results are generally consistent with the empir- ical findings in this chapter: simulations show that spillovers from temporary fiscal shocks can differ 23In 2015, for example, the Reinhart-Rogoff classification has more recipient countries classified as having  fixed  exchange rates compared with the IMF classification. The number of fixed-rate countries varies over time. In general, there tend to be more fixed exchange rate regimes in earlier years of the sample. 24Additional details on the G20 Model are available in Andrle and others (2015).  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 0 2 4 6 8  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 0 2 4 6 8  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 0 2 4 6 8 1. Fixed Regime: Reinhart-Rogoff Classi cation  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 0 2 4 6 8 2. Flexible Regime: Reinhart-Rogoff Classi cation 3. Fixed Regime: IMF Classi cation 4. Flexible Regime: IMF Classi cation Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the shock. Solid red lines denote point estimates conditional on exchange rate regime; dashed red lines denote 90 percent con dence bands; and solid blue lines represent the unconditional estimates. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries (note that this represents a less than 1 percent of US GDP shock). Figure 4.9. Dynamic Reponses of Recipient Countries  Output to US Spending Shock under Various Exchange Rate Regimes (Impact on output, percent; quarters on x-axis)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 197 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 substantially depending on the monetary policy response and the fiscal instruments used. In addition, the responses of GDP components under different assumptions on monetary accommodation closely resemble those identified empirically.25 In all cases, fis- cal shocks are expressed as a share (generally 1 percent) of a particular source country s GDP this differs from how results were presented in the empirical section and implies that, all else equal, shocks emanating from larger countries will have larger spillover effects. Spillovers on Output: Fiscal Instruments and Policy Accommodation The model simulations confirm substantial spill- overs from government spending shocks. Specifically, they show that spending shocks have larger spillover effects than do tax shocks.26 This coincides with results from the empirical analysis described in this chapter. However, structural models offer insights into the impact of specific fiscal instruments as well, as shown in Figure 4.10:   Spending instruments: Government investment shocks in the G20 Model have larger domestic and spillover effects than shocks to government con- sumption. This is because government investment increases the public capital stock, which is assumed to increase private sector productivity, stimulating private investment and labor demand and in turn raising wages and labor income. By contrast, gov- ernment consumption does not affect private sector productivity.   Tax instruments: Model simulations suggest that temporary changes in consumption taxes have the largest domestic and spillover effects among tax instruments. Unlike cuts in labor income or corpo- rate taxes, where benefits can be saved, households must increase their current-period spending to take advantage of temporarily lower consumption 25The domestic and spillover effects of permanent fiscal shocks may differ from those of temporary shocks, partly because of their effects on interest rates. For example, permanent fiscal consolidations in large countries may lower global interest rates, thereby crowding in investment and boosting GDP over the long term. Some perma- nent fiscal reform scenarios are considered in the next section. 26For simplicity, the analysis presented here is conducted for France, Germany, and the United States; the intention is to draw broad lessons about the heterogeneity of spillovers across different fiscal instruments. The findings presented here apply equally to other countries  fiscal shocks. taxes.27 In addition, because investment decisions have a long planning horizon and investment can be costly to adjust (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans 2005), the impact of temporary corporate income tax changes is smaller than that of tempo- rary labor income tax changes the latter affect liquidity-constrained households, which fully adjust consumption in response. Consistent with the empirical analysis, model simulations show that spillovers on output can vary widely, depending on the response of monetary policy, in both source and recipient countries. Figure 4.11 depicts the impact of the same temporary two-year US government spending and tax shocks considered in Figure 4.10 using the average across spending and tax instruments on recipient-country GDP under different monetary policy assumptions: (1) a rule-based response in both source and recipient countries, (2) accommodation in the United States during the first two years following the fiscal shock, (3) accom- modation in recipient countries during the first two 27Conversely, when consumption taxes increase temporarily, house- holds can avoid some of the burden by postponing consumption. 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20 Government investment Government consumption Labor income tax Corporate income tax Value-added tax Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations. Note: All shocks are 1 percent of source-country GDP, lasting two years. Figure 4.10. Impact of Fiscal Shocks on Global GDP Based on Various Instruments (Two-year average impact, percent) United States France and Germany  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 198 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 years, and (4) accommodation in both the United States and recipient countries during the same period. Spillovers vary markedly depending on the response of monetary policy for example, they can be about four times larger if monetary policy in recipient countries fully accommodates the shock, as compared with when monetary policy follows the inflation-forecast targeting rule in each country.28,29 These results are closely aligned with the empirical analysis presented in Figure 4.7 when interest rates in the recipient coun- try are at or near the effective lower bound, spillover effects are estimated to be about four times larger than they are during normal times. Model-based simulations can also offer insights in terms of regional patterns of the impact of fiscal shocks. Spillovers from stimulus in the United States 28In the G20 Model, monetary policy in countries with flexible exchange rate regimes responds to an increase in expected future inflation by increasing nominal interest rates to reduce demand and return inflation to target. 29Spillovers are even larger under the full accommodation scenario they should be viewed as an upper bound, as such a scenario would require an exceptional coordinated accommodation by monetary policy in all countries. have the broadest global reach due to the large size of the US economy and its moderately strong trade links with most regions (Figure 4.12).30 Spillovers from the United States are largest on countries in Latin Amer- ica and Canada all of which account for significant shares of US import demand. For shocks from France and Germany, spillovers are largest on Europe, given deep trade integration, but relatively small on other regions. Finally, fiscal measures in China have mean- ingful spillovers on each region due to the size and openness of the Chinese economy. By region, spillovers are slightly larger on countries in Asia given strong trade links though spillovers on Europe, Canada, and Latin America are not trivial. China s economy, given its growing global clout, is playing an important role in driving spillovers onto neighboring countries through the trade channel and the impact of fluctua- tions in demand on commodity prices (IMF 2016). Macroeconomic Adjustment and the Role of Financial Variables Model simulations can give a richer description of the macroeconomic dynamics behind fiscal spillovers. In particular, simulations allow for an examination of the dynamics of interest rates and exchange rates because these variables are forward-looking in nature, they respond to changes in the expected future state of the economy, so when a change in fiscal policy is announced or expected, these variables react immediately. This makes it difficult to capture their behavior in empirical exercises using structural shocks, which typically assess the impact of the implementation of fiscal changes.31 The chapter uses both model-based analysis and an alternative empirical approach that isolates anticipation effects to assess the impact of fiscal shocks on exchange rates and external positions in recipient countries. To shed light on the dynamics of adjustment fol- lowing fiscal shocks, Figure 4.13 presents the response of several variables in the United States and the global 30The regional distribution of spillovers predicted by model simu- lations closely resembles those implied by the empirical analysis pre- sented earlier. See Blagrave and others (forthcoming) for more details. 31Several studies estimating fiscal shocks in structural vector autoregression models find that increases in government spend- ing trigger exchange rate depreciations see, for example, Corsetti and M ller (2006); Kim and Roubini (2008); Monacelli and Perotti (2010); Enders, M ller, and Scholl (2011); and Ravn, Schmitt-Groh , and Uribe (2012). This empirical result runs counter to the predictions of the Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch framework, although it is consistent with some new open-economy macroeco- nomic models (Obstfeld and Rogoff 1995). 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Government spending Tax revenue Figure 4.11. Spillovers from US Fiscal Shocks with and without Monetary Accommodation (Two-year average impact on rest of the world GDP, percent) Normal response of monetary policy Monetary accommodation in United States only Monetary accommodation in recipient countries Monetary accommodation in all countries Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations. Note: Normal response of monetary policy is a rule-based response, in countries without  xed exchange rate regimes, where monetary policy responds to an increase in expected future in ation by increasing nominal interest rates to reduce demand and return in ation to target.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 199 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 economy to a temporary government spending increase in the United States. Given the importance of the monetary policy reaction, it presents a two-year stim- ulus scenario under both a normal monetary policy response (blue line) and monetary policy accommoda- tion in all countries (red line).   Monetary policy response: Following the fiscal shock, policy rates increase to curb inflationary pressures from the demand shock both in the United States and in recipient countries. The uncovered inter- est parity condition implies that bilateral nominal exchange rates in relation to the US dollar depreciate in the short term given that the response of US mon- etary policy is more pronounced than elsewhere  being the source of the shock, inflationary pressures are greater there. The increase in US external demand and the nominal exchange rate depreciation in recip- ient countries induce a modest increase in exports from the rest of the world, and thus a slight improve- ment in the corresponding trade balances. However, 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 US shock: impact on EU US shock: impact on Canada, Lat. Am. US shock: impact on Asia Europe shock: impact on EU Europe shock: impact on Canada, Lat. Am. Europe shock: impact on Asia China shock: impact on EU China shock: impact on Canada, Lat. Am. China shock: impact on Asia Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations. Note: EU = European Union; Lat. Am. = Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico). Europe shock refers to France and Germany shocks. Shock to government spending is equivalent to 1 percent of GDP, lasting two years. Average level impact over two years with no monetary accommodation in any country is presented. Figure 4.12. Regional GDP Impact of Government Spending Shocks from the United States, Europe, and China (Two-year average impact, percent)  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017 18 19 20 21 22  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 2017 18 19 20 21 22  1.0  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017 18 19 20 21 22  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 2017 18 19 20 21 22 Spending shock without monetary accommodation Spending shock with monetary accommodation  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017 18 19 20 21 22 Figure 4.13. Dynamic Reponses to a US Government Spending Shock (Percent deviation from baseline) Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations. Note: Red lines denote the response to a 1 percent of GDP US government spending shock lasting two years with monetary accommodation in both source and recipient countries lasting two years, and blue lines represent the response to the same shock without monetary accommodation in any country. 1Increase represents appreciation. 1. US Real GDP  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017 18 19 20 21 22 2. Rest of the World: Real GDP 5. Rest of the World: Real Exports 3. Rest of the World: Real Interest Rate 4. Rest of the World: Nominal Exchange Rate vis- -vis US Dollar1 6. Rest of the World: Real Imports  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017 18 19 20 21 22 7. Rest of the World: Real Consumption  0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2017 18 19 20 21 22 8. Rest of the World: Real Investment  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 200 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 the increase in world interest rates reduces consump- tion and investment in the rest of the world. The net effect on GDP is small but positive.   Monetary accommodation: In this scenario, the positive impact on inflation goes unchecked, causing real interest rates to decline. This triggers a strong positive response in both consumption and invest- ment in the rest of the world as the cost of capital and current-period consumption declines. The contrast between the dynamics of consumption and investment under monetary accommodation, as opposed to normal times, is consistent with the empirical findings shown in Figure 4.8. Monetary accommodation also implies a much larger impact on both exports due to stronger external demand conditions and imports, due to stronger domestic activity in recipients. The expenditure switching channel operates in the opposite direction under monetary accommodation, with recipient coun- tries  real exchange rates appreciating against the US dollar. This occurs because the negative impact on US real interest rates is more pronounced than elsewhere. Recipients  trade balances still improve because of the strong increase in demand from the United States. Overall, as shown in Figure 4.11, the cumulative effect on global GDP is amplified under monetary accommodation. If the term premium increases following a fiscal impulse capturing potential concerns about debt sustainability or higher future inflation and monetary policy responds normally, the impact of stimulus in the United States is reduced and spillovers are marginally smaller (Figure 4.14). In this case, higher interest rates than in the baseline scenario discourage investment and consumption in the United States. Therefore, the net effect on GDP in the rest of the world is slightly smaller, illustrating the potential for an adverse reac- tion of financial markets to an increase in spending to reduce spillovers.32 This possibility underscores the importance of having a credible medium-term macro- economic framework, which gives market participants confidence that inflation will be held in check because debt dynamics are sustainable. An empirical examination of how exchange rates and external positions respond to fiscal shocks is pre- sented in Box 4.1. To capture anticipation effects, the analysis constructs fiscal shocks based on the method- ology of Forni and Gambetti (2016), which identifies these shocks at announcement dates, as captured by changes in professional forecasts. It shows that an increase in government spending in the United States leads to a real appreciation of the dollar and a worsen- ing of the US trade balance, as predicted by standard macroeconomic models. Fiscal Reforms The model-based analysis also facilitates the examina- tion of spillovers from so-called fiscal reforms defined 32In this scenario, the increase in the US term premium is assumed to drive up term premiums in other countries as well, according to historical correlations between these variables across countries.  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 2017 18 19 20 21 22 2. World Real GDP excluding United States Figure 4.14. Spillovers from US Spending Shock with and without a US Term-Premium Increase (Percent deviation from baseline) Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations. Note: Red lines denote the response to a 1 percent of GDP US government spending shock lasting two years, with a 25 basis point increase in the US term premium and subsequent spillovers to term premiums in other countries. Blue lines represent the response to the same spending shock with no term-premium increase. No monetary accommodation is assumed for any country.  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 2017 18 19 20 21 22 1. US Real GDP Spending shock without US term-premium increase Spending shock with US term- premium increase  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 201 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 as permanent budget-neutral shifts in the composition of the public sector budget. The scenarios considered so far in the chapter deal with temporary fiscal impulses associated with a change in the fiscal stance in the source country. However, budget-neutral fiscal reforms may also have spillover effects. To demonstrate these differences, the following two scenarios are considered: (1) a budget-neutral corporate income tax reform and (2) a budget-neutral infrastructure spending increase. These illustrative scenarios suggest that fiscal reforms have limited cross-border effects, though significant changes can still generate large spillovers. Budget-Neutral Corporate Income Tax Reform The direct spillovers of a (simultaneous) budget-neutral reduction in corporate income tax rates in France, Germany, and the United States the  source  countries in this scenario would be slightly negative.33 The scenario s main assumptions are that corporate tax rates are reduced by 15 percentage points, consumption-tax rates rise to offset the revenue loss, and monetary policy responds normally.34 The direct impact of the reform is captured by the blue lines in Figure 4.15. As shown in the figure,   Real GDP increases gradually as lower corporate income tax rates raise the return to capital in the source countries, stimulating investment. This positive effect on reform-country GDP is only partly counteracted by the increase in the consumption tax rate, which depresses consumption. Although these reforms are initially budget neutral, the expansion of investment increases tax revenues over time, which reduces the deficit and the debt stock in source countries.35 Their trade balances deteriorate slightly due to investment-driven import demand.   Given the lack of fiscal stimulus in the short term, the direct spillovers on recipient countries are limited. Over the medium term, GDP in recipient countries is slightly reduced, as recipient countries are now at a 33France, Germany, and the United States are considered in this scenario given that they currently have corporate income tax rates above the OECD average, giving them scope for a substantial reduction. Reforms are budget neutral, contingent on the baseline path of output. 34In the case of the United States, which has no federal consump- tion tax, this would imply enacting such a tax. 35Absent the offsetting increase in consumption taxes, the corporate income tax reduction would result in a net loss of tax revenues, even after accounting for the increase in the tax base due to stronger investment.  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2017 19 21 23 25 27  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 2017 19 21 23 25 27  3  2  1 0 1 2 3 2017 19 21 23 25 27  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 2017 19 21 23 25 27  4  3  2  1 0 1 2 2017 19 21 23 25 27 CIT/VAT reform direct impact only CIT/VAT reform plus assumptions on investment shift CIT/VAT reform plus assumptions on pro t and investment shift  2  1 0 1 2 3 4 5 2017 19 21 23 25 27 Figure 4.15. Spillovers from Corporate Income Tax Reduction Financed by an Offsetting Increase in Value-Added Tax (Percentage-point deviation from baseline, unless noted otherwise) Sources: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations; and IMF staff estimates. Note: Blue lines denote the response to CIT/VAT reforms only, red lines denote the response to CIT/VAT reforms plus assumptions on investment shift, and yellow lines denote the response to CIT/VAT reforms plus assumptions on pro t and investment shift. No monetary accommodation is assumed for any country. For rest of the world, no reforms are assumed. CIT = corporate income tax; VAT = value-added tax. 1. Real GDP: Countries Pursuing CIT/VAT Reforms (Percent deviation from baseline) 2. Real GDP: Rest of the World (Percent deviation from baseline) 5. Trade Balance, Contribution to GDP: Countries Pursuing CIT/VAT reforms 3. Government Debt to GDP: Countries Pursuing CIT/VAT Reforms 4. Government Debt to GDP: Rest of the World 6. Trade Balance, Contribution to GDP: Rest of the World  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 202 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 competitive disadvantage with respect to their return to capital, and real interest rates are slightly higher  implying lower investment. This negative impact more than offsets the small impetus to exports associ- ated with increased demand from source countries. However, beyond this direct effect, fiscal reforms may also affect investment and profit-reporting deci- sions. As discussed in Devereux (2008) and De Mooij and Ederveen (2008), corporate tax rates influence both intensive and extensive (discrete or location) deci- sions of firms, suggesting that multinational companies may relocate operations when faced with significant changes in relative tax rates in different jurisdictions. In addition, both studies note that it is feasible for multinational companies to shift profits between countries. In the scenario, the lower corporate income tax rates prompt these firms to shift operations  both investment and the jurisdiction in which profits are reported to source countries, to the detriment of recipients. The effect of investment and profit shifting are illus- trated by the red (investment shifting only) and yellow (investment and profit shifting together) lines of Fig- ure 4.15. Based on estimates in the literature on profit and investment shifting, the scenario assumes that foreign direct investment in countries not pursuing reforms could decline by about $400 billion this loss is assumed to be distributed equally across all coun- tries as a share of GDP.36 By contrast, the countries pursuing reforms are assumed to benefit by a similar amount, above and beyond the immediate impact on investment from the corporate income tax reduction discussed above.37 Profit shifting is assumed to be a 36This is a simplifying assumption. Countries that currently bene- fit from a significant corporate income tax gap relative to the source countries, or those with a significant presence of multinational cor- porations based in countries pursuing corporate income tax reforms, may be more adversely affected by investment shifting. 37The assumed impact of investment shifting is derived by apply- ing an estimated semielasticity of the corporate tax base to tax rate changes from De Mooij and Ederveen (2008) taken to be  3.2  to foreign direct investment inflows and outflow data for France, Germany, and the United States, which proxy the foreign portion of the corporate tax base subject to relocation. Under a large corporate income tax rate reduction, foreign direct investment inflows would increase as foreign multinationals choose to locate more production in the countries pursuing reforms, and outflows would decline as domestic multinationals choose to develop more production capacity domestically. It is important to note that semielasticities in the liter- ature vary widely and that the estimated investment-shifting impact of corporate income tax reform is sensitive to these assumptions. pure fiscal revenue gain for source countries and a corresponding loss for other countries.38 The results suggest that investment shifting and profit shifting could trigger more significant spill- overs on activity and affect fiscal positions. Activity in source countries would be considerably higher  with GDP increasing by almost 4 percent after 10 years although significantly reduced elsewhere, by about 1 percent. Corresponding changes in trade balances would imply a material deterioration for corporate-tax-reforming countries as import demand rises significantly and an improvement for the rest of the world, due to import compression and export growth. Both investment shifting and profit shifting can also have an impact on fiscal positions, improving the primary balance of source countries and under- mining the balance of others, above and beyond the direct effects of the corporate income tax reform itself. The marginal impact of profit shifting on public debt stocks can be seen by comparing the red and yellow lines in panels 3 and 4 of Figure 4.15 it is clear that the impact of investment shifting (measured by com- paring the blue and the red lines) is much larger than that of profit shifting.39 Budget-Neutral Permanent Increase in Public Investment Compared with corporate income tax reforms that trigger investment and profit shifting, a budget-neutral permanent increase in public investment would have very modest spillovers.40 The scenario assumes a   per- cent of GDP increase in public investment in the five large economies considered in the empirical exercise  France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States which is financed by an increase 38The assumed impact of profit shifting is derived by applying an estimated semielasticity of profits with respect to the tax rate a value of 2, taken from De Mooij and Ederveen (2008) to estimates of the share of multinational firms in each country, which is assumed to be approximately 0.6 in Germany and France and 0.3 in the United States, and to the corporate income tax rate reduction being considered (15 percentage points). The same caveats mentioned for investment shifting regarding elasticities apply. 39The impact on public debt in this scenario is only transitory, with all debt-to-GDP ratios returning to baseline in the long term. The speed of adjustment back to baseline depends on assumptions regarding the aggressiveness of the model s fiscal rule other assump- tions would lead to different adjustment dynamics. 40This result is broadly consistent with results reported in Bussi re and others (2017), who find that most budget-neutral fiscal reforms do not have large cross-border trade spillovers, except in the case of coordinated reforms in periods of accommodative monetary policy.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 203 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 in consumption taxes. Such a reform would boost the capital stock in source countries, thereby increas- ing output permanently the increase in investment resulting from the higher productivity associated with an expansion of the public capital stock outweighs the negative impact on domestic consumption of higher consumption taxes. However, as shown in Figure 4.16, although there would be some modest cross-border impact due to expenditure shifting, the impact would be muted by an exchange rate depreciation in source countries, implying that the expenditure switching channel will eventually offset the positive effect.41 The impact on recipient countries  trade balances is small, but negative. Conclusions Positive cross-country spillovers from collective fis- cal policy actions helped the global economy recover from the global financial crisis, but do fiscal spillovers still matter under much-improved economic condi- tions today? The chapter finds that spillovers con- tinue to be relevant, but to what extent depends on circumstances in both source and recipient countries. It shows that fiscal spillovers tend to be lower when a fiscal shock originates from a country where GDP is at its potential, but that the impact intensifies when either the source or recipient country is in recession and/or benefiting from accommodative monetary policy. This suggests that spillovers are generally large when domestic multipliers are also large. The chapter also finds that spillovers from government spending shocks are larger than those associated with tax shocks, that the transmission of fiscal shocks may be greater among countries with fixed exchange rates, and that transmission may be dampened if the fiscal impulse at the source tightens global finan- cial conditions. While the chapter does not offer conclusions about how individual countries should conduct fiscal policy from a domestic perspective, it provides informa- tion about potential cross-country effects from such action. The current juncture suggests that positive cross-border effects from stimulus in countries with broadly closed output gaps will generally be smaller than during the crisis, but there could still be ben- 41A permanent productivity shock in source countries increases supply by more than demand, implying that the relative price of source-country goods must fall in equilibrium. efits. For example, in the euro area, spillovers from a more expansionary fiscal stance in countries with fiscal space such as higher public investment to raise potential output in Germany on some trading part- ners experiencing weak cyclical positions might still be important due to continued accommodative monetary policy and evidence suggesting that spillovers tend to be amplified by currency pegs. More generally, the fiscal instrument also matters: spending on public investment is likely to produce greater cross-border dividends than tax cuts. The chapter also presents illustrative scenarios of fiscal reforms in which a change in the makeup of the government budget that does not generate a short-term change in the fiscal stance come with small spillovers. However, substantial fiscal reforms, such as large budget-neutral corporate income tax rate reductions compensated with increases in consump- tion taxes that affect the investment-location and  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 2017 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 2. Real GDP in Recipient Countries Figure 4.16. Spillovers from Increase in Government Investment in Five Major Economies (Percent deviation from baseline) Source: IMF, G20 Model (G20MOD) simulations. Note: Spillovers from a permanent 0.5 percent of GDP increase in government investment in  ve major economies (France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, United States)  nanced via value-added tax. No monetary accommodation is assumed for any country.  1.2  0.8  0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 2017 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 1. Real GDP, Consumption, and Investment in Source Countries Real GDP Real consumption Real investment  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 204 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 profit-reporting decisions of multinational firms, could have large spillovers. Finally, and not surprisingly, fiscal actions with economically meaningful cross-border effects can also impact trade balances. For example, the chapter suggests that fiscal stimulus tends to lead to a dete- rioration in the trade balance of the country where it occurs, with corresponding improvements in the positions of trading partners. This implies that a fiscal expansion in the United States could exacerbate global current account imbalances, while stimulus in Germany would tend to reduce them.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 205 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Consensus on the effect of government spending shocks on a country s exchange rate and external bal- ance remains elusive in the empirical literature.1 This may stem partly from the difficulty of isolating agents  anticipation of fiscal policies, given both legislative and implementation lags, as highlighted by Ramey (2011), among others. This box and a related spillover note (Popescu and Shibata, forthcoming) examine the impact of fiscal spending shocks from the United States on the US trade balance and real exchange rate, from both a multilateral and a bilateral perspective, while carefully taking into consideration the issue of fiscal foresight. To capture anticipation effects, the approach follows Forni and Gambetti (2016) and relies on professional forecasters  surveys to identify fiscal shocks at the announcement rather than implementation date.2 Methodologically, the fiscal foresight ( news ) shock is identified in a vector autoregression using US data from the first quarter of 1981 through the fourth quarter of 2016.3 The analysis further extends Forni and Gambetti (2016) to a cross-country perspective to account for recipients  macroeconomic conditions, which is the main unique contribution of this exercise. The results suggest that news of future government spending leads to a real appreciation of the US dollar and deterioration of the US trade balance in line with theory and solving the  depreciation puzzle  found in most previous studies. As discussed in Forni and Gambetti (2016), the key intuition is that the inclusion of additional information on fiscal expec- tations and forecasts improves the estimation of the effects of fiscal spending shocks by capturing more precisely the timing of the impact. The timing is likely The authors of this box are Adina Popescu and Ippei Shibata. 1For example, while the theoretical literature tends to predict that increases in government spending would trigger exchange rate appreciations, the empirical literature often finds the oppo- site in the case of the United States; this is usually referred to as the  depreciation puzzle.  2More specifically, the Survey of Professional Forecasters fore- casts of government spending are used to capture preannounced or anticipated (also called  news  or  foresight ) fiscal spending by exploiting the change in forecast expectations. 3The vector autoregression includes, in this order: real federal government consumption expenditures and gross investment, the fiscal news variable based on Survey of Professional Forecasters forecasts, real GDP, private consumption, the federal surplus divided by GDP, net exports of goods and services divided by GDP, the 10-year Treasury constant maturity rate, and the real effective exchange rate. significant in assessing the response of fast-moving variables, such as the exchange rate, which react quickly to perceived changes in future conditions. Moving on to the analysis of spillovers, a panel vector autoregression analysis makes it possible to take into account the recipient country s macro and policy variables (such as cyclical positions, monetary policy, and domestic fiscal policy). The estimation uses an unbalanced panel of 30 US trading partners (23 advanced economies and 7 emerging market econo- mies representing about 80 percent of US imports) from the fourth quarter of 1982 through the third quarter of 2016. Results suggest that an anticipated increase in US government spending triggers real  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 Full sample Before global  nancial crisis 1. Response of Trade Balance (Percentage points)  16  12  8  4 0 4 8 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 2. Response of Real Exchange Rate vis- -vis US Dollar (Percent) Figure 4.1.1. Response of Recipient Countries  Trade Balance and Real Exchange Rate vis- -vis US Dollar (Quarters on x-axis) Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the shock. Dashed lines denote 90 percent con dence bands. Box 4.1. The Spillover Impact of US Government Spending Shocks on External Positions  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 206 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 exchange rate depreciations in other countries and improvements in their trade balances with the United States. More specifically, an announcement of a 1 per- cent of US GDP increase in government spending will depreciate a trading partner s exchange rate by about 5 percent after one and a half years while improving the partner s net exports vis- -vis the United States by 0.3 percentage point of its own GDP after two years (Figure 4.1.1, blue lines). Estimation over subsamples reveals that the impact on exchange rates and trade balances may have diminished following the global financial crisis. The red lines in Figure 4.1.1 plot the response of the trade balance and real exchange rates vis- -vis the United States before the global financial crisis (before 2007), suggesting that responses were significantly larger before the onset of the crisis. These results may reflect constrained monetary policy in recent years, which could have dampened US exchange rate appre- ciation (in response to expansionary fiscal shocks), thus also potentially contributing to a smaller trade balance response. Performing the same analysis for different groups of countries only advanced economies or only Group of Twenty economies suggests that the results are quantitatively robust. The results are also robust to variations in the methodology, including different vari- able ordering and the inclusion of additional variables, as well as to different weighting schemes (including time-varying weights). Box 4.1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 207 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Annex 4.1. Data Data for Shock Identification Quarterly fiscal data used in shock identification for five shock-emitting (source) countries stem from national statistical bureaus, either directly or via Haver Analytics.42 Quarterly real government spend- ing and tax revenue data used in constructing fiscal shocks are expressed in local currency units, seasonally adjusted, and annualized for the sample period of 2000:Q1 2016:Q2. Government spending is calcu- lated as the sum of quarterly general government con- sumption and general government gross fixed capital formation from national accounts. For tax revenue, quarterly general government total tax income is used, except for Japan. Data sources for each country are listed in Annex Table 4.1.1. See Blagrave and others, forthcoming, for more details on the data, as well as a discussion of data limitations and construction of fiscal shocks. 42France, Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, United States. Data for Spillover Analysis Quarterly data from 55 recipient countries for 2000:Q1 2016:Q2 include series on real output, consumption, investment, exports/imports, bilateral good exports/imports, external demand, short-term interest rates, output gaps, and exchange rate regimes, collected from multiple data sources. Data sources for each series are listed in detail in Annex Table 4.1.2, followed by a list of all the countries in the sample in Annex Table 4.1.3. Data Description   Real GDP, consumption, investment: Quarterly real levels are rebased to 2010 prices, expressed in local currency units, seasonally adjusted and annual- ized. Investment data refer to gross fixed capi- tal formation.   Exports/imports: Quarterly real levels are rebased to 2010 prices, expressed in local currency units, seasonally adjusted and annualized. Data from national accounts stem from Haver Analyt- ics and refer to total exports/imports of goods and services. Annex Table 4.1.1. Data Sources for Quarterly Fiscal Data by Source Country Country Fiscal Data Data Source Seasonal Adjustment Note France Government spending Eurostat1 SWDA by source Sum of government final consumption and GFCF Tax revenue Eurostat1 SWDA by source Current taxes on income and wealth, excluding social contributions Germany Government spending Deutsche Bundesbank SWDA by source Sum of government final consumption and GFCF Tax revenue Eurostat1 X-12-ARIMA by IMF staff Japan Government spending Cabinet Office of Japan SAAR by source Sum of government final consumption and GFCF Government total revenue Ministry of Finance and Cabinet Office X-12-ARIMA by IMF staff Extrapolated using Denton method United Kingdom Government spending Office for National Statistics Seasonally adjusted by source Sum of government final consumption and GFCF Tax revenue Eurostat1 X-12-ARIMA by IMF staff United States Government spending US Bureau of Economic Analysis Seasonally adjusted by source Sum of government final consumption and GFCF Tax revenue US Bureau of Economic Analysis Seasonally adjusted by source Source: IMF staff compilation. Note: For government spending, nominal levels are deflated using the GDP deflator when real levels are not directly available from the source. For tax revenue (total revenue for Japan), real levels are calculated by deflating nominal levels using each country s GDP deflator. GFCF = gross fixed capital formation; SAAR = seasonally adjusted and annualized data; SWDA = seasonally and working-day adjusted data; X-12-ARIMA = US Census Bureau software package for seasonal adjustment. 1Quarterly nonfinancial accounts for general government database from Eurostat.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 208 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017   Bilateral goods exports/imports: Bilateral weights are calculated using bilateral exports/imports of goods between 55 countries in the sample and five source countries (5 x 55 = 275 pairs). For each country pair, the average is that of reported values of both countries.   External demand: This is calculated as a weighted sum of partner countries  real growth based on bilat- eral export weights.   Short-term interest rate: The three-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) and three-month Treasury bill rate are used. For more comprehensive country and historical coverage, policy, deposit, and target rates are used where three-month LIBOR and Treasury bill data are not available.   Output gap: The quarterly output gap is first calcu- lated as the gap between real output and potential output, estimated by the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Then, to reconcile any potential difference between the estimated output gap and the annual output gap numbers published in the IMF s World Economic Outlook (WEO), the Denton proportional bench- marking method is used. This method both preserves the seasonality observed from quarterly estimated output gap series and matches the data published in the WEO when converted to annual basis. Variables with notable trends over the sample period are detrended using country-specific linear Annex Table 4.1.2. Data Sources for Recipient Countries Series Data Sources Estimation Countries Missing Data Note Real Output WEO; Haver Analytics Rebased to 2010; deflated using GDP deflator None in the sample Seasonally adjusted, annualized, in national currency Real Consumption, Investment, Exports, Imports Haver Analytics Rebased to 2010; deflated using respective deflators for each country and variable Vietnam Seasonally adjusted, annualized, in national currency; data from national accounts Bilateral Goods Exports/Imports DOTS Average of values reported by the reporter and partner countries None in the sample Original data at monthly frequency, aggregated by sum External Demand WEO; DOTS; Haver Analytics Export-weighted sum of partner countries  real GDP growth None in the sample Seasonally adjusted, quarter over quarter growth, log difference, percent Short-Term Monetary Policy Rate Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics Three-month LIBOR, three-month Treasury bill rate, where available Cyprus, Estonia, Luxembourg, Slovak Republic, Uruguay Policy rate, deposit rate, target rate used where LIBOR and treasury bill rates were not available Output Gap WEO; Haver Analytics Gap between real output and potential output estimated by HP filter None in the sample Denton method used to match annual output gap numbers in WEO Source: IMF staff compilation. Note: DOTS = IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics; HP = Hodrick-Prescott; LIBOR = London interbank offered rate; WEO = World Economic Outlook. Annex Table 4.1.3. Recipient Countries in Sample Region Countries (55 total) Africa South Africa Americas Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, United States,* Uruguay Asia Australia, China, India, Indonesia, Japan,* Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam Europe Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,* Germany,* Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom* Source: IMF staff compilation. *Shock-emitting (source) country. Source country is excluded from the set of recipient countries when analyzing fiscal shocks from the same source.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 209 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 trends. In addition, outliers observations with quarter-over-quarter GDP growth rates higher than 10 percent or lower than  10 percent in any given quarter (very few observations) are excluded. Exchange Rate Regime Classification A measure of bilateral exchange rate arrangement vis- -vis the US dollar is constructed to estimate spill- overs for different exchange rate regimes. For the Reinhart-Rogoff classification, the exchange rate regime is expressed as a time-varying index based on the annual coarse de facto classification from Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2017a, 2017b), ranging from 1 (most rigid) to 6 (most flexible). For each period, if a country is assigned a value of 1 (de facto peg) or 2 (de facto crawling peg), it is deemed a  fixed regime.  The quarterly index is interpolated from annual data, assigning the same value for all four quarters within a year. For example, in 2015, this clas- sification yields seven  fixed  rate countries (Argentina, China, Costa Rica, India, Peru, Philippines, Vietnam) out of the sample of 55 countries.43 The IMF pre-2008 classification (coarse) consists of six categories, with 1 being the most rigid and 6 the most flexible.44 The classification changed in 2008, and post-2008 data are obtained from the IMF s website. As under the Reinhart-Rogoff classification, a country is generally classified as having a fixed exchange rate vis- -vis the US dollar if it is assigned a value of 1 (de facto peg) or 2 (de facto crawling peg or crawling band narrower than or equal to  2 percent). Again, the quarterly index is interpolated from annual data. For example, for 2015, this classification yields two fixed-rate countries (China, Vietnam) out of the sam- ple of 55 countries, although there are more fixed-rate countries in earlier periods. Annex 4.2. Empirical Strategy Baseline Specification As in Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013), the response of output in the recipient country to a fiscal shock abroad is estimated using the local projections method. This approach is particularly well suited to 43The number of countries classified as  fixed  can generally vary over time given that the exchange rate regime classification is time varying. 44Data for regime classification before 2008 is from Carmen Reinhart s website, http:// www .carmenreinhart .com. accommodate nonlinearity; that is, it allows esti- mation of spillovers under different states of the economy. Moreover, the method is more robust to misspecification of the data-generating process than a vector autoregression, for which the misspecifi- cation error is compounded at each horizon of the impulse response. The following baseline linear model at time horizon h (for h = 0, . . . , H) is estimated using a panel ordi- nary least squares estimator:    Z  i,t+h     Z  i,t   1  _________  Y  i,t   1    =   h    Shock   it  ______  Y  i,t   1    +   l = 1  L     hl     X  i,t   l  +   hi  +   ht  +   iht ,  (4.1) in which  Z  it  is the variable of interest (real GDP, consumption, investment, and the like) in recipient country i at quarter t,  Y  it  is real GDP in recipient country i at quarter t,  Shock   it  is the foreign fiscal shock facing country i at time t (see below), and  X  it  is a vector of control variables including lags of the fiscal shock, lags of GDP growth, and lags of external demand, measured as a weighted average of trading partner growth rates (the number of lags L = 4 was chosen). Variables   hi  and   ht  capture the country and time fixed effects. Given that the foreign fiscal shock is expressed in units of recipient-country GDP ( Shock   it  is scaled by lagged GDP  Y  it   1 ), the coefficient   h  is analogous to a domestic multiplier of an external shock (Hall 2009; Barro and Redlick 2011). The impulse response for H periods is constructed from a sequence of estimates  {  h }  h = 0  H  . The baseline fiscal shock combines country-specific shocks from the five source countries (France, Ger- many, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and weights them using trade links with recipient coun- tries. The assumption behind the weighting system is that fiscal policy is transmitted mainly through trade countries with tighter trade links to the source would be expected to receive larger shocks in the form of larger changes in export demand, and therefore larger spillovers. However, the estimated spillovers capture those from all transmission channels, including the financial channel. The external fiscal shock facing recipient country i in time t is given by  Shoc  k  it  =   j = 1  5     M   ij,t   1  ______ M   j,t   1       s  jt   E  j,t   1  ______  E  i,t   1   ,  (4.2) in which j denotes source country,  M   ijt  is country j s goods imports from country i at time t,  M   jt  is  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 210 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 total goods imports by country j,  s  jt  is the identified fiscal shock in country j expressed in real terms in country j s currency, and  E  jt  is country j s US dollar real exchange rate. Therefore, the second term on the right side  ( s  jt   E  j,t   1  /  E  i,t   1 )  equals the real mon- etary value of the fiscal shock coming from country j converted into units of recipient country i s cur- rency. This term is then scaled by the import share   (M   ij,t   1  / M   j,t   1 ) , which captures the relative impor- tance of recipient country i as a supplier of the source country s imports.45 Finally, the weighted shocks are added up across the five source countries.46 The com- bined shocks are relatively small: for example, spend- ing (tax) shocks average about 0.06 (0.1) percent of recipient-country GDP over the sample period. Nonlinear Specifications Role of Cyclical Conditions and Monetary Policy Constraints To study the state-dependent effects for recipient countries, a nonlinear version of the baseline speci- fication is estimated. Regression coefficients on the shock and the control variables are allowed to vary with different states. The state is defined with respect to the economic cycle ( slack/no slack ) or with respect to monetary policy stance ( effective lower bound/ no effective lower bound ). Slack corresponds to a neg- ative output gap. Effective lower bound corresponds to short-term interest rate below the 25th percentile value of the cross-country distribution, which is about 0.57 percent for advanced economies and 3.0 percent for emerging market economies. Following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013), the baseline specification is modified in the following way:    Z  i,t + h     Z  i,t   1  __________  Y  i,t   1    =   1h   I  i,t   1    Shoc  k  it  _____  Y  i,t   1    +   2h (1    I  i,t   1 )    Shoc  k  it  _____  Y  i,t   1     +   l = 1  4     1hl       I  i,t   1  X  i,t   l  +   l = 1  4     2hl       ( 1   I  i,t   1 ) X  i,t   l  +   hi  +   ht  +   iht .  (4.3) in which  I  i,t  takes the values of either 1 or 0, indicating the state in recipient country i in period t. Spillovers in 45See Blagrave and others, forthcoming, for a discussion of alter- native weighting systems. 46Estimated fiscal shocks are not correlated across countries. the two different states can then be analyzed by com- paring the estimated parameters   1h  and   2h . For the source country, only the shock is partitioned according to the state of the economy, which can be again either the cyclical position or monetary policy near the effective lower bound. The states are defined in the same way as in the specification for recipient countries. The source-country shock therefore becomes  Shock  it  j   :  I  t   1  j    Shock  it  j   +  (1    I  t   1  j  )   Shock  it  j  ,  (4.4) in which  I   t  j  is a {0;1} dummy variable indicating the state in the shock-emitting country. The assumption behind interacting only the shock with the state dummy is that although shocks in the source country and its domestic response might be regime dependent, their propagation to recipient countries is not. Spillovers to Recipients with Different Exchange Rate Regimes Similar to the nonlinear specification in which the shock is partitioned based on the source country s state, the shock is decomposed into two components according to the bilateral exchange rate arrangement between recipient  i  and the United States:  Shock  it  US  :  Fix  i,t   1  US    Shock  it  US  +  (1    Fix  i,t   1  US  )   Shock  it  US ,   (4.5) in which  Fix  it  jUS  = 1  if country  i  and the United States share a fixed regime in period  t . Spillover Estimates Expressed in Terms of Source-Country GDP While the baseline specification expresses fiscal shocks in terms of recipient-country GDP given the decision to combine shocks from different sources and following standard practice in the literature this transformation might complicate the interpretation of the magnitude of spillovers. To facilitate the interpreta- tion, the estimates presented in the chapter are rescaled as spillovers in response to a 1 percent of source country GDP fiscal shock. This is done by normalizing the estimated spillover coefficient   in the following way:  Spil  l  i,j  =  S  j   M  i,j  ___  M  j       Y  j  __  Y  i   ,  (4.6) in which  S  j  is the source-country shock as a percent of its own GDP (assumed to be 1);  ( M  i,j  /  M  j )  is the recipient country s share in the source country s total imports (the weighting factor in the baseline model);  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 211 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 and  ( Y  j  /  Y  i )  is the ratio of source to recipient-country GDP both measured in US dollars.47 Annex 4.3. Robustness Tests To ensure that the baseline results are not driven by the selected shock identification scheme or economet- ric approach, this section performs several robustness checks. The results are robust to (1) estimation of spillovers using a panel vector autoregression, which accounts for the endogenous response of exchange rates and monetary policy in recipient countries; and (2) the use of alternative fiscal shocks based on forecast error and narrative approaches. Estimation with a Panel Vector Autoregression Analysis in a panel vector autoregression is con- ducted to ensure that the results are not driven by the choice of the local projections method. A panel vector autoregression explicitly takes into account the endog- enous response of key macro variables when estimating spillovers from a fiscal shock. The following six-variable panel vector autoregression model is estimated:  Y  i,t  =  c  i  +   p = 0  1    A  p   Y  i,t   p  +   i,t ,  (4.7) in which  c  i  is a vector of country-specific fixed effects,   A  p  is a reduced-form coefficient matrix,   i,t  is a vector of shock terms, and  Y  i,t  is a vector of six endoge- nous variables:  Y =  { Gshock; Tshock; effective ext . demand; GDP growth; interest rate; REER } . With the exceptions of Gshock and Tshock, which are identical to the weighted shocks used in the baseline analysis presented in equation 4.1, each variable is in (detrended) quarter-over-quarter growth rates and relates to the recipient country i s domestic economy.48 The sample period is the same as in the baseline local projections analysis. Panel vector autoregression analysis confirms the findings from the baseline regression model esti- 47Plausible alternative weighting systems of the source-country shock would deliver the same results in terms of source-country GDP. Alternative weighting systems would also require recalculating the spillover coefficient estimated in the baseline ( ) , resulting in an equal and offsetting adjustment of this coefficient, given that any transformation applied to the source shock would be constant across all recipient countries. 48Results from the panel vector autoregression are robust to several alternative specifications, including not detrending the data. mated with the local projections method. The results, expressed in terms of the cumulative impulse response following a 1 percent of source-country GDP shock to government spending (tax revenue), are presented in Annex Figure 4.3.1 (red line). Spillovers from an increase in government spending at the source are larger than spillovers from a tax cut. The results are statistically different from zero at the 5 percent level, based on simulations conducted using standard (Monte Carlo) resampling methods. Identification Using Forecast Errors The second robustness check focuses on the identi- fication of fiscal shocks. The alternative methodology identifies shocks as forecast errors (the difference  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1. Output Effects of Spending Shock  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2. Output Effects of Tax Shock Local projection method Panel vector autoregression Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: t = 0 is the quarter of respective shocks. Solid blue lines denote the baseline response to respective shocks using local projection method; dashed lines denote 90 percent con dence bands; and solid red lines represent the response to respective shocks using panel vector autoregressions. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries. Annex Figure 4.3.1. Effects of Spending and Tax Shock on Recipient Countries  Output: Comparison with Panel Vector Autoregression (Percent; quarters on x-axis)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 212 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 between actual variable and its forecast from the previous period) in the growth rates of government spending or tax revenues, this way capturing only unanticipated fiscal changes. This differs from the structural shocks used in the baseline analysis, which are based on actual changes in fiscal variables and can be anticipated by agents if they were announced earlier. The presence of such anticipated shocks could bias the estimates because the information set of the econometrician is different from the information set of the agents. Because forecast errors capture unex- pected changes, the problem with fiscal foresight is reduced under this approach, as the information set of the econometrician and private agents is more aligned. The approach uses real-time fiscal projections by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and real-time actual data to construct the forecast error shocks at annual frequency on the sample from 2000 to 2012.49 The forecast error for each variable  X =  {G, T, Y}  is constructed as  FE  t  X  =  X  t     X  t | t   1  f   , (4.8) in which  X  t  is the growth rate of the variable from the contemporaneous data release and  X  t | t   1  f   is the forecast one period earlier. A positive forecast error means an expansionary spending shock and a contractionary tax shock. Following Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013), the forecast errors of spending and taxes are regressed on the forecast errors of output to take into account any changes as a result of surprises in the business cycle. They are also regressed on lagged macroeconomic variables  growth rates (GDP, deflator, investment, government spending or tax revenues) to account for the portion of the innovation that can be predicted from past observations. The forecast error shocks for each source country are then constructed as residuals from this regression, converted to levels using base year (2010) expenditures or revenue, and replaced in equations (4.1) and (4.2). Spillover analysis using forecast error shocks confirms the baseline results that spending shocks have larger spillovers than tax shocks (Annex Figure 4.3.2) and provides a strong robustness check. These shocks are constructed using an entirely different methodology, a different database and estimated at a different frequency than the shocks used in the baseline specification. The size of spillovers is somewhat larger compared with the baseline, which can be explained, in part, by a stronger response of source-country spending and revenues to forecast error shocks compared with structural shocks (although these impulse responses are imprecisely esti- mated because of the small sample). Identification Using Narrative Approach To further confirm that the baseline results are not driven by the shock identification scheme, a robust- ness check using the narrative tax shocks of Romer and Romer (2010) is conducted. Several studies in the literature present narrative fiscal shocks (for example, DeVries and others 2011), but the data set of Romer and Romer (2010) is the most suitable for comparison with the baseline analysis of the chapter given that it covers both expansion and consolidation episodes.50 49After 2012 the forecast data are not continuous. 50Narrative shock databases for government spending are much less common in the literature, which precludes a robustness check of spillovers from spending shocks based on narrative shocks.  0.4  0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 1 2 3 4 5 1. Output Effects of Spending Shock  0.4  0.3  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 1 2 3 4 5 2. Output Effects of Tax Shock Source: IMF staff calculations. Note: t = 0 is the year of respective shocks. Solid lines denote the response to respective shocks, and dashed lines denote 90 percent con dence bands. Effects are estimated based on shocks derived from forecast errors. Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries. Annex Figure 4.3.2. Effects of Spending and Tax Shock on Recipient Countries  Output: Forecast Errors (Percent; years on x-axis)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 213 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 The shock is simply replaced in equations (4.1) and (4.2), with analysis conducted only for the United States over the period 1995:Q1 2007:Q4 (2007:Q4 is last period for which the narrative shock is available). A comparable set of time-sample-modified baseline results is obtained by estimating spillovers from the United States on the same sample. Results presented in Annex Figure 4.3.3 show similar spillovers from US tax shocks for shocks identified using a structural vector autoregression and those coming from the narrative approach. Although the spillovers identified using the narrative approach are somewhat smaller compared with the (time-sample-modified) baseline, they fall comfortably within the confidence bands of the baseline estimates. Given that the narrative shocks are based on a com- pletely different identification scheme, these results provide another strong robustness check. References Aglietta, Michel, and Thomas Brand. 2013. Un New Deal pour l Europe. Paris:  ditions Odile Jacob. Andrle, Michal, Patrick Blagrave, Pedro Espaillat, Keiko Honjo, Benjamin Hunt, Mika Kortelainen, Ren  Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Eleonora Mavroeidi, Dirk Muir, Susanna Mursula, and Stephen Snudden. 2015.  The Flexible System of Global Models FSGM.  IMF Working Paper 15/64, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012a.  Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expansion.  In Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, 63 98. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.  . 2012b.  Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Pol- icy.  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2): 1 27.  . 2013.  Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy.  American Economic Review 103 (3): 141 46. Barro, Robert J., and Charles J. Redlick. 2011.  Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases and Taxes.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 51 102. Batini, Nicoletta, Luc Eyraud, Lorenzo Forni, and Anke Weber. 2014.  Fiscal Multipliers: Size, Determinants, and Use in Macroeconomic Projections.  IMF Technical Notes and Man- uals 14/4, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Beetsma, Roel, and Massimo Giuliodori. 2004.  What Are the Spill-Overs from Fiscal Shocks in Europe? An Empirical Analysis.  ECB Working Paper Series 325, European Central Bank, Frankfurt. Beetsma, Roel, Franc Klaassen, and Volker Wieland. 2006.  Trade Spill-Overs of Fiscal Policy in the European Union: A Panel Analysis.  Economic Policy 21 (48): 639 87. Berger, Helge, and Volker Nitsch. 2008.  Zooming Out: The Trade Effect of the Euro in Historical Perspective.  Journal of International Money and Finance 27 (8): 1244 60. Blagrave, Patrick, Giang Ho, Ksenia Koloskova, and Esteban Vesperoni. Forthcoming.  Fiscal Spillovers The Importance of Macroeconomic and Policy Conditions in Transmis- sion.  IMF Spillover Note, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Blanchard, Olivier, Christopher J. Erceg, and Jesper Lind . 2016.  Jump-Starting the Euro Area Recovery: Would a Rise in Core Fiscal Spending Help the Periphery?  In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016, vol. 31, edited by Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker. Forthcoming from University of Chicago Press. Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti. 2002.  An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of Changes in Gov- ernment Spending and Taxes on Output.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1329 68. Born, Benjamin, Falko Juessen, and Gernot J. M ller. 2013.  Exchange Rate Regimes and Fiscal Multipliers.  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37 (2): 446 65. Bussi re, Matthieu, Laurent Ferrera, Michel Juillard, and Daniele Siena. 2017.  Can Fiscal Budget-Neutral Reforms Stimulate  0.3  0.2  0.1 0.0 0.1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Shocks identi ed using structural vector autoregression Narrative shock (Romer-Romer) Sources: Romer and Romer (2010); and IMF staff calculations. Note: t = 0 is the quarter of the US tax shock. Solid blue line denotes the response to US tax shock using structural vector autoregression; dashed lines denote 90 percent con dence bands; and solid red line represents the response to US narrative tax shock based on Romer and Romer (2010). Shocks are normalized to an average of 1 percent of GDP across source countries (note that this will represent a less than 1 percent of US GDP shock). Annex Figure 4.3.3. Effects of US Tax Shock on Recipient Countries  Output: Comparison with US Narrative Tax Shock, 1995 2007 (Percent; quarters on x-axis)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 214 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Seeking Sustainable Growth Short-Term Recovery, Long-Term Challenges International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Growth? Model-Based Results.  Banque de France Work- ing Paper 625. Canzoneri Matthew, Fabrice Collard, Harris Dellas, and Behzad Diba. 2016.  Fiscal Multipliers in Recessions.  Economic Journal 126 (590): 75 108. Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. 2005.  Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.  Journal of Political Economy 113 (1): 1 45. Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011.  When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?  Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 78 121. Cloyne, James. 2013.  Discretionary Tax Changes and the Macroeconomy: New Narrative Evidence from the United Kingdom.  American Economic Review 103 (4): 1507 28. Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 2004.  New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great Depression: A General Equilib- rium Analysis.  Journal of Political Economy 112 (4): 779 816. Corsetti, Giancarlo, Andr  Meier, and Gernot J. M ller. 2012.  What Determines Government Spending Multipliers?  IMF Working Paper 12/150, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Gernot J. M ller. 2006.  Twin Deficits: Squaring Theory, Evidence, and Common Sense.  Economic Policy 21 (48): 598 638. De Mooij, Ruud, and Sjef Ederveen. 2008.  Corporate Tax Elasticities: A Reader s Guide to Empirical Findings.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24 (4): 680 97. Devereux, Michael P. 2008.  Business Taxation in a Globalized World.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24 (4): 625 38. DeVries, Pete, Jaime Guajardo, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pesca- tori. 2011.  A New Action-Based Dataset of Fiscal Consoli- dation.  IMF Working Paper 11/128, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976.  Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics.  Journal of Political Economy, 84 (6): 1161 76. Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2011.  What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?  in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, vol. 25, 59 112. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Enders, Zeno, Gernot J. M ller, and Almuth Scholl. 2011.  How Do Fiscal and Technology Shocks Affect Real Exchange Rates?: New Evidence for the United States.  Journal of Inter- national Economics 83 (1): 53 69. Erceg, Christopher J., and Jesper Lind . 2010.  Is There a Free Lunch in a Liquidity Trap?  International Finance Discussion Paper 1003, US Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.  . 2013.  Fiscal Consolidation in a Currency Union: Spending Cuts vs. Tax Hikes.  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37 (2): 422 45. Fleming, J. Marcus. 1962.  Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates.  IMF Staff Papers 9 (3): 369 80. Forni, Mario, and Luca Gambetti. 2016.  Government Spend- ing Shocks in Open Economy VARs.  Journal of International Economics 99: 68 84. Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Linda L. Tesar. 2012.  The Finnish Great Depression: From Russia with Love.  American Economic Review 102 (4): 1619 44. Goujard, Antoine. 2017.  Cross-Country Spillovers from Fiscal Consolidations.  Fiscal Studies 38 (2): 219 67. Guajardo, Jaime, Daniel Leigh, and Andrea Pescatori. 2014.  Expansionary Austerity: International Evidence.  Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (4): 949 68. Hall, Robert E. 2009.  By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More Output?  Brookings Papers on Eco- nomic Activity 40 (Fall): 183 249. Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. Vegh. 2013.  How Big (Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?  Journal of Mone- tary Economics 60 (2): 239 54. Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2017a.  Exchange Arrangements Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?  NBER Working Paper 23134, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.  . 2017b.  The Country Chronologies to Exchange Rate Arrangements into the 21st Century: Will the Anchor Cur- rency Hold?  NBER Working Paper 23135, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016.  Spillovers from China s Transition and from Migration.  Chapter 4 in World Economic Outlook, October. Jord ,  scar. 2005.  Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.  American Economic Review 95 (1): 161 82. Kim, Soyoung, and Nouriel Roubini. 2008.  Twin Deficit or Twin Divergence? Fiscal Policy, Current Account, and Real Exchange Rate in the U.S.  Journal of International Economics 74 (2): 362 83. Kirchner, Markus, Jacopo Cimadomo, and Sebastian Hauptmeier. 2010.  Transmission of Government Spending Shocks in the Euro Area: Time Variation and Driving Forces.  ECB Working Paper Series 1219, European Central Bank, Frankfurt. Klein, Michael W., and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2006.  Fixed Exchange Rates and Trade.  Journal of International Economics 70 (2): 359 83. Mertens, Karel, and Morten O. Ravn. 2013.  The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate Income Tax Changes in the United States.  American Economic Review 103 (4): 1212 47. Michaillat, Pascal. 2014.  A Theory of Countercyclical Govern- ment Multiplier.  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (1): 190 217. Mineshima, Aiko, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Anke Weber. 2014.  Size of Fiscal Multipliers.  Post-crisis Fiscal Policy Part III Chapter 12, 315 72. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Monacelli, Tommaso, and Roberto Perotti. 2010.  Fiscal Policy, the Real Exchange Rate and Traded Goods.  Economic Journal 120 (544): 437 61. Mundell, Robert A. 1963.  Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates.  Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 29 (4): 475 85.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 215 CHAPTER 4 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant? International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. 2014.  Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions.  American Economic Review 104 (3): 753 92. Nicar, Stephen B. 2015.  International Spillovers from U.S. Fis- cal Policy Shocks.  Open Economies Review 26 (5): 1081 97. Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995.  Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux.  Journal of Political Economy 103 (3): 624 60. Owyang, Michael, Valerie Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy. 2013.  Are Government Spending Multipliers Greater during Times of Slack? Evidence from 20th Century Historical Data.  Ameri- can Economic Review 103 (2): 129 34. Poghosyan, Tigran. 2017.  Cross-Country Spillovers of Fiscal Consolidations in the Euro Area.  IMF Working Paper 17/140, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Popescu, Adina, and Ippei Shibata. Forthcoming.  Spillovers from US Government Spending Shocks: Impact on External Positions.  IMF Spillover Note, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Qureshi, Mahvash S., and Charalambos Tsangarides. 2010.  The Empirics of Exchange Rate Regimes and Trade: Words vs. Deeds.  IMF Working Paper 10/48, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. Ramey, Valerie A. 2011.  Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It s All in the Timing.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 1 50.  , and Sarah Zubairy. Forthcoming.  Government Spend- ing Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data,  Journal of Political Economy. Ravn, Morten O., Stephanie Schmitt-Groh , and Martin Uribe. 2012.  Consumption, Government Spending, and the Real Exchange Rate.  Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (3): 215 34. Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2004.  The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.  Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1): 1 48. Riera-Crichton, Daniel, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin. 2015.  Procyclical and Countercyclical Fiscal Multipliers: Evidence from OECD Countries.  Journal of International Money and Finance 52: 15 31. Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010.  The Macro- economic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.  American Economic Review 100 (3): 763 801. Rose, Andrew K., and Eric van Wincoop. 2001.  National Money as a Barrier to International Trade: The Real Case for Currency Union.  American Economic Review 91 (2): 386 90. Woodford, Michael. 2011.  Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier.  American Economic Journal: Macro- economics 3 (1): 1 35.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 217 STATISTICAL APPENDIX T he Statistical Appendix presents histori- cal data as well as projections. It comprises seven sections: Assumptions, What s New, Data and Conventions, Country Notes, Classification of Countries, Key Data Documentation, and Statistical Tables. The assumptions underlying the estimates and pro- jections for 2017 18 and the medium-term scenario for 2019 22 are summarized in the first section. The second section presents a brief description of the changes to the database and statistical tables since the April 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section provides a general description of the data and the conventions used for calculating country group composites. The fourth section summarizes selected key information for each country. The classification of countries in the various groups presented in the WEO is summarized in the fifth section. The sixth section provides information on methods and reporting stan- dards for the member countries  national account and government finance indicators included in the report. The last, and main, section comprises the statistical tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; Sta- tistical Appendix B is available online.) Data in these tables have been compiled on the basis of information available through September 22, 2017. The figures for 2017 and beyond are shown with the same degree of precision as the historical figures solely for conve- nience; because they are projections, the same degree of accuracy is not to be inferred. Assumptions Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econo- mies are assumed to remain constant at their average levels measured during the period July 20 to August 17, 2017. For 2017 and 2018, these assumptions imply average US dollar special drawing right (SDR) conversion rates of 1.385 and 1.409, US dollar euro conversion rates of 1.128 and 1.176, and yen US dollar conversion rates of 111.4 and 109.1, respectively. It is assumed that the price of oil will average $50.28 a barrel in 2017 and $50.17 a barrel in 2018. Established policies of national authorities are assumed to be maintained. The more specific policy assumptions underlying the projections for selected economies are described in Box A1. With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month US dollar deposits will average 1.4 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018, that three-month euro depos- its will average  0.3 percent in 2017 and 2018, and that six-month yen deposits will average 0.1 percent in 2017 and 0.2 percent in 2018. As a reminder, with respect to introduction of the euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the Euro- pean Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro and currencies of the member countries adopting the euro are as follows: See Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO for details on how the conversion rates were established. 1 euro = 13.7603 Austrian schillings = 40.3399 Belgian francs = 0.585274 Cyprus pound1 = 1.95583 Deutsche marks = 15.6466 Estonian krooni2 = 5.94573 Finnish markkaa = 6.55957 French francs = 340.750 Greek drachmas3 = 0.787564 Irish pound = 1,936.27 Italian lire = 0.702804 Latvian lat4 = 3.45280 Lithuanian litas5 = 40.3399 Luxembourg francs = 0.42930 Maltese lira1 = 2.20371 Netherlands guilders = 200.482 Portuguese escudos = 30.1260 Slovak koruna6 = 239.640 Slovenian tolars7 = 166.386 Spanish pesetas 1Established on January 1, 2008. 2Established on January 1, 2011. 3Established on January 1, 2001. 4Established on January 1, 2014. 5Established on January 1, 2015. 6Established on January 1, 2009. 7Established on January 1, 2007.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 218 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 What s New   Data for Somalia are included in the emerging market and developing economies group composites, enlarging the database to a total of 193 countries. Somalia is classified as a member of the Middle East and North Africa region.   Starting with the October 2017 WEO, the real GDP per capita data in Statistical Tables A1, B1, and B2 are shown at purchasing power parity. This differs from the treatment of these data in the April 2017 WEO and earlier issues, in which the data were shown in local national currency. Data and Conventions Data and projections for 193 economies form the statisti- cal basis of the WEO database. The data are maintained jointly by the IMF s Research Department and regional departments, with the latter regularly updating country projections based on consistent global assumptions. Although national statistical agencies are the ultimate providers of historical data and definitions, international organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with the objective of harmonizing methodologies for the compila- tion of national statistics, including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, classifications, and valuation proce- dures used in the production of economic statistics. The WEO database reflects information from both national source agencies and international organizations. Most countries  macroeconomic data presented in the WEO conform broadly to the 1993 version of the System of National Accounts (SNA). The IMF s sector statistical standards the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual and Compila- tion Guide (MFSMCG), and the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM 2014) have been or are being aligned with the SNA 2008. These standards reflect the IMF s special interest in countries  external positions, financial sector stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The process of adapting country data to the new standards begins in earnest when the manuals are released. However, full concordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent on the provision by national statistical compilers of revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are only partially adapted to these manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries the impact, on major balances and aggregates, of conver- sion to the updated standards will be small. Many other countries have partially adopted the latest standards and will continue implementation over a period of years.1 1 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few countries use The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF staff estimates. While attempts are made to align gross and net debt data with the definitions in the GFSM, as a result of data limitations or specific country circumstances, these data can sometimes deviate from the formal definitions. Although every effort is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant and internationally comparable, differences in both sectoral and instrument coverage mean that the data are not universally comparable. As more informa- tion becomes available, changes in either data sources or instrument coverage can give rise to data revisions that can sometimes be substantial. For clarification on the devia- tions in sectoral or instrument coverage, please refer to the metadata for the online WEO database. Composite data for country groups in the WEO are either sums or weighted averages of data for individual countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates of change.2 Arithmetically weighted averages are used for all data for the emerging market and developing econo- mies group except data on inflation and money growth, for which geometric averages are used. The following conventions apply:   Country group composites for exchange rates, interest rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three years) as a share of group GDP.   Composites for other data relating to the domes- tic economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share of total world or group GDP.3 Annual inflation rates are simple percentage changes from the previous years, except in the case of emerging market and developing economies, for which the rates are based on logarithmic differences.   Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing power parity terms are sums of individual country versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar adoption pat- tern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards adhered to by each country. 2 Averages for real GDP and its components, employment, infla- tion, factor productivity, trade, and commodity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of change, except in the case of GDP per capita and the unemployment rate, which are based on the simple arithmetic average. 3 See  Revised Purchasing Power Parity Weights  in the July 2014 WEO Update for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based weights, as well as Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO and Annex IV of the May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne Schulze- Ghattas,  Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the World Economic Outlook,  in Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, December 1993), 106 23.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 219 data after conversion to the international dollar in the years indicated.   Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepan- cies in intra-area transactions. Annual data are not adjusted for calendar-day effects. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply 1995 European cur- rency unit exchange rates.   Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual country data after conversion to US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years indicated.   Composite unemployment rates and employment growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group labor force.   Composites relating to external sector statistics are sums of individual country data after conversion to US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years indicated for balance of payments data and at end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denomi- nated in currencies other than US dollars.   Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent changes for individual countries weighted by the US dol- lar value of exports or imports as a share of total world or group exports or imports (in the preceding year).   Unless noted otherwise, group composites are com- puted if 90 percent or more of the share of group weights is represented. Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and government finance data for each country. For some countries, the figures for 2016 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please refer to Table G, which lists the latest actual out- turns for the indicators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country. Country Notes   The consumer price data for Argentina before Decem- ber 2013 reflect the consumer price index (CPI) for the Greater Buenos Aires Area (CPI-GBA), while from December 2013 to October 2015 the data reflect the national CPI (IPCNu). The new government that took office in December 2015 discontinued the IPCNu, stating that it was flawed, and released a new CPI for the Greater Buenos Aires Area on June 15, 2016 (a new national CPI has been disseminated starting in June 2016). At its November 9, 2016, meeting, the IMF Executive Board considered the new CPI series to be in line with international standards and lifted the declara- tion of censure issued in 2013. Given the differences in geographical coverage, weights, sampling, and meth- odology of these series, the average CPI inflation for 2014, 2015, and 2016 and end-of-period inflation for 2015 and 2016 are not reported in the October 2017 World Economic Outlook.   Argentina s authorities discontinued the publication of labor market data in December 2015 and released new series starting in the second quarter of 2016.   Argentina s and Venezuela s consumer prices are excluded from all WEO group aggregates.   Greece s primary balance estimates for 2016 are based on preliminary excessive deficit procedure (EDP) data on an accrual basis (ESA 2010) provided by the National Statistical Service (ELSTAT) as of April 21, 2017. Fiscal data since 2010 are adjusted in line with program definitions.   India s growth rates of real GDP calculated from 1998 to 2011 are as per national accounts with base year 2004/05, and thereafter are as per national accounts with base year 2011/12.   Against the background of a civil war and weak capacities, the reliability of Libya s data, especially medium-term projections, is low.   Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward because of the uncertain political situation.   Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, includ- ing assessing past and current economic developments as the basis for the projections, is complicated by the lack of discussions with the authorities (the last Article IV consultation took place in 2004), long intervals in receiving data with information gaps, incomplete provision of information, and difficulties in interpret- ing certain reported economic indicators in line with economic developments. The fiscal accounts include the budgetary central government and Petr leos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA), and the fiscal accounts data for 2016 22 are IMF staff estimates. Revenue includes the IMF staff s estimated foreign exchange profits transferred from the central bank to the government (buying US dollars at the most appreci- ated rate and selling at more depreciated rates in a multitier exchange rate system) and excludes the staff s estimated revenue from PDVSA s sale of PetroCaribe assets to the central bank. Fiscal accounts for 2010 22 correspond to the budgetary central government and PDVSA. Fiscal accounts before 2010 correspond to the budgetary central government, public enterprises (including PDVSA), Instituto Venezolano de los Seguros Sociales (IVSS social security), and Fondo de Garant a de Dep sitos y Protecci n Bancaria (FOGADE deposit insurance).  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 220 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Classification of Countries Summary of the Country Classification The country classification in the WEO divides the world into two major groups: advanced economies and emerging market and developing economies.4 This classification is not based on strict criteria, economic or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objec- tive is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably meaningful method of organizing data. Table A pro- vides an overview of the country classification, showing the number of countries in each group by region and summarizing some key indicators of their relative size (GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports of goods and services, and population). Some countries remain outside the country classifica- tion and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba and the Democratic People s Republic of Korea are examples of countries that are not IMF members, and their economies therefore are not monitored by the IMF. General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification Advanced Economies The 39 advanced economies are listed in Table B. The seven largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange rates the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada con- stitute the subgroup of major advanced economies often referred to as the Group of Seven (G7). The members of the euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Composite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover the current members for all years, even though the membership has increased over time. Table C lists the member countries of the European Union, not all of which are classified as advanced economies in the WEO. Emerging Market and Developing Economies The group of emerging market and developing econo- mies (154) includes all those that are not classified as advanced economies. The regional breakdowns of emerging market and developing economies are Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), emerging and developing Asia, emerging and 4 As used here, the terms  country  and  economy  do not always refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by interna- tional law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis. developing Europe (sometimes also referred to as  central and eastern Europe ), Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan (MENAP), and sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Emerging market and developing economies are also classified according to analytical criteria. The analytical criteria reflect the composition of export earnings and a distinction between net creditor and net debtor econo- mies. The detailed composition of emerging market and developing economies in the regional and analytical groups is shown in Tables D and E. The analytical criterion source of export earnings distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products (SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized into one of these groups when their main source of export earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on average between 2012 and 2016. The financial criteria focus on net creditor economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries (HIPCs), and low-income developing countries (LIDCs). Economies are categorized as net debtors when their lat- est net international investment position, where available, was less than zero or their current account balance accu- mulations from 1972 (or earliest available data) to 2016 were negative. Net debtor economies are further differen- tiated on the basis of experience with debt servicing.5 The HIPC group comprises the countries that are or have been considered by the IMF and the World Bank for participation in their debt initiative known as the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a  sustainable  level in a reasonably short period of time.6 Many of these countries have already benefited from debt relief and have graduated from the initiative. The LIDCs are countries that have per capita income levels below a certain threshold (currently set at $2,700 in 2016 as measured by the World Bank s Atlas method), structural features consistent with limited development and structural transformation, and insufficiently close external financial linkages to be widely seen as emerging market economies. 5 During 2012 16, 25 economies incurred external payments arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or rescheduling during 2012 16. 6 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and Suk- winder Singh, Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The Enhanced HIPC Initiative, IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, DC: Interna- tional Monetary Fund, November 1999).  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 221 Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 20171 (Percent of total for group or world) GDP Exports of Goods and Services Population Number of Economies Advanced Economies World Advanced Economies World Advanced Economies World Advanced Economies 39 100.0 41.8 100.0 64.4 100.0 14.5 United States 37.0 15.5 16.6 10.7 30.5 4.4 Euro Area 19 28.1 11.7 41.2 26.5 31.9 4.6 Germany 7.9 3.3 12.1 7.8 7.8 1.1 France 5.4 2.3 5.7 3.7 6.1 0.9 Italy 4.4 1.9 4.2 2.7 5.7 0.8 Spain 3.4 1.4 3.1 2.0 4.4 0.6 Japan 10.4 4.4 6.1 3.9 12.0 1.7 United Kingdom 5.5 2.3 5.6 3.6 6.2 0.9 Canada 3.3 1.4 3.6 2.3 3.4 0.5 Other Advanced Economies 16 15.6 6.5 26.9 17.3 16.0 2.3 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 7 74.1 31.0 53.8 34.7 71.7 10.4 Emerging Market and Developing Economies World Emerging Market and Developing Economies World Emerging Market and Developing Economies World Emerging Market and Developing Economies 154 100.0 58.2 100.0 35.6 100.0 85.5 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States2 12 7.8 4.5 6.9 2.5 4.6 3.9 Russia 5.5 3.2 4.5 1.6 2.3 2.0 Emerging and Developing Asia 30 54.3 31.6 50.1 17.8 56.9 48.6 China 30.5 17.7 30.0 10.7 22.2 19.0 India 12.4 7.2 6.0 2.2 20.9 17.8 Excluding China and India 28 11.4 6.6 14.1 5.0 13.8 11.8 Emerging and Developing Europe 12 6.1 3.5 9.8 3.5 2.8 2.4 Latin America and the Caribbean 32 13.5 7.8 14.2 5.1 9.9 8.4 Brazil 4.5 2.6 3.0 1.1 3.3 2.8 Mexico 3.3 1.9 5.4 1.9 2.0 1.7 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 23 13.2 7.7 14.7 5.2 10.7 9.2 Middle East and North Africa 21 11.7 6.8 14.3 5.1 7.1 6.0 Sub-Saharan Africa 45 5.2 3.0 4.3 1.5 15.1 12.9 Excluding Nigeria and South Africa 43 2.6 1.5 2.5 0.9 11.3 9.7 Analytical Groups3 By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 28 18.6 10.8 20.2 7.2 11.7 10.0 Nonfuel 125 81.4 47.3 79.8 28.4 88.3 75.5 Of Which, Primary Products 31 4.6 2.7 4.7 1.7 7.9 6.7 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies 121 49.6 28.9 46.2 16.5 66.8 57.1 Net Debtor Economies by Debt- Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16 25 3.3 1.9 2.1 0.8 5.5 4.7 Other Groups Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 39 2.4 1.4 1.9 0.7 11.3 9.7 Low-Income Developing Countries 59 7.2 4.2 6.6 2.3 22.5 19.2 1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies  GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those for which data are included in the group aggregates. 2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 3Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of insufficient data.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 222 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup Major Currency Areas United States Euro Area Japan Euro Area Austria Greece Netherlands Belgium Ireland Portugal Cyprus Italy Slovak Republic Estonia Latvia Slovenia Finland Lithuania Spain France Luxembourg Germany Malta Major Advanced Economies Canada Italy United States France Japan Germany United Kingdom Other Advanced Economies Australia Korea Singapore Czech Republic Macao SAR2 Sweden Denmark New Zealand Switzerland Hong Kong SAR1 Norway Taiwan Province of China Iceland Puerto Rico Israel San Marino 1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People s Republic of China and became a Special Administrative Region of China. 2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People s Republic of China and became a Special Administrative Region of China. Table C. European Union Austria Germany Poland Belgium Greece Portugal Bulgaria Hungary Romania Croatia Ireland Slovak Republic Cyprus Italy Slovenia Czech Republic Latvia Spain Denmark Lithuania Sweden Estonia Luxembourg United Kingdom Finland Malta France Netherlands  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 223 Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings Fuel Nonfuel Primary Products Commonwealth of Independent States Azerbaijan Uzbekistan Kazakhstan Russia Turkmenistan1 Emerging and Developing Asia Brunei Darussalam Lao P.D.R. Timor-Leste Marshall Islands Mongolia Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Tuvalu Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Argentina Ecuador Chile Trinidad and Tobago Guyana Venezuela Honduras Paraguay Suriname Uruguay Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan Algeria Afghanistan Bahrain Mauritania Iran Sudan Iraq Kuwait Libya Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates Yemen Sub-Saharan Africa Angola Burkina Faso Chad Burundi Republic of Congo Central African Republic Equatorial Guinea Democratic Republic of the Congo Gabon C te d Ivoire Nigeria Eritrea South Sudan Guinea Guinea-Bissau Liberia Malawi Mali Sierra Leone South Africa Zambia 1Turkmenistan, which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, is included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 224 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Low-Income Developing Countries Commonwealth of Independent States Armenia * Azerbaijan   Belarus * Georgia3 * Kazakhstan * Kyrgyz Republic * * Moldova * * Russia   Tajikistan * * Turkmenistan3   Ukraine3 * Uzbekistan   * Emerging and Developing Asia Bangladesh * * Bhutan * * Brunei Darussalam   Cambodia * * China   Fiji * India * Indonesia * Kiribati   * Lao P.D.R. * * Malaysia   Maldives * Marshall Islands * Micronesia   Mongolia * Myanmar * * Nauru * Nepal   * Palau   Papua New Guinea * * Philippines * Samoa * Solomon Islands * * Sri Lanka * Thailand * Timor-Leste   * Tonga * Tuvalu * Vanuatu * Vietnam * * Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Low-Income Developing Countries Emerging and Developing Europe Albania * Bosnia and Herzegovina * Bulgaria * Croatia * Hungary * Kosovo * FYR Macedonia * Montenegro * Poland * Romania * Serbia * Turkey * Latin America and the Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda * Argentina   The Bahamas * Barbados * Belize * Bolivia *   Brazil * Chile * Colombia * Costa Rica * Dominica * Dominican Republic * Ecuador * El Salvador * Grenada * Guatemala * Guyana *   Haiti *   * Honduras *   * Jamaica * Mexico * Nicaragua *   * Panama * Paraguay * Peru * St. Kitts and Nevis * St. Lucia * St. Vincent and the Grenadines * Suriname * Trinidad and Tobago   Uruguay * Venezuela   Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 225 Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Low-Income Developing Countries Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan Afghanistan     * Algeria   Bahrain   Djibouti * * Egypt * Iran   Iraq   Jordan * Kuwait   Lebanon * Libya   Mauritania *   * Morocco * Oman   Pakistan * Qatar   Saudi Arabia   Somalia * * * Sudan * * * Syria4 . . . Tunisia * United Arab Emirates   Yemen * * Sub-Saharan Africa Angola   Benin *   * Botswana   Burkina Faso *   * Burundi *   * Cabo Verde * Cameroon *   * Central African Republic *   * Chad *   * Comoros *   * Net External Position1 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries2 Low-Income Developing Countries Democratic Republic of the Congo *   * Republic of Congo *   * C te d Ivoire *   * Equatorial Guinea * Eritrea * * * Ethiopia *   * Gabon   The Gambia *   * Ghana *   * Guinea *   * Guinea-Bissau *   * Kenya * * Lesotho * * Liberia *   * Madagascar *   * Malawi *   * Mali *   * Mauritius   Mozambique *   * Namibia * Niger *   * Nigeria * * Rwanda *   * S o Tom  and Pr ncipe *   * Senegal *   * Seychelles * Sierra Leone *   * South Africa   South Sudan4 . . . * Swaziland * Tanzania *   * Togo *   * Uganda *   * Zambia *   * Zimbabwe * * Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries (continued) 1Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor). 2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point. 3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 4South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 226 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1 National Accounts Government Finance The Bahamas Jul/Jun Bangladesh Jul/Jun Barbados Apr/Mar Belize Apr/Mar Bhutan Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Botswana Apr/Mar Dominica Jul/Jun Egypt Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Ethiopia Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Haiti Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Hong Kong SAR Apr/Mar India Apr/Mar Apr/Mar Iran Apr/Mar Apr/Mar Jamaica Apr/Mar Lesotho Apr/Mar Apr/Mar Malawi Jul/Jun Marshall Islands Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Mauritius Jul/Jun Micronesia Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Myanmar Apr/Mar Apr/Mar Namibia Apr/Mar Nauru Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Nepal Aug/Jul Aug/Jul Pakistan Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Palau Oct/Sep Oct/Sep Puerto Rico Jul/Jun Jul/Jun St. Lucia Apr/Mar Samoa Jul/Jun Jul/Jun Singapore Apr/Mar Swaziland Apr/Mar Thailand Oct/Sep Trinidad and Tobago Oct/Sep 1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 227 Table G. Key Data Documentation Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Afghanistan Afghan afghani NSO 2015 2002/03 SNA 1993 NSO 2015 Albania Albanian lek IMF staff 2016 1996 SNA 1993 From 1996 NSO 2016 Algeria Algerian dinar NSO 2016 2001 SNA 1993 From 2005 NSO 2016 Angola Angolan kwanza MEP 2015 2002 ESA 1995 NSO 2015 Antigua and Barbuda Eastern Caribbean dollar CB 2016 20066 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Argentina Argentine peso NSO 2016 2004 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Armenia Armenian dram NSO 2016 2005 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Australia Australian dollar NSO 2016 2014/15 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2016 Austria Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Azerbaijan Azerbaijan manat NSO 2016 2003 SNA 1993 From 1994 NSO 2016 The Bahamas Bahamian dollar NSO 2015 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Bahrain Bahrain dinar NSO 2016 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Bangladesh Bangladesh taka NSO 2016 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Barbados Barbados dollar NSO and CB 2014 19746 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Belarus Belarusian ruble NSO 2016 2014 SNA 2008 From 2005 NSO 2016 Belgium Euro CB 2016 2014 ESA 2010 From 1995 CB 2016 Belize Belize dollar NSO 2015 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2015 Benin CFA franc NSO 2015 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Bhutan Bhutanese ngultrum NSO 2015/16 20006 SNA 1993 CB 2015/16 Bolivia Bolivian boliviano NSO 2015 1990 Other NSO 2016 Bosnia and Herzegovina Bosnia convertible marka NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2016 Botswana Botswana pula NSO 2015 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Brazil Brazilian real NSO 2016 1995 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Brunei Darussalam Brunei dollar NSO and GAD 2016 2010 SNA 1993 NSO and GAD 2016 Bulgaria Bulgarian lev NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1996 NSO 2016 Burkina Faso CFA franc NSO and MEP 2016 1999 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Burundi Burundi franc NSO 2015 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Cabo Verde Cabo Verdean escudo NSO 2016 2007 SNA 2008 From 2011 NSO 2016 Cambodia Cambodian riel NSO 2016 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Cameroon CFA franc NSO 2016 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Canada Canadian dollar NSO 2016 2007 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2016 Central African Republic CFA franc NSO 2012 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2015 Chad CFA franc CB 2015 2005 Other NSO 2015 Chile Chilean peso CB 2016 20136 SNA 2008 From 2003 NSO 2016 China Chinese yuan NSO 2016 2015 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Colombia Colombian peso NSO 2016 2005 Other From 2000 NSO 2016 Comoros Comorian franc MEP 2015 2000 Other NSO 2015 Democratic Republic of the Congo Congolese franc NSO 2015 2005 SNA 1993 CB 2015 Republic of Congo CFA franc NSO 2016 1990 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Costa Rica Costa Rican col n CB 2016 2012 SNA 2008 CB 2016  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 228 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Afghanistan MoF 2015 2001 CG C NSO, MoF, and CB 2015 BPM 5 Albania IMF staff 2016 1986 CG,LG,SS,MPC, NFPC Other CB 2016 BPM 6 Algeria MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Angola MoF 2015 2001 CG,LG Other CB 2015 BPM 6 Antigua and Barbuda MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Argentina MEP 2016 1986 CG,SG,LG,SS C NSO 2016 BPM 5 Armenia MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Australia MoF 2015 2014 CG,SG,LG,TG A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Austria NSO 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Azerbaijan MoF 2015 Other CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 The Bahamas MoF 2016/17 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Bahrain MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Bangladesh MoF 2015/16 Other CG C CB 2015 BPM 6 Barbados MoF 2016/17 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Belarus MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Belgium CB 2016 ESA 2010 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Belize MoF 2015/16 1986 CG,MPC Mixed CB 2015 BPM 6 Benin MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2015 BPM 6 Bhutan MoF 2015/16 1986 CG C CB 2014/15 BPM 6 Bolivia MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS,NMPC, NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 6 Bosnia and Herzegovina MoF 2015 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS Mixed CB 2016 BPM 6 Botswana MoF 2015/16 1986 CG C CB 2015 BPM 5 Brazil MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS, MPC,NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 6 Brunei Darussalam MoF 2016 Other CG,BCG C NSO, MEP, and GAD 2015 BPM 6 Bulgaria MoF 2015 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Burkina Faso MoF 2016 2001 CG CB CB 2016 BPM 6 Burundi MoF 2015 2001 CG A CB 2015 BPM 6 Cabo Verde MoF 2016 2001 CG A NSO 2016 BPM 5 Cambodia MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG A CB 2016 BPM 5 Cameroon MoF 2016 2001 CG,NFPC C MoF 2016 BPM 5 Canada MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Central African Republic MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2015 BPM 5 Chad MoF 2015 1986 CG,NFPC C CB 2015 BPM 5 Chile MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG A CB 2016 BPM 6 China MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG C GAD 2016 BPM 6 Colombia MoF 2015 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS Other CB and NSO 2015 BPM 6 Comoros MoF 2016 1986 CG Mixed CB and IMF staff 2016 BPM 5 Democratic Republic of the Congo MoF 2015 2001 CG,LG A CB 2015 BPM 5 Republic of Congo MoF 2016 2001 CG A CB 2015 BPM 5 Costa Rica MoF and CB 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 229 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data C te d'Ivoire CFA franc NSO 2014 2009 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Croatia Croatian kuna NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 NSO 2016 Cyprus Euro NSO 2016 2005 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Czech Republic Czech koruna NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Denmark Danish krone NSO 2015 2010 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 Djibouti Djibouti franc NSO 2014 1990 Other NSO 2016 Dominica Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2015 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2015 Dominican Republic Dominican peso CB 2016 2007 SNA 2008 From 2007 CB 2016 Ecuador US dollar CB 2016 2007 SNA 1993 NSO and CB 2016 Egypt Egyptian pound MEP 2015/16 2011/12 SNA 1993 NSO 2015/16 El Salvador US dollar CB 2016 1990 Other NSO 2016 Equatorial Guinea CFA franc MEP and CB 2016 2006 SNA 1993 MEP 2016 Eritrea Eritrean nakfa IMF staff 2006 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2009 Estonia Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 2010 NSO 2016 Ethiopia Ethiopian birr NSO 2015/16 2010/11 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Fiji Fijian dollar NSO 2016 20116 SNA 1993 NSO 2015 Finland Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 France Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 Gabon CFA franc MoF 2015 2001 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 The Gambia Gambian dalasi NSO 2016 2004 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Georgia Georgian lari NSO 2016 2000 SNA 1993 From 1996 NSO 2016 Germany Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1991 NSO 2016 Ghana Ghanaian cedi NSO 2016 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Greece Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Grenada Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2015 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Guatemala Guatemalan quetzal CB 2016 2001 SNA 1993 From 2001 NSO 2016 Guinea Guinean franc NSO 2011 2003 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Guinea-Bissau CFA franc NSO 2015 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Guyana Guyanese dollar NSO 2016 20066 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Haiti Haitian gourde NSO 2015/16 1986/87 SNA 2008 NSO 2015/16 Honduras Honduran lempira CB 2016 2000 SNA 1993 CB 2016 Hong Kong SAR Hong Kong dollar NSO 2016 2014 SNA 2008 From 1980 NSO 2016 Hungary Hungarian forint NSO 2016 2005 ESA 2010 From 2005 IEO 2016 Iceland Icelandic kr na NSO 2016 2005 ESA 2010 From 1990 NSO 2016 India Indian rupee NSO 2016/17 2011/12 SNA 2008 NSO 2016/17 Indonesia Indonesian rupiah NSO 2016 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Iran Iranian rial CB 2015/16 2011/12 SNA 1993 CB 2015/16 Iraq Iraqi dinar NSO 2014 2007 SNA 1968 NSO 2014 Ireland Euro NSO 2016 2015 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Israel New Israeli shekel NSO 2016 2015 SNA 2008 From 1995 NSO 2016 Italy Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 Jamaica Jamaican dollar NSO 2015 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2015  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 230 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source C te d'Ivoire MoF 2016 1986 CG A CB 2015 BPM 6 Croatia MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG A CB 2016 BPM 6 Cyprus NSO 2016 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS Other CB 2016 BPM 6 Czech Republic MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Denmark NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2015 BPM 6 Djibouti MoF 2016 2001 CG A CB 2016 BPM 5 Dominica MoF 2015/16 1986 CG C CB 2015 BPM 6 Dominican Republic MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS,NMPC Mixed CB 2016 BPM 6 Ecuador CB and MoF 2016 1986 CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 6 Egypt MoF 2015/16 2001 CG,LG,SS,MPC C CB 2015/16 BPM 5 El Salvador MoF and CB 2016 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Equatorial Guinea MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2015 BPM 5 Eritrea MoF 2008 2001 CG C CB 2008 BPM 5 Estonia MoF 2016 1986/2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Ethiopia MoF 2015/16 1986 CG,SG,LG,NFPC C CB 2015/16 BPM 5 Fiji MoF 2015 1986 CG C CB 2015 BPM 6 Finland MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 France NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Gabon IMF staff 2016 2001 CG A CB 2015 BPM 5 The Gambia MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB and IMF staff 2016 BPM 5 Georgia MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG C NSO and CB 2015 BPM 5 Germany NSO 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Ghana MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Greece NSO 2016 2014 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Grenada MoF 2015 2001 CG CB CB 2015 BPM 6 Guatemala MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2015 BPM 6 Guinea MoF 2016 2001 CG Other CB and MEP 2016 BPM 6 Guinea-Bissau MoF 2014 2001 CG A CB 2015 BPM 6 Guyana MoF 2016 1986 CG,SS,NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 5 Haiti MoF 2015/16 2001 CG C CB 2015/16 BPM 5 Honduras MoF 2016 2014 CG,LG,SS,NFPC A CB 2015 BPM 5 Hong Kong SAR NSO 2016/17 2001 CG C NSO 2016 BPM 6 Hungary MEP and NSO 2016 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS,NMPC A CB 2015 BPM 6 Iceland NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 India MoF and IMF staff 2015/16 1986 CG,SG C CB 2016/17 BPM 6 Indonesia MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Iran MoF 2015/16 2001 CG C CB 2015/16 BPM 5 Iraq MoF 2014 2001 CG C CB 2014 BPM 5 Ireland MoF and NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Israel MoF and NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS Other NSO 2016 BPM 6 Italy NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Jamaica MoF 2015/16 1986 CG C CB 2015 BPM 5  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 231 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Japan Japanese yen GAD 2016 2011 SNA 2008 From 1980 GAD 2016 Jordan Jordanian dinar NSO 2016 1994 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Kazakhstan Kazakhstani tenge NSO 2016 2007 SNA 1993 From 1994 CB 2016 Kenya Kenya shilling NSO 2016 2009 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Kiribati Australian dollar NSO 2015 2006 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Korea South Korean won CB 2016 2010 SNA 2008 From 1980 MoF 2016 Kosovo Euro NSO 2015 2015 ESA 2010 NSO 2016 Kuwait Kuwaiti dinar MEP and NSO 2015 2010 SNA 1993 NSO and MEP 2016 Kyrgyz Republic Kyrgyz som NSO 2015 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Lao P.D.R. Lao kip NSO 2016 2012 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Latvia Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Lebanon Lebanese pound NSO 2013 2010 SNA 2008 From 2010 NSO 2016 Lesotho Lesotho loti NSO 2015/16 2012/13 Other NSO 2016 Liberia US dollar CB 2016 1992 SNA 1993 CB 2016 Libya Libyan dinar MEP 2016 2003 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Lithuania Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 2005 NSO 2016 Luxembourg Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Macao SAR Macanese pataca NSO 2016 2015 SNA 2008 From 2001 NSO 2016 FYR Macedonia Macedonian denar NSO 2016 2005 ESA 2010 NSO 2016 Madagascar Malagasy ariary NSO 2015 2000 SNA 1968 NSO 2016 Malawi Malawian kwacha NSO 2011 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Malaysia Malaysian ringgit NSO 2016 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Maldives Maldivian rufiyaa MoF and NSO 2015 2014 SNA 1993 CB 2016 Mali CFA franc NSO 2016 1999 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Malta Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2016 Marshall Islands US dollar NSO 2015/16 2003/04 SNA 1993 NSO 2015/16 Mauritania Mauritanian ouguiya NSO 2014 2004 SNA 1993 NSO 2014 Mauritius Mauritian rupee NSO 2016 2006 SNA 1993 From 1999 NSO 2016 Mexico Mexican peso NSO 2016 2008 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Micronesia US dollar NSO 2014/15 2004 SNA 1993 NSO 2014/15 Moldova Moldovan leu NSO 2016 1995 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Mongolia Mongolian t gr g NSO 2016 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Montenegro Euro NSO 2015 2006 ESA 1995 NSO 2016 Morocco Moroccan dirham NSO 2016 2007 SNA 1993 From 1998 NSO 2016 Mozambique Mozambican metical NSO 2016 2009 SNA 1993/ 2008 NSO 2016 Myanmar Myanmar kyat MEP 2015/16 2010/11 Other NSO 2015/16 Namibia Namibia dollar NSO 2016 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Nauru Australian dollar Other 2015/16 2006/07 SNA 1993 NSO 2015/16 Nepal Nepalese rupee NSO 2015/16 2000/01 SNA 1993 CB 2016/17 Netherlands Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 New Zealand New Zealand dollar NSO 2016 2009/10 Other From 1987 NSO 2016 Nicaragua Nicaraguan c rdoba CB 2016 2006 SNA 1993 From 1994 CB 2016 Niger CFA franc NSO 2016 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Nigeria Nigerian naira NSO 2016 2010 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Norway Norwegian krone NSO 2016 2014 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 232 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Japan GAD 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A MoF 2016 BPM 6 Jordan MoF 2016 2001 CG,NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 5 Kazakhstan IMF staff 2016 2001 CG,LG A CB 2016 BPM 6 Kenya MoF 2016 2001 CG A CB 2016 BPM 6 Kiribati MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG C NSO 2014 BPM 6 Korea MoF 2015 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Kosovo MoF 2015 Other CG,LG C CB 2015 BPM 5 Kuwait MoF 2015 1986 CG Mixed CB 2016 BPM 6 Kyrgyz Republic MoF 2016 Other CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 5 Lao P.D.R. MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Latvia MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Lebanon MoF 2015 2001 CG Mixed CB and IMF staff 2015 BPM 5 Lesotho MoF 2016/17 2001 CG,LG C CB 2016/17 BPM 5 Liberia MoF 2016 2001 CG A CB 2015 BPM 5 Libya MoF 2016 1986 CG,SG,LG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Lithuania MoF 2015 2014 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Luxembourg MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Macao SAR MoF 2015 2014 CG,SS C NSO 2016 BPM 6 FYR Macedonia MoF 2016 1986 CG,SG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Madagascar MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Malawi MoF 2015/16 1986 CG C NSO and GAD 2016 BPM 5 Malaysia MoF 2015 1986 CG,SG,LG C NSO 2016 BPM 6 Maldives MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Mali MoF 2016 2001 CG Mixed CB 2016 BPM 6 Malta NSO 2016 2001 CG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Marshall Islands MoF 2015/16 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2015/16 BPM 6 Mauritania MoF 2014 1986 CG C CB 2013 BPM 5 Mauritius MoF 2015/16 2001 CG,LG,NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 5 Mexico MoF 2016 2001 CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 6 Micronesia MoF 2014/15 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS Other NSO 2014/15 Other Moldova MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 5 Mongolia MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 5 Montenegro MoF 2015 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2015 BPM 6 Morocco MEP 2016 2001 CG A GAD 2016 BPM 5 Mozambique MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG Mixed CB 2015 BPM 6 Myanmar MoF 2015/16 Other CG,NFPC Mixed IMF staff 2015/16 BPM 5 Namibia MoF 2015/16 2001 CG C CB 2015 BPM 5 Nauru MoF 2015/16 2001 CG Mixed IMF staff 2014/15 BPM 6 Nepal MoF 2015/16 2001 CG C CB 2015/16 BPM 5 Netherlands MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 New Zealand MoF 2015/16 2001 CG A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Nicaragua MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG,SS C IMF staff 2016 BPM 6 Niger MoF 2015 1986 CG A CB 2015 BPM 6 Nigeria MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Norway NSO and MoF 2016 2014 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 233 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Oman Omani rial NSO 2015 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Pakistan Pakistan rupee NSO 2015/16 2005/066 SNA 1968/ 1993 NSO 2016/17 Palau US dollar MoF 2015/16 2004/05 SNA 1993 MoF 2015/16 Panama US dollar NSO 2015 2007 SNA 1993 From 2007 NSO 2015 Papua New Guinea Papua New Guinea kina NSO and MoF 2013 1998 SNA 1993 NSO 2013 Paraguay Paraguayan guaran  CB 2016 1994 SNA 1993 CB 2016 Peru Peruvian nuevo sol CB 2016 2007 SNA 1993 CB 2016 Philippines Philippine peso NSO 2016 2000 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Poland Polish zloty NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Portugal Euro NSO 2016 2011 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 Puerto Rico US dollar NSO 2014/15 1954 SNA1968 MEP 2015/16 Qatar Qatari riyal NSO and MEP 2015 2013 SNA 1993 NSO and MEP 2015 Romania Romanian leu NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2016 Russia Russian ruble NSO 2016 2016 SNA 2008 From 1995 NSO 2016 Rwanda Rwandan franc NSO 2016 2014 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Samoa Samoa tala NSO 2015/16 2009/10 SNA 1993 NSO 2015/16 San Marino Euro NSO 2015 2007 Other NSO 2016 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe S o Tom  and Pr ncipe dobra NSO 2015 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Saudi Arabia Saudi riyal NSO and MEP 2016 2010 SNA 1993 NSO and MEP 2016 Senegal CFA franc NSO 2016 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Serbia Serbian dinar NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 2010 NSO 2016 Seychelles Seychellois rupee NSO 2015 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Sierra Leone Sierra Leonean leone NSO 2016 2006 SNA 1993 From 2010 NSO 2016 Singapore Singapore dollar NSO 2016 2010 SNA 1993 From 2010 NSO 2016 Slovak Republic Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1997 NSO 2016 Slovenia Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 2000 NSO 2016 Solomon Islands Solomon Islands dollar CB 2016 2004 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Somalia US dollar CB 2015 2015 SNA 1993 CB 2014 South Africa South African rand CB 2016 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 South Sudan South Sudanese pound NSO 2015 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Spain Euro NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1995 NSO 2016 Sri Lanka Sri Lankan rupee NSO 2016 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 St. Kitts and Nevis Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2016 20066 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 St. Lucia Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2016 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 St. Vincent and the Grenadines Eastern Caribbean dollar NSO 2016 20066 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Sudan Sudanese pound NSO 2010 2007 Other NSO 2015 Suriname Surinamese dollar NSO 2015 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2016  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 234 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Oman MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2015 BPM 5 Pakistan MoF 2015/16 1986 CG,SG,LG C CB 2015/16 BPM 5 Palau MoF 2015/16 2001 CG Other MoF 2015/16 BPM 6 Panama MoF 2015 1986 CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC C NSO 2015 BPM 5 Papua New Guinea MoF 2013 1986 CG C CB 2013 BPM 5 Paraguay MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC, NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 5 Peru MoF 2016 1986 CG,SG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 5 Philippines MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Poland MoF and NSO 2016 ESA 2010 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Portugal NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Puerto Rico MEP 2015/16 2001 Other A       Qatar MoF 2015 1986 CG C CB and IMF staff 2014 BPM 5 Romania MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Russia MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,SS Mixed CB 2016 BPM 6 Rwanda MoF 2016 2001 CG,LG Mixed CB 2016 BPM 6 Samoa MoF 2015/16 2001 CG A CB 2015/16 BPM 6 San Marino MoF 2016 Other CG Other       S o Tom  and Pr ncipe MoF and Customs 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Saudi Arabia MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Senegal MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB and IMF staff 2016 BPM 6 Serbia MoF 2016 1986/2001 CG,SG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Seychelles MoF 2016 1986 CG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 Sierra Leone MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Singapore MoF 2015/16 2001 CG C NSO 2016 BPM 6 Slovak Republic NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Slovenia MoF 2016 1986 CG,SG,LG,SS C NSO 2016 BPM 6 Solomon Islands MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Somalia MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 South Africa MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 South Sudan MoF and MEP 2016 Other CG C MoF, NSO, and MEP 2016 BPM 5 Spain MoF and NSO 2016 ESA 2010 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Sri Lanka MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 St. Kitts and Nevis MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 St. Lucia MoF 2015/16 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 St. Vincent and the Grenadines MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Sudan MoF 2015 2001 CG Mixed CB 2015 BPM 5 Suriname MoF 2015 1986 CG Mixed CB 2016 BPM 5  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 235 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Currency National Accounts Prices (CPI) Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Base Year2 System of National Accounts Use of Chain- Weighted Methodology3 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Swaziland Swazi lilangeni NSO 2015 2011 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Sweden Swedish krona NSO 2016 2016 ESA 2010 From 1993 NSO 2016 Switzerland Swiss franc NSO 2016 2010 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 Syria Syrian pound NSO 2010 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2011 Taiwan Province of China New Taiwan dollar NSO 2015 2011 SNA 2008 NSO 2016 Tajikistan Tajik somoni NSO 2016 1995 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Tanzania Tanzania shilling NSO 2016 2007 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Thailand Thai baht MEP 2016 2002 SNA 1993 From 1993 MEP 2016 Timor-Leste US dollar MoF 2015 20156 Other NSO 2016 Togo CFA franc NSO 2013 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Tonga Tongan pa anga CB 2016 2010 SNA 1993 CB 2016 Trinidad and Tobago Trinidad and Tobago dollar NSO 2016 2000 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Tunisia Tunisian dinar NSO 2014 2004 SNA 1993 From 2009 NSO 2016 Turkey Turkish lira NSO 2016 2009 ESA 2010 From 2009 NSO 2016 Turkmenistan New Turkmen manat NSO 2015 2008 SNA 1993 From 2000 NSO 2015 Tuvalu Australian dollar PFTAC advisors 2015 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Uganda Ugandan shilling NSO 2016 2010 SNA 1993 CB 2015/16 Ukraine Ukrainian hryvnia NSO 2016 2010 SNA 2008 From 2005 NSO 2016 United Arab Emirates U.A.E. dirham NSO 2016 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 United Kingdom Pound sterling NSO 2016 2013 ESA 2010 From 1980 NSO 2016 United States US dollar NSO 2016 2009 Other From 1980 NSO 2016 Uruguay Uruguayan peso CB 2016 2005 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Uzbekistan Uzbek sum NSO 2016 1995 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Vanuatu Vanuatu vatu NSO 2016 2006 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Venezuela Venezuelan bol var fuerte CB 2016 1997 SNA 2008 CB 2016 Vietnam Vietnamese dong NSO 2016 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Yemen Yemeni rial IMF staff 2008 1990 SNA 1993 NSO,CB, and IMF staff 2009 Zambia Zambian kwacha NSO 2015 2010 SNA 1993 NSO 2016 Zimbabwe US dollar NSO 2013 2009 Other NSO 2016  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 236 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued) Country Government Finance Balance of Payments Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Subsectors Coverage4 Accounting Practice5 Historical Data Source1 Latest Actual Annual Data Statistics Manual in Use at Source Swaziland MoF 2016/17 2001 CG A CB 2016 BPM 6 Sweden MoF 2015 2001 CG,LG,SS A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Switzerland MoF 2015 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Syria MoF 2009 1986 CG C CB 2009 BPM 5 Taiwan Province of China MoF 2015 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2015 BPM 6 Tajikistan MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 5 Tanzania MoF 2015 1986 CG,LG C CB 2015 BPM 5 Thailand MoF 2014/15 2001 CG,BCG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Timor-Leste MoF 2015 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Togo MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Tonga MoF 2016 2014 CG C CB and NSO 2015 BPM 6 Trinidad and Tobago MoF 2015/16 1986 CG C CB and NSO 2016 BPM 6 Tunisia MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Turkey MoF 2015 2001 CG,LG,SS A CB 2016 BPM 6 Turkmenistan MoF 2015 1986 CG,LG C NSO and IMF staff 2013 BPM 5 Tuvalu MoF 2016 Other CG Mixed IMF staff 2013 BPM 6 Uganda MoF 2015 2001 CG C CB 2015 BPM 6 Ukraine MoF 2016 2001 CG,SG,LG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 6 United Arab Emirates MoF 2015 2001 CG,BCG,SG,SS C CB 2016 BPM 5 United Kingdom NSO 2016 2001 CG,LG A NSO 2016 BPM 6 United States MEP 2016 2014 CG,SG,LG A NSO 2016 BPM 6 Uruguay MoF 2016 1986 CG,LG,SS,MPC, NFPC A CB 2016 BPM 6 Uzbekistan MoF 2016 Other CG,SG,LG,SS C MEP 2016 BPM 5 Vanuatu MoF 2016 2001 CG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Venezuela MoF 2013 2001 BCG,NFPC C CB 2016 BPM 5 Vietnam MoF 2014 2001 CG,SG,LG C CB 2016 BPM 5 Yemen MoF 2013 2001 CG,LG C IMF staff 2009 BPM 5 Zambia MoF 2016 1986 CG C CB 2016 BPM 6 Zimbabwe MoF 2014 1986 CG C CB and MoF 2013 BPM 4 Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National and Regional Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts. 1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre. 2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to calculate the index. 3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past. 4For some countries, the structures of government consist of a broader coverage than specified for the general government. Coverage: BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; NMPC = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments. 5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting. 6Base year is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 237 Fiscal Policy Assumptions The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for differences between the national authorities and the IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions and projected fiscal outturns. When no official budget has been announced, projections incorporate policy measures that are judged likely to be implemented. The medium- term fiscal projections are similarly based on a judg- ment about the most likely path of policies. For cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient information to assess the authorities  budget intentions and prospects for policy implementation, an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions used in regard to some of the advanced economies follow. (See also Tables B5 to B9 in the online section of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1 Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the avail- able information regarding budget outturn and budget plans for the federal and provincial governments, fiscal measures announced by the authorities, and IMF staff macroeconomic projections. Australia: Fiscal projections are based on Australian Bureau of Statistics data, the fiscal year 2017/18 budget, and IMF staff estimates. Austria: Fiscal projections are based on data from Statistics Austria, the authorities  projections, and IMF staff estimates and projections. Belgium: Projections reflect the IMF staff s assessment of policies and measures laid out in the 2017 budget and the 2016 19 Stability Programme, incorporated into the IMF staff s macroeconomic framework. 1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, such as asset and commodity prices and output composition effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of structural balances are based on IMF staff estimates of potential GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus financial assets corresponding to debt instruments. Esti- mates of the output gap and of the structural balance are subject to significant margins of uncertainty. Brazil: Fiscal projections for the end of 2017 take into account budget performance through July 31, 2017, and the deficit target approved in the budget law. Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts in the 2017 federal budget and 2017 provincial budget updates as available. The IMF staff makes some adjustments to these forecasts, including for differences in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff forecast also incorporates the most recent data releases from Statistics Canada s Canadian System of National Economic Accounts, including federal, provincial, and territorial budgetary outturns through the second quarter of 2017. Chile: Projections are based on the authorities  budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff s projections for GDP and copper prices. China: Projections assume that the pace of fiscal consolidation is likely to be more gradual, reflecting reforms to strengthen social safety nets and the social security system announced as part of the Third Plenum reform agenda. Denmark: Estimates for 2016 are aligned with the latest official budget estimates and the underlying economic projections, adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff s macroeconomic assumptions. For 2017 18, the projections incorporate key features of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the authorities  Convergence Programme 2016 submitted to the European Union. France: Projections for 2017 reflect the budget law and cancellation of spending taken in July 2017. For 2018 19, they are based on the multiyear budget and the preliminary fiscal path announced by the new government in July 2017, adjusted for differences in assumptions on macro and financial variables, and revenue projections. Historical fiscal data reflect the May 2017 revisions and update of the fiscal accounts, debt data, and national accounts for 2014 and 2015. Germany: The IMF staff s projections for 2017 and beyond are based on the 2017 Stability Programme Update, adjusted for the differences in the IMF staff s macroeconomic framework and assumptions concerning revenue elasticities. The estimate of gross debt includes portfolios of impaired assets and noncore business transferred to institutions that are winding up, as well as other financial sector and EU support operations. Greece: The fiscal projections reflect the IMF staff s assessment of implementation of legislated fiscal measures under the IMF and European Stability Mechanism (ESM) program. Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 238 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections are based on the authorities  medium-term fiscal projections on expenditures. Hungary: Fiscal projections include IMF staff projections of the macroeconomic framework and of the impact of recent legislative measures, as well as fiscal policy plans announced in the 2017 budget. India: Historical data are based on budgetary execution data. Projections are based on available information on the authorities  fiscal plans, with adjustments for IMF staff assumptions. Subnational data are incorporated with a lag of up to two years; general government data are thus finalized well after central government data. IMF and Indian presentations differ, particularly regarding divestment and license auction proceeds, net versus gross recording of revenues in certain minor categories, and some public sector lending. Indonesia: IMF projections are based on moderate tax policy and administration reforms, fuel subsidy pricing reforms introduced in January 2015, and a gradual increase in social and capital spending over the medium term in line with fiscal space. Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country s Budget 2017, Stability Programme Update 2017, and Summer Economic Statement 2017. Israel: Historical data are based on Government Finance Statistics data prepared by the Central Bureau of Statistics. Projections for 2017 and 2018 are based on the 2017 18 budget, adjusted for the fiscal impact of new measures announced in April 2017 (the  Net Family Plan ) and for one-off revenues in 2017 arising from a large foreign direct investment transaction (0.3 percent of GDP). The central government deficit is assumed to remain at the current ceiling level of 2.9 percent of GDP in subsequent years, rather than declining in line with medium-term fiscal targets, consistent with long experience of revisions to those targets. Italy: IMF staff estimates and projections are based on the fiscal plans included in the government s 2017 budget and April 2017 Economic and Financial Document. Japan: The projections include fiscal measures already announced by the government, including the fiscal stimulus package for 2017 and the consumption tax hike in October 2019. Korea: The medium-term forecast incorporates the government s announced medium-term consolidation path. Mexico: Fiscal projections for 2017 are broadly in line with the approved budget; projections for 2018 onward assume compliance with rules established in the Fiscal Responsibility Law. Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2017 22 are based on the authorities  Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis budget projections, after differences in macroeconomic assumptions are adjusted for. Historical data were revised following the June 2014 Central Bureau of Statistics release of revised macro data because of the adoption of the European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010) and the revisions of data sources. New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the authorities  fiscal year 2017/18 budget and on IMF staff estimates. Portugal: Projections for 2017 are based on the authorities  approved budget, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff s macroeconomic forecast. Projections thereafter are based on the assumption of unchanged policies. Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the Puerto Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plan (FEGP), which was prepared on March 13, 2017, and certified by the Oversight Board. In line with assumptions of this plan, IMF projections assume that Puerto Rico will lose federal funding for the Affordable Care Act (ACA) starting in 2018. Likewise, projections assume federal tax incentives, which were neutralizing the effects of Puerto Rico s Act 154 on foreign companies, will no longer be available, starting in 2018, leading to additional revenue losses. Given sizable policy uncertainty, some FEGP and IMF assumptions may differ, in particular, those relating to the effects of the corporate tax reform, tax compliance and tax adjustments (fees and rates); reduction of subsidies, freezing of payroll operational costs, improvement of mobility, and reduction of expenses; and increasing health care efficiency. On the expenditure side, measures include extension of Act 66, which freezes much government spending, through 2020; reduction of operating costs; decreases in government subsidies; and spending cuts in education. Although IMF policy assumptions are similar to those in the FEGP scenario with full measures, the IMF s projections of fiscal revenues, expenditures, and balance are different from FEGP s. This stems from two main differences in methodologies: first and foremost, while IMF projections are on an accrual basis, FEGP s are on a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGP make very different macroeconomic assumptions. Russia: Projections for 2017 19 are IMF staff estimates, based on the authorities  budget. Projections for 2020 22 Box A1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 239 are based on an oil price rule to be in effect in 2022, with adjustments by the IMF staff. Saudi Arabia: IMF staff projections of oil revenues are based on WEO baseline oil prices and the assumption that Saudi Arabia continues to meet its commitments under the OPEC+ agreement. For non- oil revenues, IMF staff estimates of the revenue impact of announced policies in the Fiscal Balance Program are included in the baseline. On the expenditure side, starting in 2017, following recent reforms, the wage bill estimates no longer include the 13th-month wage payment that used to be awarded every three years in accordance with the lunar calendar. Expenditure projections take the 2017 budget as a starting point and reflect staff estimates of the effects of the latest changes in policies and economic developments. Singapore: For fiscal years 2016/17 and 2017/18, projections are based on budget numbers. For the remainder of the projection period, the IMF staff assumes unchanged policies. South Africa: Fiscal projections are based on the authorities  2017 Budget Review. Spain: For 2017, fiscal data are IMF staff projections, reflecting the cash outturn through May and the 2017 budget passed by Parliament. For 2018 and beyond, fiscal projections are based on the measures specified in the Stability Programme Update 2017 20 and on the IMF staff s macroeconomic projections. Sweden: Fiscal projections take into account the authorities  projections based on the 2017 Spring Budget. The impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal accounts is calculated using the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development s 2005 elasticity to take into account output and employment gaps. Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal policy is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in line with the requirements of Switzerland s fiscal rules. Turkey: The fiscal projections for 2017 are based on the authorities  Medium Term Programme 2017 19, with adjustments for additionally announced fiscal measures and the IMF staff s higher inflation forecast. For the medium term, the fiscal projections assume a more gradual fiscal consolidation than envisaged in the Medium Term Programme. United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on the country s Budget 2017, published in March 2017, with expenditure projections based on the budgeted nominal values and with revenue projections adjusted for differences between IMF staff forecasts of macroeconomic variables (such as GDP growth and inflation) and the forecasts of these variables assumed in the authorities  fiscal projections. IMF staff data exclude public sector banks and the effect of transferring assets from the Royal Mail Pension Plan to the public sector in April 2012. Real government consumption and investment are part of the real GDP path, which, according to the IMF staff, may or may not be the same as projected by the U.K. Office for Budget Responsibility. United States: Fiscal projections are based on the January 2017 Congressional Budget Office baseline adjusted for the IMF staff s policy and macroeconomic assumptions. The baseline incorporates the key provisions of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015, including a partial rollback of the sequester spending cuts in fiscal year 2016. In fiscal years 2017 through 2022, the IMF staff assumes that the sequester cuts will continue to be partially replaced, in proportions similar to those already implemented in fiscal years 2014 and 2015, with back-loaded measures generating savings in mandatory programs and additional revenues. Projections also incorporate the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015, which extended some existing tax cuts for the short term and some permanently. Finally, fiscal projections are adjusted to reflect the IMF staff s forecasts for key macroeconomic and financial variables and different accounting treatment of financial sector support and of defined- benefit pension plans and are converted to a general government basis. Data are compiled using SNA 2008, and when translated into government finance statistics, this is in accordance with GFSM 2014. Because of data limitations, most series begin in 2001. Monetary Policy Assumptions Monetary policy assumptions are based on the estab- lished policy framework in each country. In most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance over the business cycle: official interest rates will increase when economic indicators suggest that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or range; they will decrease when indicators suggest that inflation will not exceed the acceptable rate or range, that output growth is below its potential rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy is significant. On this basis, the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month US dollar Box A1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 240 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 deposits is assumed to average 1.4 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018 (see Table 1.1). The rate on three- month euro deposits is assumed to average  0.3 percent in 2017 and 2018. The interest rate on six-month Japanese yen deposits is assumed to average 0.1 percent in 2017 and 0.2 percent in 2018. Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with market expectations. Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with gradual convergence of inflation toward the middle of the target range over the relevant horizon. Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with market expectations. China: Monetary policy is expected to tighten with a gradual rise in the interest rate. Denmark: The monetary policy is to maintain the peg to the euro. Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro area member countries are in line with market expectations. Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The IMF staff assumes that the currency board system remains intact. India: The policy (interest) rate assumption is con- sistent with an inflation rate within the Reserve Bank of India s targeted band. Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with the maintenance of inflation within the central bank s targeted band. Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with market expectations. Korea: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with market expectations. Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with attaining the inflation target. Russia: Monetary projections assume that policy rates will be falling over the next year or two as infla- tion continues to be close to target in the context of a tight monetary stance. Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the US dollar. Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line with the projected growth in nominal GDP. Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with Riks- bank projections. Switzerland: The projections assume no change in the policy rate in 2016 17. Turkey: The outlook for monetary and financial conditions assumes no changes to the current policy stance. United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate path is based on market interest rate expectations. United States: Following the Federal Reserve s 25 basis point rate hike in mid-March, the IMF staff expects the federal funds target rate to increase by 25 more basis points in 2017 and rise gradually thereafter. Box A1 (continued)  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 241 List of Tables Output A1. Summary of World Output A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP Inflation A5. Summary of Inflation A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices Financial Policies A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt Foreign Trade A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices Current Account Transactions A10. Summary of Current Account Balances A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account Balance of Payments and External Financing A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances Flow of Funds A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing Medium-Term Baseline Scenario A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 242 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A1. Summary of World Output1 (Annual percent change) Average Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 World 4.2  0.1 5.4 4.3 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.4 3.2 3.6 3.7 3.8 Advanced Economies 2.5  3.4 3.1 1.7 1.2 1.3 2.1 2.2 1.7 2.2 2.0 1.7 United States 2.6  2.8 2.5 1.6 2.2 1.7 2.6 2.9 1.5 2.2 2.3 1.7 Euro Area 2.1  4.5 2.1 1.6  0.9  0.2 1.3 2.0 1.8 2.1 1.9 1.5 Japan 1.0  5.4 4.2  0.1 1.5 2.0 0.3 1.1 1.0 1.5 0.7 0.6 Other Advanced Economies2 3.5  2.0 4.6 2.9 1.9 2.3 2.9 2.0 2.0 2.4 2.2 2.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 6.2 2.8 7.4 6.4 5.4 5.1 4.7 4.3 4.3 4.6 4.9 5.0 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States3 7.2  6.4 4.7 5.3 3.6 2.5 1.1  2.2 0.4 2.1 2.1 2.4 Emerging and Developing Asia 8.0 7.5 9.6 7.9 7.0 6.9 6.8 6.8 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.3 Emerging and Developing Europe 4.3  3.0 4.6 6.5 2.4 4.9 3.9 4.7 3.1 4.5 3.5 3.2 Latin America and the Caribbean 3.3  1.8 6.1 4.7 3.0 2.9 1.2 0.1  0.9 1.2 1.9 2.7 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 5.2 1.1 4.7 4.5 5.2 2.7 2.8 2.7 5.0 2.6 3.5 3.8 Middle East and North Africa 5.2 1.0 4.9 4.6 5.3 2.5 2.6 2.6 5.1 2.2 3.2 3.5 Sub-Saharan Africa 5.6 3.9 7.0 5.1 4.4 5.3 5.1 3.4 1.4 2.6 3.4 3.9 Memorandum European Union 2.5  4.3 2.1 1.8  0.4 0.3 1.8 2.3 2.0 2.3 2.1 1.7 Low-Income Developing Countries 6.1 5.8 7.5 5.2 5.2 6.1 6.0 4.7 3.6 4.6 5.2 5.3 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 6.2  1.9 5.1 5.2 5.0 2.7 2.2 0.3 1.9 1.3 2.1 2.4 Nonfuel 6.2 4.1 8.1 6.7 5.5 5.8 5.3 5.2 4.9 5.4 5.4 5.5 Of Which, Primary Products 3.7  0.8 6.7 4.9 2.6 4.1 1.8 3.0 1.2 2.7 3.0 3.7 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies 5.0 2.2 6.9 5.3 4.4 4.8 4.4 4.1 3.7 4.5 4.7 5.4 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16 5.1 0.1 4.2 2.6 2.3 3.2 1.4 0.6 2.7 3.2 4.0 5.1 Memorandum Median Growth Rate Advanced Economies 3.1  3.8 2.3 2.0 1.0 1.6 2.5 1.8 2.0 3.0 2.5 1.8 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.7 1.6 4.6 4.7 4.3 4.3 3.8 3.5 3.0 3.5 3.5 3.8 Low-Income Developing Countries 5.0 3.9 6.1 5.6 5.1 5.3 4.8 4.3 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.4 Output per Capita4 Advanced Economies 1.8  4.0 2.5 1.1 0.7 0.8 1.6 1.7 1.1 1.7 1.6 1.3 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.5 1.1 5.9 4.9 3.7 3.7 3.2 2.8 2.8 3.2 3.5 3.6 Low-Income Developing Countries 3.4 3.5 5.2 3.7 2.4 3.8 3.7 2.2 1.2 2.2 3.0 3.1 World Growth Rate Based on Market Exchange Rates 3.1  2.1 4.1 3.1 2.5 2.6 2.8 2.7 2.5 3.0 3.1 2.9 Value of World Output (billions of US dollars) At Market Exchange Rates 43,843 60,280 65,906 73,119 74,489 76,551 78,594 74,311 75,368 79,281 84,375 103,201 At Purchasing Power Parities 62,820 83,777 89,271 94,857 99,664 104,684 110,258 115,108 120,197 126,634 133,805 167,782 1Real GDP. 2Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan. 3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 4The output per capita is at purchasing power parity.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 243 Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1 (Annual percent change) Fourth Quarter2 Average Projections Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 2016:Q4 2017:Q4 2018:Q4 Real GDP Advanced Economies 2.5  3.4 3.1 1.7 1.2 1.3 2.1 2.2 1.7 2.2 2.0 1.7 2.0 2.2 1.9 United States 2.6  2.8 2.5 1.6 2.2 1.7 2.6 2.9 1.5 2.2 2.3 1.7 1.8 2.3 2.3 Euro Area 2.1  4.5 2.1 1.6  0.9  0.2 1.3 2.0 1.8 2.1 1.9 1.5 1.9 2.2 1.7 Germany 1.6  5.6 3.9 3.7 0.7 0.6 1.9 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.2 1.9 2.2 1.8 France 2.0  2.9 2.0 2.1 0.2 0.6 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.6 1.8 1.8 1.2 2.1 1.4 Italy 1.2  5.5 1.7 0.6  2.8  1.7 0.1 0.8 0.9 1.5 1.1 0.8 1.2 1.5 1.0 Spain 3.6  3.6 0.0  1.0  2.9  1.7 1.4 3.2 3.2 3.1 2.5 1.7 3.0 3.1 2.1 Netherlands 2.5  3.8 1.4 1.7  1.1  0.2 1.4 2.3 2.2 3.1 2.6 1.8 2.7 3.4 1.9 Belgium 2.3  2.3 2.7 1.8 0.1  0.1 1.6 1.5 1.2 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.1 1.9 1.5 Austria 2.4  3.8 1.9 2.8 0.7 0.1 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.3 1.9 1.4 2.0 1.8 2.0 Greece 3.5  4.3  5.5  9.1  7.3  3.2 0.4  0.2 0.0 1.8 2.6 1.0  1.0 3.6 1.7 Portugal 1.6  3.0 1.9  1.8  4.0  1.1 0.9 1.6 1.4 2.5 2.0 1.2 2.0 2.0 2.3 Ireland 5.4  4.7 1.8 2.9 0.0 1.6 8.3 25.5 5.1 4.1 3.4 2.8 8.9 0.4 2.4 Finland 3.3  8.3 3.0 2.6  1.4  0.8  0.6 0.0 1.9 2.8 2.3 1.5 2.4 2.5 2.6 Slovak Republic 5.1  5.4 5.0 2.8 1.7 1.5 2.6 3.8 3.3 3.3 3.7 3.4 2.9 3.6 3.7 Lithuania 6.1  14.8 1.6 6.0 3.8 3.5 3.5 1.8 2.3 3.5 3.5 3.0 3.5 2.4 5.5 Slovenia 4.3  7.8 1.2 0.6  2.7  1.1 3.0 2.3 3.1 4.0 2.5 1.8 4.6 2.2 3.7 Luxembourg 4.3  4.4 4.9 2.5  0.4 4.0 5.6 4.0 4.2 3.9 3.6 3.0 3.9 3.9 2.9 Latvia 6.6  14.3  3.8 6.4 4.0 2.6 2.1 2.7 2.0 3.8 3.9 3.0 2.3 4.3 4.0 Estonia 5.7  14.7 2.3 7.6 4.3 1.9 2.9 1.7 2.1 4.0 3.7 3.0 3.2 3.0 4.0 Cyprus 4.1  1.8 1.3 0.3  3.2  6.0  1.5 1.7 2.8 3.4 2.6 2.2 2.9 3.1 2.6 Malta 2.2  2.4 3.5 1.4 2.6 4.6 8.2 7.1 5.5 5.1 4.4 3.2 5.9 3.9 4.4 Japan 1.0  5.4 4.2  0.1 1.5 2.0 0.3 1.1 1.0 1.5 0.7 0.6 1.7 1.4 0.5 United Kingdom 2.5  4.3 1.9 1.5 1.3 1.9 3.1 2.2 1.8 1.7 1.5 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.5 Korea 5.7 0.7 6.5 3.7 2.3 2.9 3.3 2.8 2.8 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.4 3.4 2.8 Canada 2.9  2.9 3.1 3.1 1.7 2.5 2.6 0.9 1.5 3.0 2.1 1.8 2.0 3.0 2.0 Australia 3.4 1.7 2.3 2.7 3.6 2.1 2.8 2.4 2.5 2.2 2.9 2.7 2.4 2.3 3.2 Taiwan Province of China 4.6  1.6 10.6 3.8 2.1 2.2 4.0 0.7 1.5 2.0 1.9 2.2 2.7 1.6 2.4 Switzerland 2.3  2.2 2.9 1.8 1.0 1.9 2.5 1.2 1.4 1.0 1.3 1.7 0.9 2.1 0.3 Sweden 3.0  5.2 6.0 2.7  0.3 1.2 2.6 4.1 3.2 3.1 2.4 1.7 2.1 2.7 2.6 Singapore 5.9  0.6 15.2 6.2 3.9 5.0 3.6 1.9 2.0 2.5 2.6 2.6 2.9 2.0 2.8 Hong Kong SAR 4.7  2.5 6.8 4.8 1.7 3.1 2.8 2.4 2.0 3.5 2.7 3.3 3.2 2.6 3.0 Norway 2.2  1.6 0.6 1.0 2.7 1.0 1.9 1.6 1.1 1.4 1.6 1.9 2.0 1.2 1.8 Czech Republic 4.0  4.8 2.3 1.8  0.8  0.5 2.7 5.3 2.6 3.5 2.6 2.3 1.8 3.6 3.0 Israel 3.7 1.5 5.5 5.2 2.2 4.2 3.5 2.6 4.0 3.1 3.4 3.0 4.7 2.7 3.1 Denmark 1.8  4.9 1.9 1.3 0.2 0.9 1.7 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8 1.8 2.9 0.7 1.8 New Zealand 3.4 0.4 2.0 1.9 2.5 2.1 2.8 3.2 3.6 3.5 3.0 2.4 2.8 4.6 1.9 Puerto Rico 1.7  2.0  0.4  0.4 0.0  0.3  1.2  1.1  2.6  2.8  2.5  0.5 . . . . . . . . . Macao SAR . . . 1.3 25.3 21.7 9.2 11.2  1.2  21.5  2.1 13.4 7.0 4.3 . . . . . . . . . Iceland 4.6  6.9  3.6 2.0 1.2 4.4 1.9 4.1 7.2 5.5 3.3 2.7 10.7 5.5 1.8 San Marino . . .  12.8  4.6  9.5  7.5  3.0  0.9 0.5 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.3 . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 2.1  3.8 2.8 1.6 1.4 1.4 1.9 2.1 1.4 2.0 1.9 1.5 1.7 2.1 1.8 Real Total Domestic Demand Advanced Economies 2.4  3.7 2.9 1.4 0.8 1.0 2.0 2.4 1.7 2.3 2.1 1.7 2.0 2.2 2.1 United States 2.7  3.8 2.9 1.6 2.1 1.3 2.7 3.5 1.7 2.3 2.5 1.6 2.1 2.2 2.5 Euro Area 2.0  4.0 1.5 0.7  2.4  0.6 1.3 1.9 2.3 2.1 1.9 1.5 2.4 2.4 0.9 Germany 0.9  3.2 2.9 3.0  0.8 1.0 1.3 1.5 2.4 2.1 2.0 1.5 2.3 2.0 1.7 France 2.4  2.5 2.1 2.0  0.3 0.7 1.4 1.6 1.9 1.9 1.7 1.8 1.5 1.7 1.9 Italy 1.4  4.1 2.0  0.6  5.6  2.6 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.6 1.1 0.7 1.3 1.4 1.1 Spain 4.2  6.0  0.5  3.1  5.1  3.2 1.9 3.4 2.9 2.6 2.2 1.5 2.3 2.9 1.8 Japan 0.6  4.0 2.4 0.7 2.3 2.4 0.4 0.7 0.4 1.1 0.7 0.6 0.5 1.5 0.5 United Kingdom 2.8  4.9 2.5  0.6 2.2 2.1 3.4 1.9 1.5 1.6 1.2 1.7 1.6 2.0 1.1 Canada 3.5  3.0 5.1 3.4 2.0 2.1 1.5 0.0 0.8 4.4 1.9 1.7 1.7 5.0 1.6 Other Advanced Economies3 3.7  2.6 6.1 3.1 2.0 1.5 2.6 2.5 1.9 3.1 2.6 2.6 2.0 2.7 3.3 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 2.1  3.7 2.8 1.4 1.1 1.3 1.9 2.3 1.5 2.1 1.9 1.5 1.8 2.1 1.9 1In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size. 2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year. 3Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 244 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (Annual percent change) Averages Projections 1999 2008 2009 18 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Private Consumer Expenditure Advanced Economies 2.6 1.5  1.2 1.9 1.3 0.9 1.2 1.8 2.4 2.2 2.3 1.9 United States 3.1 1.9  1.6 1.9 2.3 1.5 1.5 2.9 3.6 2.7 2.7 2.1 Euro Area 1.8 0.6  1.1 0.8  0.1  1.1  0.6 0.8 1.7 2.1 1.8 1.7 Germany 0.9 1.2 0.3 0.3 1.3 1.3 0.8 1.0 1.6 1.9 2.1 1.8 France 2.3 1.0 0.2 1.8 0.5  0.2 0.5 0.8 1.4 2.2 1.2 1.6 Italy 1.0  0.1  1.5 1.2 0.0  4.0  2.4 0.2 1.6 1.3 1.3 1.1 Spain 3.4 0.0  3.6 0.3  2.4  3.5  3.1 1.6 2.9 3.2 2.6 2.4 Japan 1.0 0.7  0.7 2.4  0.4 2.0 2.4  0.9  0.3 0.4 1.5 0.8 United Kingdom 3.0 1.0  3.2 0.6  0.5 1.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 2.8 1.7 1.1 Canada 3.6 2.3 0.0 3.6 2.3 1.9 2.6 2.7 1.9 2.3 3.4 1.9 Other Advanced Economies1 3.7 2.4 0.0 3.7 3.0 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.7 2.3 2.4 2.7 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 2.3 1.4  1.2 1.7 1.3 1.1 1.3 1.8 2.4 2.2 2.2 1.7 Public Consumption Advanced Economies 2.2 1.0 2.9 1.0  0.5 0.1  0.3 0.6 1.5 1.6 1.1 1.9 United States 2.1 0.3 3.7 0.1  2.7  0.9  2.4  0.5 1.3 1.0 0.2 3.0 Euro Area 2.0 0.9 2.4 0.7  0.1  0.3 0.3 0.7 1.3 1.7 1.2 0.9 Germany 1.0 2.0 3.0 1.3 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.5 2.9 3.7 1.8 2.1 France 1.6 1.3 2.4 1.3 1.0 1.6 1.5 1.3 1.1 1.3 1.2 0.5 Italy 1.4  0.3 0.4 0.6  1.8  1.4  0.3  0.7  0.7 0.6 0.9  0.4 Spain 5.1 0.2 4.1 1.5  0.3  4.7  2.1  0.3 2.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 Japan 1.8 1.3 2.0 1.9 1.9 1.7 1.5 0.5 1.7 1.3 0.6  0.2 United Kingdom 3.1 1.0 1.1 0.2 0.2 1.7 0.3 2.3 1.3 0.8 1.4 0.8 Canada 2.6 1.5 2.7 2.3 1.3 0.7  0.7 0.8 1.5 2.0 2.7 2.2 Other Advanced Economies1 2.8 2.5 3.4 2.8 1.5 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.4 3.4 2.8 2.4 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.9 0.8 2.9 0.7  0.9 0.1  0.7 0.3 1.4 1.3 0.7 1.9 Gross Fixed Capital Formation Advanced Economies 2.3 1.1  11.0 1.7 2.9 2.4 1.5 3.3 2.6 1.7 3.4 3.0 United States 2.3 1.5  13.1 1.1 3.7 6.3 3.1 4.8 3.5 0.6 3.4 3.3 Euro Area 2.7 0.0  11.2  0.3 1.5  3.4  2.5 1.7 3.1 4.4 3.9 3.4 Germany 1.0 1.5  9.9 5.0 7.4  0.1  1.2 3.8 1.1 2.9 3.7 3.2 France 3.4 0.4  9.1 2.1 2.1 0.2  0.8 0.1 1.0 2.9 2.9 3.1 Italy 2.3  2.2  9.9  0.5  1.9  9.3  6.6  2.3 1.6 2.9 2.1 2.7 Spain 5.3  2.3  16.9  4.9  6.9  8.6  3.4 3.8 6.0 3.1 4.3 3.5 Japan  1.0 0.6  9.7  1.6 1.7 3.5 4.9 2.9 0.1 0.9 2.8 1.7 United Kingdom 1.8 1.0  15.2 5.0 1.9 2.3 3.2 6.7 3.4 0.5 2.2 1.7 Canada 4.9 0.7  11.8 11.4 4.6 4.9 1.3 0.9  4.6  3.1 3.4 2.2 Other Advanced Economies1 3.7 2.3  5.1 5.9 4.0 2.9 2.5 2.1 1.9 2.2 3.7 3.0 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 1.8 1.0  11.8 1.8 3.2 3.4 1.9 3.6 2.1 1.0 3.2 2.8  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 245 Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued) (Annual percent change) Averages Projections 1999 2008 2009 18 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Final Domestic Demand Advanced Economies 2.5 1.3  2.6 1.7 1.3 1.1 1.0 1.9 2.3 2.1 2.4 2.1 United States 2.8 1.6  3.1 1.5 1.7 1.9 1.2 2.7 3.3 2.1 2.5 2.4 Euro Area 2.0 0.5  2.7 0.5 0.3  1.5  0.8 1.0 1.9 2.5 2.1 1.9 Germany 0.9 1.4  1.4 1.4 2.5 1.0 0.5 1.7 1.8 2.5 2.4 2.2 France 2.4 0.9  1.5 1.8 0.9 0.3 0.4 0.7 1.2 2.2 1.6 1.7 Italy 1.3  0.6  2.9 0.7  0.8  4.5  2.8  0.4 1.1 1.5 1.4 1.1 Spain 4.2  0.5  5.9  0.7  3.0  4.8  3.0 1.6 3.3 2.7 2.6 2.3 Japan 0.6 0.8  2.4 1.4 0.5 2.3 2.8 0.2 0.2 0.7 1.8 0.8 United Kingdom 2.8 1.0  4.4 1.1 0.0 1.8 1.6 2.9 2.3 2.0 1.8 1.1 Canada 3.7 1.8  2.2 5.0 2.6 2.4 1.6 1.9 0.3 1.0 3.3 2.0 Other Advanced Economies1 3.5 2.4  0.7 4.1 2.9 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.4 2.9 2.6 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 2.2 1.3  2.7 1.6 1.3 1.4 1.1 1.9 2.2 1.8 2.2 1.9 Stock Building2 Advanced Economies 0.0 0.0  1.1 1.3 0.1  0.2 0.0 0.1 0.1  0.3  0.1 0.0 United States  0.1 0.0  0.8 1.5  0.1 0.1 0.2  0.1 0.2  0.4  0.2 0.0 Euro Area 0.0  0.1  1.3 0.9 0.5  0.9 0.2 0.3 0.0  0.1 0.0 0.0 Germany  0.1  0.2  1.7 1.4 0.5  1.6 0.5  0.4  0.3  0.1  0.2  0.2 France 0.0 0.1  1.1 0.3 1.1  0.6 0.2 0.7 0.3  0.1 0.4 0.0 Italy 0.0 0.0  1.2 1.3 0.2  1.1 0.2 0.6 0.2  0.5 0.2 0.0 Spain 0.0 0.0  0.2 0.2  0.1  0.2  0.3 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 Japan 0.0  0.1  1.6 1.0 0.2 0.0  0.4 0.1 0.6  0.3  0.5  0.1 United Kingdom  0.1 0.1  0.5 1.5  0.6 0.2 0.3 0.7  0.2  0.5  0.1 0.0 Canada 0.0 0.1  0.7 0.1 0.7  0.3 0.5  0.3  0.3  0.3 1.1 0.8 Other Advanced Economies1 0.2  0.1  1.9 1.9 0.2  0.3  0.8 0.2 0.1  0.5 0.1 0.0 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 0.0 0.0  1.0 1.2 0.1  0.2 0.2 0.1 0.2  0.3  0.1 0.0 Foreign Balance2 Advanced Economies 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.1  0.2  0.1  0.1 0.0 United States  0.2 0.0 1.2  0.5 0.0 0.1 0.3  0.2  0.7  0.2  0.2  0.2 Euro Area 0.1 0.3  0.6 0.7 0.9 1.5 0.4 0.1 0.1  0.4 0.2 0.1 Germany 0.7 0.1  2.6 1.1 0.9 1.4  0.3 0.7 0.1  0.4 0.0 0.0 France  0.3  0.2  0.4  0.1 0.0 0.5  0.1  0.5  0.5  0.8  0.3 0.0 Italy  0.1 0.2  1.3  0.3 1.2 2.8 0.8  0.1  0.5  0.1  0.1 0.0 Spain  0.7 1.0 2.8 0.5 2.1 2.2 1.5  0.5  0.1 0.5 0.5 0.3 Japan 0.2  0.1  1.2 1.6  0.9  0.8  0.4 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.3  0.1 United Kingdom  0.2  0.1 0.3  0.8 1.4  0.7  0.8  0.4 0.0  0.4  0.1 0.3 Canada  0.7 0.0 0.0  2.1  0.3  0.4 0.3 1.1 1.0 0.6  0.5 0.3 Other Advanced Economies1 0.4 0.3 1.5 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.9 0.5  0.4 0.1  0.4 0.1 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies  0.1 0.0 0.0  0.1 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0  0.3  0.1  0.1  0.1 1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 246 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (Annual percent change) Average Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Commonwealth of Independent States1,2 7.2  6.4 4.7 5.3 3.6 2.5 1.1  2.2 0.4 2.1 2.1 2.4 Russia 6.9  7.8 4.5 5.1 3.7 1.8 0.7  2.8  0.2 1.8 1.6 1.5 Excluding Russia 8.0  2.4 5.0 6.0 3.6 4.2 1.9  0.6 1.9 2.9 3.3 4.3 Armenia 10.5  14.1 2.2 4.7 7.1 3.3 3.6 3.3 0.2 3.5 2.9 4.0 Azerbaijan 14.6 9.3 5.0  1.6 2.2 5.8 2.7 0.6  3.1  1.0 1.3 3.1 Belarus 7.5 0.2 7.7 5.5 1.7 1.0 1.7  3.8  2.6 0.7 0.7 2.0 Georgia 6.6  3.7 6.2 7.2 6.4 3.4 4.6 2.9 2.7 4.0 4.2 5.5 Kazakhstan 8.7 1.2 7.3 7.5 5.0 6.0 4.3 1.2 1.1 3.3 2.8 4.3 Kyrgyz Republic 4.7 2.9  0.5 6.0  0.1 10.9 4.0 3.5 3.8 3.5 3.8 5.4 Moldova 4.9  6.0 7.1 6.8  0.7 9.4 4.8  0.4 4.3 4.0 3.7 3.9 Tajikistan 8.1 3.9 6.5 7.4 7.5 7.4 6.7 6.0 6.9 4.5 4.0 4.0 Turkmenistan 15.2 6.1 9.2 14.7 11.1 10.2 10.3 6.5 6.2 6.5 6.3 5.4 Ukraine3 6.2  15.1 0.3 5.5 0.2 0.0  6.6  9.8 2.3 2.0 3.2 4.0 Uzbekistan 6.1 8.1 8.5 8.3 8.2 8.0 8.1 8.0 7.8 6.0 6.0 6.0 Emerging and Developing Asia 8.0 7.5 9.6 7.9 7.0 6.9 6.8 6.8 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.3 Bangladesh 5.8 5.3 6.0 6.5 6.3 6.0 6.3 6.8 7.2 7.1 7.0 7.0 Bhutan 8.3 5.7 9.3 9.7 6.4 3.6 4.0 6.1 6.2 5.9 11.2 6.3 Brunei Darussalam 1.9  1.8 2.7 3.7 0.9  2.1  2.5  0.4  2.5  1.3 0.6 5.3 Cambodia 9.5 0.1 6.0 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.1 7.2 7.0 6.9 6.8 6.0 China 10.1 9.2 10.6 9.5 7.9 7.8 7.3 6.9 6.7 6.8 6.5 5.8 Fiji 1.9  1.4 3.0 2.7 1.4 4.7 5.6 3.8 0.4 3.8 3.5 3.2 India4 6.9 8.5 10.3 6.6 5.5 6.4 7.5 8.0 7.1 6.7 7.4 8.2 Indonesia 4.9 4.7 6.4 6.2 6.0 5.6 5.0 4.9 5.0 5.2 5.3 5.5 Kiribati 1.1 1.1  1.6 0.6 5.1 5.0 0.4 7.5 4.2 2.8 2.3 1.8 Lao P.D.R. 6.7 7.4 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.0 7.6 7.3 7.0 6.9 6.9 7.0 Malaysia 5.5  1.5 7.5 5.3 5.5 4.7 6.0 5.0 4.2 5.4 4.8 4.9 Maldives 7.8  6.6 7.1 8.4 2.3 7.1 7.6 3.3 3.9 4.6 4.7 5.0 Marshall Islands 1.9 6.5 1.2 3.5 2.9  0.8  0.4 1.9 2.0 1.9 1.8 1.5 Micronesia 0.5 1.2 3.3 1.0  1.7  3.0  2.4 3.7 3.0 2.0 1.4 0.6 Mongolia 6.2  2.1 7.3 17.3 12.3 11.6 7.9 2.4 1.0 2.0 2.5 8.2 Myanmar 11.7 5.1 5.3 5.6 7.3 8.4 8.0 7.0 6.1 7.2 7.6 7.5 Nauru . . . 8.7 13.6 11.7 10.1 34.2 36.5 2.8 10.4 4.0  4.0 2.0 Nepal 4.1 4.5 4.8 3.4 4.8 4.1 6.0 3.3 0.4 7.5 5.0 3.8 Palau . . .  9.1 3.0 5.1 3.9  2.1 5.4 11.4 1.9 1.0 5.5 2.0 Papua New Guinea 2.3 6.8 10.1 1.1 4.6 3.8 12.5 9.2 2.4 3.1 2.9 3.3 Philippines 4.6 1.1 7.6 3.7 6.7 7.1 6.1 6.1 6.9 6.6 6.7 6.8 Samoa 3.8  6.1  2.0 5.6 0.4  1.9 1.2 1.6 7.1 2.1 0.9 2.1 Solomon Islands 1.6  4.7 6.8 13.2 4.6 3.0 2.3 2.5 3.3 3.0 3.1 2.7 Sri Lanka 5.1 3.5 8.0 8.4 9.1 3.4 5.0 4.8 4.4 4.7 4.8 5.2 Thailand 4.8  0.7 7.5 0.8 7.2 2.7 0.9 2.9 3.2 3.7 3.5 3.0 Timor-Leste5 . . . 13.0 10.2 7.9 5.0 2.7 4.3 4.0 5.0 4.0 6.0 5.2 Tonga 1.1 2.9 3.2 1.8  1.1  0.6 2.9 3.5 3.1 3.1 3.2 1.4 Tuvalu . . .  4.4  3.1 7.9  3.8 4.6 1.3 9.1 3.0 3.2 2.5 2.0 Vanuatu 3.0 3.3 1.6 1.2 1.8 2.0 2.3 1.6 4.0 4.5 4.0 3.0 Vietnam 6.8 5.4 6.4 6.2 5.2 5.4 6.0 6.7 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.2 Emerging and Developing Europe 4.3  3.0 4.6 6.5 2.4 4.9 3.9 4.7 3.1 4.5 3.5 3.2 Albania 6.8 3.4 3.7 2.5 1.4 1.0 1.8 2.2 3.4 3.7 3.7 4.0 Bosnia and Herzegovina 5.4  0.8 0.8 0.9  0.9 2.4 1.1 3.0 2.0 2.5 2.6 3.0 Bulgaria 5.3  3.6 1.3 1.9 0.0 0.9 1.3 3.6 3.4 3.6 3.2 2.5 Croatia 3.7  7.4  1.7  0.3  2.2  1.1  0.5 2.2 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.1 Hungary 3.4  6.6 0.7 1.7  1.6 2.1 4.0 3.1 2.0 3.2 3.4 2.2 Kosovo . . . 3.6 3.3 4.4 2.8 3.4 1.2 4.1 3.4 3.5 3.5 4.0 FYR Macedonia 3.6  0.4 3.4 2.3  0.5 2.9 3.6 3.8 2.4 2.5 3.2 3.8 Montenegro . . .  5.7 2.5 3.2  2.7 3.5 1.8 3.4 2.5 3.0 2.8 3.1 Poland 4.1 2.6 3.7 5.0 1.6 1.4 3.3 3.9 2.6 3.8 3.3 2.6 Romania 5.4  7.1  0.8 1.1 0.6 3.5 3.1 3.9 4.8 5.5 4.4 3.3 Serbia 4.1  3.1 0.6 1.4  1.0 2.6  1.8 0.8 2.8 3.0 3.5 4.0 Turkey 4.0  4.7 8.5 11.1 4.8 8.5 5.2 6.1 3.2 5.1 3.5 3.6  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 247 Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued) (Annual percent change) Average Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Latin America and the Caribbean 3.3  1.8 6.1 4.7 3.0 2.9 1.2 0.1  0.9 1.2 1.9 2.7 Antigua and Barbuda 4.6  12.1  7.2  2.1 3.5  0.1 5.1 4.1 5.3 2.7 3.0 2.0 Argentina 2.6  5.9 10.1 6.0  1.0 2.4  2.5 2.6  2.2 2.5 2.5 3.2 The Bahamas 2.1  4.2 1.5 0.6 3.1 0.0  0.5  1.7  0.3 1.8 2.5 1.5 Barbados 1.8  4.0 0.3 0.8 0.3  0.1 0.1 0.9 1.6 0.9 0.5 1.6 Belize 5.7 0.8 3.3 2.1 3.7 0.7 4.1 2.9  0.8 2.5 2.3 1.7 Bolivia 3.4 3.4 4.1 5.2 5.1 6.8 5.5 4.9 4.3 4.2 4.0 3.7 Brazil 3.4  0.1 7.5 4.0 1.9 3.0 0.5  3.8  3.6 0.7 1.5 2.0 Chile 4.3  1.6 5.8 6.1 5.3 4.0 1.9 2.3 1.6 1.4 2.5 3.3 Colombia 3.4 1.7 4.0 6.6 4.0 4.9 4.4 3.1 2.0 1.7 2.8 3.6 Costa Rica 4.7  1.0 5.0 4.3 4.8 2.3 3.7 4.7 4.3 3.8 3.8 3.9 Dominica 2.8  1.2 0.7  0.2  1.1  0.6 4.4  2.5 2.6 3.9 2.8 1.5 Dominican Republic 4.8 0.9 8.3 3.1 2.8 4.7 7.6 7.0 6.6 4.8 5.8 5.0 Ecuador 3.3 0.6 3.5 7.9 5.6 4.9 4.0 0.2  1.5 0.2 0.6 1.6 El Salvador 2.6  3.1 1.4 2.2 1.9 1.8 1.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.1 2.0 Grenada 3.7  6.6  0.5 0.8  1.2 2.4 7.3 6.4 3.7 2.5 2.3 2.7 Guatemala 3.6 0.5 2.9 4.2 3.0 3.7 4.2 4.1 3.1 3.2 3.4 4.0 Guyana 1.8 3.3 4.4 5.4 4.8 5.2 3.8 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.6 2.8 Haiti 0.7 3.1  5.5 5.5 2.9 4.2 2.8 1.2 1.4 1.0 3.0 3.0 Honduras 4.5  2.4 3.7 3.8 4.1 2.8 3.1 3.6 3.6 4.0 3.6 3.8 Jamaica 1.3  3.4  1.4 1.4  0.5 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.3 1.7 2.3 2.8 Mexico 2.6  4.7 5.1 4.0 4.0 1.4 2.3 2.6 2.3 2.1 1.9 2.7 Nicaragua 3.9  3.3 4.4 6.3 6.5 4.9 4.8 4.9 4.7 4.5 4.3 4.5 Panama 5.7 1.6 5.8 11.8 9.2 6.6 6.1 5.8 4.9 5.3 5.6 5.5 Paraguay 2.2  4.0 13.1 4.3  1.2 14.0 4.7 3.0 4.1 3.9 4.0 3.8 Peru 5.1 1.0 8.5 6.5 6.0 5.8 2.4 3.3 4.0 2.7 3.8 3.8 St. Kitts and Nevis 3.7  1.0  2.9  0.8  0.8 6.6 5.1 4.9 3.1 2.7 3.5 2.7 St. Lucia 2.1  0.8 0.1 3.4  0.7 0.2  0.9 2.0 1.0 1.6 2.8 1.5 St. Vincent and the Grenadines 3.5  2.0  2.3 0.2 1.3 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.8 2.2 2.8 3.0 Suriname 4.1 3.0 5.2 5.8 2.7 2.9 0.4  2.7  10.5  1.2 1.2 3.1 Trinidad and Tobago 7.6  4.4 3.3  0.3 1.3 2.7  0.6  0.6  5.4  3.2 1.9 1.4 Uruguay 1.5 4.2 7.8 5.2 3.5 4.6 3.2 0.4 1.5 3.5 3.1 3.0 Venezuela 3.4  3.2  1.5 4.2 5.6 1.3  3.9  6.2  16.5  12.0  6.0  1.3 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 5.2 1.1 4.7 4.5 5.2 2.7 2.8 2.7 5.0 2.6 3.5 3.8 Afghanistan . . . 20.6 8.4 6.5 14.0 5.7 2.7 1.3 2.4 2.5 3.0 5.0 Algeria 4.0 1.6 3.6 2.8 3.4 2.8 3.8 3.7 3.3 1.5 0.8 2.4 Bahrain 6.0 2.5 4.3 2.0 3.7 5.4 4.4 2.9 3.0 2.5 1.7 2.2 Djibouti 3.3 1.6 4.1 7.3 4.8 5.0 6.0 6.5 6.5 7.0 7.0 6.0 Egypt 5.1 4.7 5.1 1.8 2.2 3.3 2.9 4.4 4.3 4.1 4.5 6.0 Iran 4.4 0.3 5.8 3.5  7.7  0.3 3.2  1.6 12.5 3.5 3.8 4.1 Iraq 13.0 3.4 6.4 7.5 13.9 7.6 0.7 4.8 11.0  0.4 2.9 2.1 Jordan 6.3 5.5 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.8 3.1 2.4 2.0 2.3 2.5 3.0 Kuwait 5.9  7.1  2.4 10.9 7.9 0.4 0.6 2.1 2.5  2.1 4.1 3.2 Lebanon 3.8 10.1 8.0 0.9 2.8 2.6 2.0 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 Libya4 4.5  3.0 3.2  66.7 124.7  36.8  53.0  10.3  3.0 55.1 31.2 2.6 Mauritania 5.2  1.0 4.8 4.7 5.8 6.1 5.6 0.9 1.7 3.8 3.0 4.0 Morocco 4.4 4.2 3.8 5.2 3.0 4.5 2.7 4.5 1.2 4.8 3.0 4.6 Oman 2.9 6.1 4.8  1.1 9.3 4.4 2.5 4.2 3.0 0.0 3.7 2.2 Pakistan 5.1 0.4 2.6 3.6 3.8 3.7 4.1 4.1 4.5 5.3 5.6 5.9 Qatar 11.3 12.0 18.1 13.4 4.7 4.4 4.0 3.6 2.2 2.5 3.1 3.2 Saudi Arabia 3.2  2.1 4.8 10.3 5.4 2.7 3.7 4.1 1.7 0.1 1.1 2.0 Somalia . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 2.8 3.6 3.6 3.2 2.4 3.5 3.8 Sudan6 6.2 4.7 2.5  1.2  3.0 5.2 1.6 4.9 3.0 3.7 3.6 3.5 Syria7 3.4 5.9 3.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tunisia 4.9 3.1 2.6  1.9 3.9 2.4 2.3 1.1 1.0 2.3 3.0 4.3 United Arab Emirates 5.9  5.2 1.6 6.4 5.1 5.8 3.3 3.8 3.0 1.3 3.4 3.1 Yemen 4.1 3.9 7.7  12.7 2.4 4.8  0.2  28.1  9.8  2.0 8.5 5.5  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 248 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued) (Annual percent change) Average Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Sub-Saharan Africa 5.6 3.9 7.0 5.1 4.4 5.3 5.1 3.4 1.4 2.6 3.4 3.9 Angola 11.2 2.4 3.4 3.9 5.2 6.8 4.8 3.0  0.7 1.5 1.6 1.4 Benin 4.5 2.3 2.1 3.0 4.8 7.2 6.4 2.1 4.0 5.4 6.0 6.2 Botswana 5.2  7.7 8.6 6.0 4.5 11.3 4.1  1.7 4.3 4.5 4.8 4.2 Burkina Faso 5.7 3.0 8.4 6.6 6.5 5.7 4.2 4.0 5.9 6.4 6.5 6.0 Burundi 3.1 3.8 5.1 4.0 4.4 5.9 4.5  4.0  1.0 0.0 0.1 0.5 Cabo Verde 7.4  1.3 1.5 4.0 1.1 0.8 0.6 1.0 3.8 4.0 4.1 4.1 Cameroon 3.6 1.9 3.3 4.1 4.6 5.6 5.9 5.8 4.7 4.0 4.6 5.5 Central African Republic 1.2 1.7 3.0 3.3 4.1  36.7 1.0 4.8 4.5 4.7 5.0 5.6 Chad 7.8 4.1 13.6 0.1 8.8 5.8 6.9 1.8  6.4 0.6 2.4 3.7 Comoros 2.0 1.8 2.1 2.2 3.0 3.5 2.0 1.0 2.2 3.3 4.0 4.0 Democratic Republic of the Congo 2.4 2.9 7.1 6.9 7.1 8.5 9.5 6.9 2.4 2.8 3.0 4.7 Republic of Congo 3.5 7.8 8.7 3.4 3.8 3.3 6.8 2.6  2.8  3.6 2.8 0.3 C te d Ivoire 0.5 3.3 2.0  4.2 10.1 9.3 8.8 8.9 7.7 7.6 7.3 6.5 Equatorial Guinea 28.1 1.3  8.9 6.5 8.3  4.1  0.7  9.1  9.7  7.4  7.8  1.4 Eritrea  1.1 3.9 2.2 8.7 7.0 3.1 5.0 4.8 3.7 3.3 3.6 4.0 Ethiopia 8.1 10.0 10.6 11.4 8.7 9.9 10.3 10.4 8.0 8.5 8.5 7.5 Gabon  0.1  2.3 6.3 7.1 5.3 5.5 4.4 3.9 2.1 1.0 2.7 5.1 The Gambia 3.7 6.4 6.5  4.3 5.6 4.8 0.9 4.3 2.2 3.0 3.5 4.8 Ghana 5.3 4.8 7.9 14.0 9.3 7.3 4.0 3.8 3.5 5.9 8.9 5.4 Guinea 3.5  1.5 4.2 5.6 5.9 3.9 3.7 3.5 6.6 6.7 5.8 5.2 Guinea-Bissau 2.9 3.4 4.6 8.1  1.7 3.3 1.0 5.1 5.1 5.0 5.0 5.0 Kenya 3.3 3.3 8.4 6.1 4.6 5.9 5.4 5.7 5.8 5.0 5.5 6.5 Lesotho 3.5 4.5 6.9 4.5 5.3 3.6 3.4 2.5 2.4 4.6 3.1 5.6 Liberia . . . 5.1 6.1 7.4 8.2 8.7 0.7 0.0  1.6 2.6 4.0 6.8 Madagascar 4.0  4.7 0.3 1.5 3.0 2.3 3.3 3.1 4.2 4.3 5.3 5.0 Malawi 3.8 8.3 6.9 4.9 1.9 5.2 5.7 2.9 2.3 4.5 5.0 5.5 Mali 5.4 4.7 5.4 3.2  0.8 2.3 7.0 6.0 5.8 5.3 5.0 4.7 Mauritius 4.3 3.0 4.1 3.9 3.2 3.2 3.6 3.5 3.9 3.9 4.0 4.1 Mozambique 7.8 6.4 6.7 7.1 7.2 7.1 7.4 6.6 3.8 4.7 5.3 14.0 Namibia 4.1 0.3 6.0 5.1 5.1 5.6 6.4 6.0 1.1 0.8 2.5 3.6 Niger 4.4  0.7 8.4 2.2 11.8 5.3 7.5 4.0 5.0 4.2 4.7 6.2 Nigeria 7.5 8.4 11.3 4.9 4.3 5.4 6.3 2.7  1.6 0.8 1.9 1.7 Rwanda 8.0 6.3 7.3 7.8 8.8 4.7 7.6 8.9 5.9 6.2 6.8 7.5 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe 4.3 4.0 4.5 4.8 4.5 4.3 4.1 4.0 4.1 5.0 5.5 5.5 Senegal 4.4 2.4 4.3 1.9 4.5 3.6 4.1 6.5 6.7 6.8 7.0 6.4 Seychelles 2.2  1.1 5.9 5.4 3.7 6.0 4.5 5.0 4.5 4.1 3.4 4.0 Sierra Leone 7.5 3.2 5.3 6.3 15.2 20.7 4.6  20.5 6.1 6.0 6.1 7.4 South Africa 4.0  1.5 3.0 3.3 2.2 2.5 1.7 1.3 0.3 0.7 1.1 2.2 South Sudan . . . . . . . . . . . .  52.4 29.3 2.9  0.2  13.8  6.3  3.4 3.9 Swaziland 3.6 4.5 3.5 2.0 3.5 4.8 3.6 1.1 0.0 0.3  0.9 2.2 Tanzania 6.1 5.4 6.4 7.9 5.1 7.3 7.0 7.0 7.0 6.5 6.8 6.6 Togo 1.6 3.5 4.1 4.8 5.9 6.1 5.4 5.3 5.0 5.0 5.3 5.6 Uganda 7.5 8.1 7.7 6.8 2.2 4.7 4.6 5.7 2.3 4.4 5.2 7.3 Zambia 6.4 9.2 10.3 5.6 7.6 5.1 4.7 2.9 3.4 4.0 4.5 4.5 Zimbabwe8  6.8 7.4 15.4 16.3 13.6 5.3 2.8 1.4 0.7 2.8 0.8  0.9 1Data for some countries refer to real net material product (NMP) or are estimates based on NMP. The figures should be interpreted only as indicative of broad orders of magnitude because reliable, comparable data are not generally available. In particular, the growth of output of new private enterprises of the informal economy is not fully reflected in the recent figures. 2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 3Data are based on the 2008 System of National Accounts. The revised national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward. 4See country-specific notes for India and Libya in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 5In this table only, the data for Timor-Leste are based on non-oil GDP. 6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan. 7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation. 8The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values may differ from authorities  estimates. Real GDP is in constant 2009 prices.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 249 Table A5. Summary of Inflation (Percent) Average Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 GDP Deflators Advanced Economies 1.8 0.7 0.9 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.3 1.0 1.4 1.6 1.8 United States 2.3 0.8 1.2 2.1 1.8 1.6 1.8 1.1 1.3 1.7 1.9 1.9 Euro Area 2.0 1.0 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.2 0.9 1.4 0.8 0.9 1.3 1.8 Japan  1.2  0.6  1.9  1.7  0.8  0.3 1.7 2.1 0.3  0.2 0.9 1.1 Other Advanced Economies1 2.1 0.9 2.0 2.0 1.2 1.4 1.3 1.0 1.1 2.0 1.6 2.0 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies 2.2 0.2 1.5 2.7 2.0 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.8 1.7 1.7 2.1 United States 2.8  0.3 1.6 3.1 2.1 1.5 1.6 0.1 1.3 2.1 2.1 2.3 Euro Area2 2.2 0.3 1.6 2.7 2.5 1.3 0.4 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.4 2.0 Japan  0.2  1.3  0.7  0.3  0.1 0.3 2.8 0.8  0.1 0.4 0.5 1.6 Other Advanced Economies1 2.1 1.4 2.4 3.3 2.1 1.7 1.5 0.5 1.0 1.8 1.9 2.0 Emerging Market and Developing Economies3 7.6 5.0 5.6 7.1 5.8 5.5 4.7 4.7 4.3 4.2 4.4 3.9 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States4 18.8 11.1 7.2 9.8 6.2 6.5 8.1 15.5 8.3 5.8 5.2 4.6 Emerging and Developing Asia 4.0 2.8 5.1 6.5 4.6 4.6 3.4 2.7 2.8 2.6 3.2 3.4 Emerging and Developing Europe 15.4 4.8 5.7 5.5 6.1 4.5 4.1 3.2 3.3 6.0 5.7 4.9 Latin America and the Caribbean 6.7 4.6 4.2 5.2 4.6 4.6 4.9 5.5 5.6 4.2 3.6 3.4 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 6.4 7.3 6.6 9.2 9.8 9.2 6.8 5.7 5.1 6.8 7.7 4.9 Middle East and North Africa 6.4 6.1 6.2 8.7 9.7 9.4 6.6 5.9 5.4 7.1 8.1 4.8 Sub-Saharan Africa 10.5 9.8 8.1 9.4 9.3 6.6 6.3 7.0 11.3 11.0 9.5 7.8 Memorandum European Union 2.7 1.0 2.0 3.1 2.6 1.5 0.5 0.0 0.2 1.7 1.7 2.0 Low-Income Developing Countries 9.9 8.2 9.2 11.7 9.9 8.1 7.2 7.2 8.9 9.7 8.8 7.2 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 12.3 7.7 6.7 8.6 8.0 8.1 6.5 8.8 7.3 5.9 6.2 5.1 Nonfuel 6.3 4.3 5.3 6.7 5.3 4.9 4.2 3.8 3.7 3.9 4.1 3.7 Of Which, Primary Products5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies 8.2 7.2 6.7 7.7 7.0 6.3 5.7 5.5 5.1 5.5 5.5 4.7 Net Debtor Economies by   Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16 8.8 12.6 9.8 10.2 7.9 6.8 10.5 15.6 9.6 17.1 15.3 6.5 Memorandum Median Inflation Rate Advanced Economies 2.3 0.8 1.9 3.2 2.6 1.4 0.7 0.1 0.6 1.6 1.5 2.0 Emerging Market and Developing Economies3 5.4 3.7 4.1 5.4 4.5 3.9 3.2 2.7 2.8 3.4 3.5 3.1 1Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan. 2Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices. 3Excludes Argentina and Venezuela. See country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 5Data are missing because of Argentina, which accounts for more than 30 percent of the weights of the group. See country-specific notes for Argentina in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 250 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1 (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 2016 2017 2018 Advanced Economies 2.2 0.2 1.5 2.7 2.0 1.4 1.4 0.3 0.8 1.7 1.7 2.1 1.5 1.5 1.9 United States 2.8  0.3 1.6 3.1 2.1 1.5 1.6 0.1 1.3 2.1 2.1 2.3 2.2 1.8 2.3 Euro Area3 2.2 0.3 1.6 2.7 2.5 1.3 0.4 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.4 2.0 1.1 1.1 1.6 Germany 1.7 0.2 1.1 2.5 2.1 1.6 0.8 0.1 0.4 1.6 1.5 2.5 1.7 1.1 1.8 France 1.9 0.1 1.7 2.3 2.2 1.0 0.6 0.1 0.3 1.2 1.3 1.8 0.6 1.1 1.5 Italy 2.4 0.8 1.6 2.9 3.3 1.2 0.2 0.1  0.1 1.4 1.2 1.4 0.5 0.9 1.6 Spain 3.3  0.3 1.8 3.2 2.4 1.4  0.1  0.5  0.2 2.0 1.5 1.9 1.6 1.2 1.4 Netherlands 2.4 1.0 0.9 2.5 2.8 2.6 0.3 0.2 0.1 1.3 1.4 1.6 0.7 1.4 1.5 Belgium 2.2 0.0 2.3 3.4 2.6 1.2 0.5 0.6 1.8 2.2 1.5 2.0 2.2 1.4 1.7 Austria 1.9 0.4 1.7 3.5 2.6 2.1 1.5 0.8 1.0 1.6 1.8 2.2 1.5 1.7 1.9 Greece 3.3 1.3 4.7 3.1 1.0  0.9  1.4  1.1 0.0 1.2 1.3 1.7 0.3 1.0 1.1 Portugal 2.9  0.9 1.4 3.6 2.8 0.4  0.2 0.5 0.6 1.6 2.0 2.4 0.9 2.3 2.6 Ireland 3.4  1.7  1.6 1.2 1.9 0.5 0.3 0.0  0.2 0.4 1.5 1.9  0.2 0.9 1.7 Finland 1.8 1.6 1.7 3.3 3.2 2.2 1.2  0.2 0.4 0.8 1.2 2.0 1.1 0.5 1.6 Slovak Republic 6.2 0.9 0.7 4.1 3.7 1.5  0.1  0.3  0.5 1.2 1.4 2.0 0.2 1.3 1.4 Lithuania 2.7 4.2 1.2 4.1 3.2 1.2 0.2  0.7 0.7 3.5 2.0 2.5 2.0 3.3 2.0 Slovenia 5.4 0.8 1.8 1.8 2.6 1.8 0.2  0.5  0.1 1.6 1.8 2.0 0.5 1.7 2.0 Luxembourg 2.8 0.0 2.8 3.7 2.9 1.7 0.7 0.1 0.0 1.2 1.3 2.0 1.6  1.3 3.7 Latvia 5.6 3.3  1.2 4.2 2.3 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.1 3.0 3.0 2.3 2.1 3.0 3.0 Estonia 4.7 0.2 2.7 5.1 4.2 3.2 0.5 0.1 0.8 3.8 3.4 2.5 2.4 4.5 2.5 Cyprus 2.7 0.2 2.6 3.5 3.1 0.4  0.3  1.5  1.2 0.8 0.7 2.0 0.1 0.8 0.7 Malta 2.6 1.8 2.0 2.5 3.2 1.0 0.8 1.2 0.9 1.3 1.6 1.8 1.0 1.5 1.7 Japan  0.2  1.3  0.7  0.3  0.1 0.3 2.8 0.8  0.1 0.4 0.5 1.6 0.3 0.1 0.6 United Kingdom3 1.8 2.2 3.3 4.5 2.8 2.6 1.5 0.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 1.2 2.8 2.6 Korea 2.9 2.8 2.9 4.0 2.2 1.3 1.3 0.7 1.0 1.9 1.9 2.0 1.3 1.9 1.9 Canada 2.3 0.3 1.8 2.9 1.5 0.9 1.9 1.1 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.4 1.6 1.9 Australia 3.1 1.8 2.9 3.3 1.7 2.5 2.5 1.5 1.3 2.0 2.2 2.5 1.4 2.0 2.3 Taiwan Province of China 1.1  0.9 1.0 1.4 1.9 0.8 1.2  0.3 1.4 1.0 1.4 2.0 1.7 1.0 1.4 Switzerland 1.1  0.5 0.7 0.2  0.7  0.2 0.0  1.1  0.4 0.5 0.6 1.0 0.0 0.6 0.8 Sweden 1.7 1.9 1.9 1.4 0.9 0.4 0.2 0.7 1.1 1.6 1.6 2.0 1.7 1.8 1.5 Singapore 1.4 0.6 2.8 5.2 4.6 2.4 1.0  0.5  0.5 0.9 1.3 1.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 Hong Kong SAR  0.6 0.6 2.3 5.3 4.1 4.3 4.4 3.0 2.6 2.0 2.2 3.0 2.6 2.0 2.2 Norway 2.1 2.2 2.4 1.3 0.7 2.1 2.0 2.2 3.6 2.1 2.0 2.5 3.5 1.9 2.1 Czech Republic 2.9 1.0 1.5 1.9 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.7 2.3 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.0 Israel 2.2 3.3 2.7 3.5 1.7 1.5 0.5  0.6  0.5 0.2 0.5 2.0  0.2 0.2 1.0 Denmark 2.2 1.3 2.3 2.8 2.4 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.3 1.0 1.4 2.0 0.5 1.2 1.6 New Zealand 2.5 2.1 2.3 4.0 1.1 1.1 1.2 0.3 0.6 2.2 2.0 2.0 1.3 2.4 2.0 Puerto Rico 2.8 0.3 2.5 2.9 1.3 1.1 0.6  0.8  0.3 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.5 1.1 0.9 Macao SAR . . . 1.2 2.8 5.8 6.1 5.5 6.0 4.6 2.4 1.5 2.2 2.8 1.4 1.5 2.2 Iceland 5.3 12.0 5.4 4.0 5.2 3.9 2.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.6 2.5 1.9 2.0 2.9 San Marino . . . 2.4 2.6 2.0 2.8 1.6 1.1 0.1 0.6 0.9 1.0 1.2 0.6 0.9 1.0 Memorandum Major Advanced Economies 2.0  0.1 1.4 2.6 1.9 1.3 1.5 0.3 0.8 1.7 1.7 2.1 1.6 1.4 1.9 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. 2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis. 3Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 251 Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 2016 2017 2018 Commonwealth of Independent States3,4 18.8 11.1 7.2 9.8 6.2 6.5 8.1 15.5 8.3 5.8 5.2 4.6 6.5 5.4 4.9 Russia 19.8 11.7 6.9 8.4 5.1 6.8 7.8 15.5 7.0 4.2 3.9 4.0 5.4 4.0 4.0 Excluding Russia 15.7 9.6 8.1 13.3 9.2 5.7 8.8 15.6 11.3 9.6 8.2 5.8 9.3 8.9 7.2 Armenia 3.3 3.5 7.3 7.7 2.5 5.8 3.0 3.7  1.4 1.9 3.5 4.0  1.1 2.1 4.0 Azerbaijan 5.9 1.6 5.7 7.9 1.0 2.4 1.4 4.0 12.4 12.0 8.0 6.0 13.3 8.0 7.5 Belarus 49.1 13.0 7.7 53.2 59.2 18.3 18.1 13.5 11.8 8.0 7.5 7.0 10.6 8.0 7.5 Georgia 8.0 1.7 7.1 8.5  0.9  0.5 3.1 4.0 2.1 6.0 3.0 3.0 1.8 6.2 3.4 Kazakhstan 9.3 7.3 7.1 8.3 5.1 5.8 6.7 6.7 14.6 7.3 6.5 4.0 8.5 7.0 6.2 Kyrgyz Republic 11.2 6.8 8.0 16.6 2.8 6.6 7.5 6.5 0.4 3.8 5.1 5.0  0.5 4.8 5.5 Moldova 15.5 0.0 7.4 7.6 4.6 4.6 5.1 9.6 6.4 6.5 5.3 5.0 2.4 7.0 5.2 Tajikistan 18.1 6.4 6.5 12.4 5.8 5.0 6.1 5.8 5.9 8.9 8.0 6.0 6.1 10.0 8.0 Turkmenistan 10.2  2.7 4.4 5.3 5.3 6.8 6.0 7.4 3.6 6.0 6.2 6.2 6.2 6.1 6.2 Ukraine5 13.5 15.9 9.4 8.0 0.6  0.3 12.1 48.7 13.9 12.8 10.0 5.0 12.4 10.0 7.0 Uzbekistan 17.4 12.3 12.3 12.4 11.9 11.7 9.1 8.5 8.0 13.0 12.7 10.0 7.9 15.7 10.7 Emerging and Developing Asia 4.0 2.8 5.1 6.5 4.6 4.6 3.4 2.7 2.8 2.6 3.2 3.4 2.7 3.1 3.2 Bangladesh 5.7 4.9 9.4 11.5 6.2 7.5 7.0 6.2 5.7 5.7 5.8 5.6 5.7 6.0 5.8 Bhutan 5.0 6.3 5.7 7.3 9.3 11.3 9.9 6.3 3.9 3.5 4.2 4.7 3.0 3.3 4.5 Brunei Darussalam 0.5 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.4  0.2  0.4  0.7  0.2 0.0 0.2  1.6 0.1 0.3 Cambodia 4.9  0.7 4.0 5.5 2.9 3.0 3.9 1.2 3.0 3.7 3.5 3.0 3.9 3.1 3.4 China 1.8  0.7 3.3 5.4 2.6 2.6 2.0 1.4 2.0 1.8 2.4 2.6 2.1 2.3 2.4 Fiji 3.2 3.7 3.7 7.3 3.4 2.9 0.5 1.4 3.9 3.8 3.5 3.0 3.9 3.5 3.5 India 4.9 10.6 9.5 9.5 10.0 9.4 5.8 4.9 4.5 3.8 4.9 5.0 3.6 4.5 4.8 Indonesia 10.0 5.0 5.1 5.3 4.0 6.4 6.4 6.4 3.5 4.0 3.9 3.5 3.0 4.0 3.7 Kiribati 2.7 9.8  3.9 1.5  3.0  1.5 2.1 0.6 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.5 0.7 2.2 2.5 Lao P.D.R. 17.1 0.0 6.0 7.6 4.3 6.4 4.1 1.3 2.0 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.2 2.3 2.6 Malaysia 2.4 0.6 1.7 3.2 1.7 2.1 3.1 2.1 2.1 3.8 2.9 3.0 1.8 3.8 2.9 Maldives 3.1 4.5 6.2 11.3 10.9 4.0 2.5 1.4 0.8 2.5 2.1 2.5 1.8 2.1 2.2 Marshall Islands . . . 0.5 1.8 5.4 4.3 1.9 1.1  2.2  1.5 0.7 1.1 2.1  1.5 0.7 1.1 Micronesia 2.5 7.7 3.7 4.1 6.3 2.2 0.7  0.2 0.5 0.9 2.0 2.0 0.5 0.9 2.0 Mongolia 8.9 6.3 10.2 7.7 15.0 8.6 12.9 5.9 0.6 4.4 6.0 6.5 0.9 6.9 6.5 Myanmar 19.9 2.2 8.2 2.8 2.8 5.7 5.1 10.0 6.8 6.5 6.1 5.7 7.0 6.5 6.1 Nauru . . . 22.4  2.0  3.4 0.3  1.1 0.3 9.8 8.2 5.1 2.0 2.0 8.2 1.6 2.0 Nepal 5.4 12.6 9.6 9.6 8.3 9.9 9.0 7.2 9.9 4.5 6.0 5.5 10.4 2.7 5.7 Palau . . . 1.4 1.4 4.7 3.6 3.4 4.1 0.9  1.0 1.5 2.0 2.0 0.4 1.5 2.0 Papua New Guinea 8.3 6.9 5.1 4.4 4.5 5.0 5.2 6.0 6.7 5.7 5.5 5.0 6.6 5.5 5.0 Philippines 5.1 4.2 3.8 4.7 3.2 2.9 4.2 1.4 1.8 3.1 3.0 3.0 2.6 2.9 3.0 Samoa 4.3 14.6  0.2 2.9 6.2  0.2  1.2 1.9 0.1 1.8 1.9 3.0 2.3 1.4 2.4 Solomon Islands 9.2 7.1 1.0 7.4 5.9 5.4 5.2  0.6 0.5  0.5 1.7 4.0 3.5  2.2 1.9 Sri Lanka 11.1 3.4 6.2 6.7 7.5 6.9 2.8 2.2 4.0 6.0 5.0 5.0 4.5 5.1 5.0 Thailand 2.6  0.8 3.3 3.8 3.0 2.2 1.9  0.9 0.2 0.6 1.0 2.5 1.1 0.6 0.7 Timor-Leste . . .  0.2 5.2 13.2 10.9 9.5 0.7 0.6  1.3 1.0 2.7 4.0 0.0 2.0 3.5 Tonga 8.3 1.4 3.5 6.3 1.1 2.1 1.2  1.1 2.6 7.5 2.7 2.5 6.7 6.6 2.5 Tuvalu . . .  0.3  1.9 0.5 1.4 2.0 1.1 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.8 2.5 2.6 2.9 2.4 Vanuatu 2.8 4.3 2.8 0.9 1.3 1.5 0.8 2.5 0.9 2.6 2.8 3.0 2.1 2.7 2.9 Vietnam 6.3 6.7 9.2 18.7 9.1 6.6 4.1 0.6 2.7 4.4 4.0 4.0 4.7 4.0 4.0 Emerging and Developing Europe 15.4 4.8 5.7 5.5 6.1 4.5 4.1 3.2 3.3 6.0 5.7 4.9 4.2 5.7 5.9 Albania 2.5 2.2 3.6 3.4 2.0 1.9 1.6 1.9 1.3 2.1 2.8 3.0 2.2 2.3 3.0 Bosnia and Herzegovina 3.2  0.4 2.1 3.7 2.0  0.1  0.9  1.0  1.1 1.8 1.2 2.0  0.3 2.3 1.4 Bulgaria6 6.7 2.5 3.0 3.4 2.4 0.4  1.6  1.1  1.3 1.1 1.4 2.1  0.5 1.3 1.6 Croatia 3.3 2.4 1.0 2.3 3.4 2.2  0.2  0.5  1.1 1.1 1.2 1.9 0.2 1.0 1.2 Hungary 6.7 4.2 4.9 3.9 5.7 1.6  0.2  0.1 0.4 2.5 3.2 3.0 1.8 2.7 3.0 Kosovo . . .  2.4 3.5 7.3 2.5 1.8 0.4  0.5 0.3 1.4 1.4 2.0 1.3 1.0 1.8 FYR Macedonia 2.6  0.7 1.5 3.9 3.3 2.8  0.3  0.3  0.2 0.3 2.6 2.0  0.3 1.7 1.7 Montenegro . . . 3.6 0.4 3.5 4.1 2.2  0.7 1.5  0.3 2.1 2.6 1.9 1.0 1.6 2.6 Poland 3.9 3.4 2.6 4.3 3.7 0.9 0.0  0.9  0.6 1.9 2.3 2.5 0.8 1.9 2.6 Romania 19.4 5.6 6.1 5.8 3.3 4.0 1.1  0.6  1.6 1.1 3.3 2.5  0.5 2.0 3.5 Serbia 23.5 8.1 6.1 11.1 7.3 7.7 2.1 1.4 1.1 3.4 3.0 3.0 1.5 3.6 3.0 Turkey 27.2 6.3 8.6 6.5 8.9 7.5 8.9 7.7 7.8 10.9 9.3 7.5 8.5 10.0 9.5  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 252 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued) (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 2016 2017 2018 Latin America and the Caribbean7 6.7 4.6 4.2 5.2 4.6 4.6 4.9 5.5 5.6 4.2 3.6 3.4 4.6 4.2 3.6 Antigua and Barbuda 2.0  0.6 3.4 3.5 3.4 1.1 1.1 1.0  0.5 2.4 1.2 2.0  1.1 2.5 2.0 Argentina8 7.6 6.3 10.5 9.8 10.0 10.6 . . . . . . . . . 26.9 17.8 8.6 . . . 22.3 16.7 The Bahamas 2.2 1.7 1.6 3.1 1.9 0.4 1.2 1.9 0.8 2.4 2.2 2.2 0.8 2.4 2.2 Barbados 3.5 3.6 5.8 9.4 4.5 1.8 1.8  1.1 1.3 5.0 5.8 2.7 3.2 6.7 2.4 Belize 2.5  1.1 0.9 1.7 1.2 0.5 1.2  0.9 0.6 1.8 2.3 2.0 1.1 2.4 2.3 Bolivia 4.7 3.3 2.5 9.9 4.5 5.7 5.8 4.1 3.6 3.2 5.1 5.0 4.0 4.3 5.0 Brazil 6.8 4.9 5.0 6.6 5.4 6.2 6.3 9.0 8.7 3.7 4.0 4.0 6.3 3.6 4.0 Chile 3.7 1.5 1.4 3.3 3.0 1.9 4.4 4.3 3.8 2.3 2.7 3.0 2.8 2.4 2.9 Colombia 6.9 4.2 2.3 3.4 3.2 2.0 2.9 5.0 7.5 4.3 3.3 3.0 5.7 4.0 3.1 Costa Rica 11.1 7.8 5.7 4.9 4.5 5.2 4.5 0.8 0.0 1.7 2.9 3.0 0.8 2.7 3.0 Dominica 2.1 0.0 2.8 1.1 1.4 0.0 0.8  0.8 0.0 0.6 1.4 2.0  0.2 1.4 1.4 Dominican Republic 12.8 1.4 6.3 8.5 3.7 4.8 3.0 0.8 1.6 3.0 3.3 4.0 1.7 2.9 4.2 Ecuador 19.6 5.2 3.6 4.5 5.1 2.7 3.6 4.0 1.7 0.7 0.7 1.6 1.1 0.8 0.7 El Salvador 3.5 0.5 1.2 5.1 1.7 0.8 1.1  0.7 0.6 0.8 2.2 2.0  0.9 2.4 2.0 Grenada 2.9  0.3 3.4 3.0 2.4 0.0  1.0  0.6 1.7 2.6 2.0 1.9 0.9 3.0 1.8 Guatemala 7.3 1.9 3.9 6.2 3.8 4.3 3.4 2.4 4.4 4.4 3.5 4.0 4.2 4.3 4.0 Guyana 6.6 3.0 4.3 4.4 2.4 1.9 0.7  0.9 0.8 2.3 2.7 3.1 1.5 2.6 2.7 Haiti 15.3 3.4 4.1 7.4 6.8 6.8 3.9 7.5 13.4 14.7 9.0 5.0 12.5 15.3 5.0 Honduras 8.8 5.5 4.7 6.8 5.2 5.2 6.1 3.2 2.7 4.0 4.0 4.0 3.3 4.5 4.0 Jamaica 10.6 9.6 12.6 7.5 6.9 9.4 8.3 3.7 2.3 3.4 5.2 5.4 1.7 5.0 5.5 Mexico 6.3 5.3 4.2 3.4 4.1 3.8 4.0 2.7 2.8 5.9 3.8 3.0 3.4 6.1 3.5 Nicaragua 9.7 3.7 5.5 8.1 7.2 7.1 6.0 4.0 3.5 4.0 7.2 7.3 3.1 4.0 7.2 Panama 2.3 2.4 3.5 5.9 5.7 4.0 2.6 0.1 0.7 1.6 2.1 2.4 1.5 2.5 2.1 Paraguay 8.6 2.6 4.7 8.3 3.7 2.7 5.0 3.1 4.1 3.5 4.0 4.0 3.9 4.0 4.0 Peru 2.6 2.9 1.5 3.4 3.7 2.8 3.2 3.5 3.6 3.2 2.3 2.0 3.2 2.7 2.5 St. Kitts and Nevis 3.6 2.1 0.9 5.8 0.8 1.1 0.2  2.3  0.4 1.2 1.8 2.0 0.9 1.5 2.0 St. Lucia 3.0  0.2 3.3 2.8 4.2 1.5 3.5  1.0  3.1 0.2 0.9 1.5  3.0 1.4 1.2 St. Vincent and the Grenadines 2.9 0.4 0.8 3.2 2.6 0.8 0.2  1.7  0.2 1.7 1.4 1.5 1.0 1.9 1.5 Suriname 21.0  0.3 6.9 17.7 5.0 1.9 3.4 6.9 55.5 22.3 9.3 4.1 52.4 9.1 12.3 Trinidad and Tobago 5.9 7.0 10.5 5.1 9.3 5.2 5.7 4.7 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.1 3.2 3.2 Uruguay 8.3 7.1 6.7 8.1 8.1 8.6 8.9 8.7 9.6 6.1 6.3 6.1 8.1 6.2 6.7 Venezuela8 20.5 27.1 28.2 26.1 21.1 43.5 57.3 111.8 254.4 652.7 2,349.3 4,684.8 302.6 1,133.0 2,529.6 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 6.4 7.3 6.6 9.2 9.8 9.2 6.8 5.7 5.1 6.8 7.7 4.9 6.2 7.5 6.5 Afghanistan . . .  6.8 2.2 11.8 6.4 7.4 4.7  0.7 4.4 6.0 6.0 6.0 4.6 7.2 6.0 Algeria 2.9 5.7 3.9 4.5 8.9 3.3 2.9 4.8 6.4 5.5 4.4 4.0 7.0 5.5 4.4 Bahrain 1.2 2.8 2.0  0.4 2.8 3.3 2.7 1.8 2.8 0.9 3.5 1.6 2.3 1.0 3.2 Djibouti 3.2 1.7 4.0 5.1 3.7 2.4 2.9 2.1 2.7 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.4 3.0 3.0 Egypt 5.8 16.2 11.7 11.1 8.6 6.9 10.1 11.0 10.2 23.5 21.3 7.1 14.0 29.8 11.7 Iran 15.6 10.7 12.4 21.2 30.8 34.7 15.6 11.9 9.0 10.5 10.1 8.7 11.9 10.1 9.7 Iraq . . .  2.2 2.4 5.6 6.1 1.9 2.2 1.4 0.4 2.0 2.0 2.0  1.0 2.0 2.0 Jordan 3.8  0.7 4.8 4.2 4.5 4.8 2.9  0.9  0.8 3.3 1.5 2.5 0.8 2.5 2.5 Kuwait 2.8 4.6 4.5 4.9 3.2 2.7 3.1 3.7 3.5 2.5 2.7 2.7 3.5 2.5 2.7 Lebanon 2.3 1.2 4.0 5.0 6.6 4.8 1.9  3.7  0.8 3.1 2.5 2.0 3.1 3.0 2.0 Libya8  0.1 2.4 2.5 15.9 6.1 2.6 2.4 9.8 27.1 32.8 32.1 23.5 29.9 35.1 29.9 Mauritania 6.4 2.1 6.3 5.7 4.9 4.1 3.8 0.5 1.5 2.1 3.7 4.0 2.8 1.6 4.7 Morocco 1.9 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.3 1.9 0.4 1.5 1.6 0.9 1.6 2.0 1.8 1.1 1.6 Oman 2.2 3.5 3.3 4.0 2.9 1.2 1.0 0.1 1.1 3.2 3.2 3.1 1.1 3.2 3.2 Pakistan 6.2 19.6 10.1 13.7 11.0 7.4 8.6 4.5 2.9 4.1 4.8 5.0 3.2 3.9 5.0 Qatar 6.3  4.9  2.4 2.0 1.8 3.2 3.4 1.8 2.7 0.9 4.8 2.3 . . . . . . . . . Saudi Arabia 1.0 4.1 3.8 3.7 2.9 3.5 2.7 2.2 3.5  0.2 5.0 2.0 1.7  0.2 5.0 Somalia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2.3 2.9 2.7 Sudan9 9.1 11.3 13.0 18.3 35.4 36.5 36.9 16.9 17.8 26.9 19.0 14.0 30.5 21.0 17.0 Syria10 4.1 2.8 4.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tunisia 2.7 3.7 3.3 3.5 5.1 5.8 4.9 4.9 3.7 4.5 4.4 3.5 4.2 4.5 4.1 United Arab Emirates 5.6 1.6 0.9 0.9 0.7 1.1 2.3 4.1 1.8 2.1 2.9 1.9 1.8 2.1 2.9 Yemen 11.4 3.7 11.2 19.5 9.9 11.0 8.2 39.4 5.0 20.0 29.5 9.0 22.0 23.0 24.0  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 253 Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued) (Annual percent change) End of Period2 Average Projections Projections 1999 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 2016 2017 2018 Sub-Saharan Africa 10.5 9.8 8.1 9.4 9.3 6.6 6.3 7.0 11.3 11.0 9.5 7.8 12.5 10.4 9.2 Angola 81.6 13.7 14.5 13.5 10.3 8.8 7.3 10.3 32.4 30.9 20.6 9.5 41.9 23.4 17.6 Benin 3.1 0.4 2.2 2.7 6.7 1.0  1.1 0.3  0.8 2.0 2.1 2.0  2.7 2.2 2.0 Botswana 8.7 8.1 6.9 8.5 7.5 5.9 4.4 3.1 2.8 3.7 3.7 3.9 3.0 4.4 3.0 Burkina Faso 2.6 0.9  0.6 2.8 3.8 0.5  0.3 0.9  0.2 1.5 2.0 2.0  1.6 2.0 2.0 Burundi 10.0 10.6 6.5 9.6 18.2 7.9 4.4 5.6 5.5 18.0 20.2 17.7 9.5 18.6 21.5 Cabo Verde 2.3 1.0 2.1 4.5 2.5 1.5  0.2 0.1  1.4 1.0 1.5 2.0  0.3 1.1 1.7 Cameroon 2.4 3.0 1.3 2.9 2.4 2.1 1.9 2.7 0.9 0.7 1.1 2.0 0.3 1.2 1.1 Central African Republic 2.9 3.5 1.5 1.2 5.9 6.6 11.6 4.5 4.6 3.8 3.7 3.0 4.7 3.6 3.6 Chad 1.6 10.1  2.1 1.9 7.7 0.2 1.7 6.8  1.1 0.2 1.9 3.0  4.9 0.7 2.3 Comoros 4.0 4.8 3.9 2.2 5.9 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 0.8 1.9 2.1 Democratic Republic of the Congo 77.9 46.1 23.5 14.9 0.9 0.9 1.2 1.0 18.2 41.7 44.0 10.0 23.6 50.0 40.0 Republic of Congo 2.7 4.3 0.4 1.8 5.0 4.6 0.9 2.7 3.6  0.4  1.1 2.4 0.8  1.3  0.9 C te d Ivoire 3.0 1.0 1.4 4.9 1.3 2.6 0.4 1.2 0.7 1.0 2.0 2.0 1.1 1.5 2.0 Equatorial Guinea 5.0 5.7 5.3 4.8 3.4 3.2 4.3 1.7 1.4 1.7 1.8 2.1 1.6 1.7 1.9 Eritrea 16.3 33.0 11.2 3.9 6.0 6.5 10.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.0 Ethiopia 10.2 8.5 8.1 33.2 24.1 8.1 7.4 10.1 7.3 8.1 8.0 7.5 6.7 9.2 7.5 Gabon 0.7 1.9 1.4 1.3 2.7 0.5 4.5  0.1 2.1 2.5 2.5 2.5 4.1 2.5 2.5 The Gambia 6.5 4.6 5.0 4.8 4.6 5.2 6.3 6.8 7.2 8.3 7.1 4.7 7.9 7.6 6.4 Ghana 17.7 13.1 6.7 7.7 7.1 11.7 15.5 17.2 17.5 11.8 9.0 6.0 15.4 10.0 8.0 Guinea 15.1 4.7 15.5 21.4 15.2 11.9 9.7 8.2 8.2 8.5 8.2 7.9 8.7 8.2 8.0 Guinea-Bissau 3.0  1.6 1.1 5.1 2.1 0.8  1.0 1.5 1.5 2.8 2.5 2.5 1.6 2.5 2.5 Kenya 6.8 10.6 4.3 14.0 9.4 5.7 6.9 6.6 6.3 8.0 5.2 5.0 6.3 5.1 5.2 Lesotho 7.5 5.8 3.3 6.0 5.5 5.0 4.6 4.3 6.4 6.6 6.0 5.0 4.4 6.5 6.0 Liberia . . . 7.4 7.3 8.5 6.8 7.6 9.9 7.7 8.8 12.8 9.9 7.1 12.5 12.4 9.1 Madagascar 10.3 9.0 9.2 9.5 5.7 5.8 6.1 7.4 6.7 7.8 6.8 5.0 7.0 7.7 6.8 Malawi 17.4 8.4 7.4 7.6 21.3 28.3 23.8 21.9 21.7 13.0 9.6 3.9 20.0 11.1 8.3 Mali 2.2 2.2 1.3 3.1 5.3  0.6 0.9 1.4  1.8 0.2 1.2 2.2  0.8 1.0 1.4 Mauritius 6.4 2.5 2.9 6.5 3.9 3.5 3.2 1.3 1.0 4.2 5.0 3.1 2.3 5.0 4.0 Mozambique 10.5 3.3 12.7 10.4 2.1 4.2 2.3 2.4 19.2 17.5 10.5 5.5 21.1 14.0 8.0 Namibia 7.6 9.5 4.9 5.0 6.7 5.6 5.3 3.4 6.7 6.0 5.8 5.8 7.3 6.0 5.8 Niger 2.4 4.3  2.8 2.9 0.5 2.3  0.9 1.0 0.3 1.0 2.1 2.0  2.4 2.0 2.0 Nigeria 11.6 12.5 13.7 10.8 12.2 8.5 8.0 9.0 15.7 16.3 14.8 14.5 18.5 16.0 15.1 Rwanda 6.8 10.3 2.3 5.7 6.3 4.2 1.8 2.5 5.7 7.1 6.0 5.0 7.3 7.0 5.0 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe 15.3 17.0 13.3 14.3 10.6 8.1 7.0 5.3 5.4 4.5 5.2 3.2 5.1 5.5 5.0 Senegal 2.3  2.2 1.2 3.4 1.4 0.7  1.1 0.1 0.9 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.2 Seychelles 6.3 31.8  2.4 2.6 7.1 4.3 1.4 4.0  1.0 2.8 2.3 3.0  0.2 3.0 3.2 Sierra Leone 9.8 9.2 17.8 18.5 13.8 9.8 8.3 9.0 11.5 16.9 10.6 7.7 17.4 12.0 9.5 South Africa 5.8 7.1 4.3 5.0 5.6 5.8 6.1 4.6 6.3 5.4 5.3 5.5 6.7 5.2 5.4 South Sudan . . . . . . . . . . . . 45.1 0.0 1.7 52.8 379.8 182.2 45.0 7.5 479.7 111.4 25.0 Swaziland 7.4 7.4 4.5 6.1 8.9 5.6 5.7 5.0 8.0 7.0 5.4 5.5 9.0 6.5 4.4 Tanzania 6.1 12.1 7.2 12.7 16.0 7.9 6.1 5.6 5.2 5.4 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 Togo 2.6 3.7 1.4 3.6 2.6 1.8 0.2 1.8 0.9 0.8 1.2 2.0 0.5 . . . . . . Uganda 5.7 13.0 3.7 15.0 12.7 4.9 3.1 5.4 5.5 5.8 5.6 5.0 5.7 5.9 5.3 Zambia 18.5 13.4 8.5 8.7 6.6 7.0 7.8 10.1 17.9 6.8 7.4 8.0 7.5 5.8 8.0 Zimbabwe11  7.4 6.2 3.0 3.5 3.7 1.6  0.2  2.4  1.6 2.5 9.5 4.0  0.9 7.0 10.0 1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. 2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis. 3For many countries, inflation for the earlier years is measured on the basis of a retail price index. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation data with broader and more up-to-date coverage are typically used for more recent years. 4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in the group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 5Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol. 6Based on Eurostat s harmonized index of consumer prices. 7Excludes Argentina and Venezuela. 8See country-specific notes for Argentina, Libya, and Venezuela in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 9Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan. 10Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation. 11The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values may differ from authorities  estimates.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 254 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1 (Percent of GDP unless noted otherwise) Average Projections 1999 2008 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Major Advanced Economies Net Lending/Borrowing  3.4  7.3  6.3  4.2  3.6  3.0  3.5  3.4  2.9  2.7 Output Gap2 0.9  2.4  2.1  1.9  1.4  0.7  0.7  0.1 0.2 0.3 Structural Balance2  3.8  6.3  5.1  3.7  3.1  2.8  3.1  3.3  2.9  2.8 United States Net Lending/Borrowing3  3.5  9.6  7.9  4.4  4.0  3.5  4.4  4.3  3.7  4.3 Output Gap2 1.8  3.1  2.2  1.9  1.1 0.0  0.1 0.3 0.7 0.6 Structural Balance2  4.0  8.2  6.4  4.4  3.8  3.6  4.1  4.4  4.0  4.5 Net Debt 43.2 76.8 80.2 81.6 80.8 80.2 81.3 82.5 81.1 82.8 Gross Debt 62.6 100.0 103.4 105.4 105.1 105.2 107.1 108.1 107.8 109.6 Euro Area Net Lending/Borrowing  2.0  4.2  3.6  3.0  2.6  2.1  1.5  1.3  1.0  0.1 Output Gap2 0.9  0.5  1.9  2.8  2.4  1.9  1.3  0.5 0.0 0.6 Structural Balance2  2.5  3.9  2.1  1.3  1.1  0.9  0.8  0.9  0.9  0.4 Net Debt 54.5 68.5 72.2 74.6 74.9 73.9 73.3 71.8 70.3 62.7 Gross Debt 67.9 86.1 89.5 91.4 91.9 90.0 89.0 87.4 85.6 76.3 Germany Net Lending/Borrowing  2.1  1.0 0.0  0.1 0.3 0.6 0.8 0.7 0.8 1.1 Output Gap2 0.1 1.0 0.5  0.3 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.8 1.0 0.8 Structural Balance2  2.2  1.3  0.2 0.1 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.3 0.2 0.7 Net Debt 50.3 58.7 58.2 57.0 53.5 50.5 48.3 45.8 43.2 33.7 Gross Debt 62.6 78.7 79.9 77.5 74.7 70.9 68.1 65.0 61.8 50.1 France Net Lending/Borrowing  2.6  5.1  4.8  4.0  3.9  3.6  3.4  3.0  3.0  0.8 Output Gap2 0.5  1.1  1.9  2.4  2.5  2.4  2.2  1.8  1.3 0.3 Structural Balance2  3.0  4.4  3.4  2.4  2.3  2.0  1.9  1.8  2.2  1.0 Net Debt 54.6 76.9 80.6 83.5 86.1 86.9 87.8 88.5 88.7 82.9 Gross Debt 63.1 85.2 89.5 92.3 94.9 95.6 96.3 96.8 97.0 91.2 Italy Net Lending/Borrowing  2.9  3.7  2.9  2.9  3.0  2.7  2.4  2.2  1.3 0.0 Output Gap2 0.2  0.5  2.8  4.1  4.1  3.3  2.7  1.6  1.0 0.0 Structural Balance2,4  3.6  4.1  1.5  0.6  1.1  0.9  1.1  1.4  0.8 0.0 Net Debt 94.7 106.8 111.6 116.7 118.8 119.8 120.6 121.2 119.9 109.6 Gross Debt 102.9 116.5 123.4 129.0 131.8 132.1 132.6 133.0 131.4 120.1 Japan Net Lending/Borrowing  5.5  9.1  8.3  7.6  5.4  3.5  4.2  4.1  3.3  2.1 Output Gap2  0.8  4.6  3.7  2.2  2.6  2.1  1.8  0.9  0.7  0.7 Structural Balance2  5.5  7.5  7.1  7.1  5.1  3.9  3.8  3.9  3.2  2.0 Net Debt 64.2 117.9 120.5 117.4 119.0 118.4 119.8 120.9 120.7 114.6 Gross Debt5 165.8 230.6 236.6 240.5 242.1 238.1 239.3 240.3 240.0 233.9 United Kingdom Net Lending/Borrowing  1.9  7.5  7.7  5.5  5.6  4.3  2.9  2.9  2.3  1.2 Output Gap2 0.8  2.6  2.6  2.1  0.7  0.2  0.1  0.1  0.2 0.0 Structural Balance2  2.5  5.4  5.7  3.9  4.8  4.1  2.8  2.8  2.2  1.2 Net Debt 34.9 73.2 76.4 77.8 79.7 80.3 80.1 80.5 80.6 76.6 Gross Debt 39.5 81.6 85.1 86.2 88.1 89.0 89.3 89.5 89.7 85.6 Canada Net Lending/Borrowing 1.1  3.3  2.5  1.5 0.0  1.1  1.9  2.2  1.8  1.1 Output Gap2 1.6  1.0  1.3  0.9  0.5  1.2  1.5  0.2 0.4 0.1 Structural Balance2 0.3  2.8  1.8  1.0 0.0  0.5  1.1  2.1  2.1  1.2 Net Debt 34.1 27.1 28.2 29.0 27.2 25.2 27.4 24.6 22.7 14.9 Gross Debt 75.6 81.5 84.8 85.8 85.4 91.6 92.4 89.6 87.7 79.9 Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. 1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the System of National Accounts (SNA) 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees  defined-benefit pension plans. Fiscal data for the aggregated major advanced economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and the United States is therefore for the period 2001 07. 2Percent of potential GDP. 3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees  defined-benefit pension plans. 4Excludes one-time measures based on the authorities  data and, if unavailable, on receipts from the sale of assets. 5Includes equity shares; nonconsolidated basis.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 255 Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (Annual percent change) Averages Projections 1999 2008 2009 18 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Trade in Goods and Services World Trade1 Volume 6.6 3.1  10.5 12.5 7.1 2.7 3.6 3.8 2.8 2.4 4.2 4.0 Price Deflator In US Dollars 4.4  1.2  10.4 5.5 11.2  1.6  0.7  1.8  13.3  4.1 3.8 2.3 In SDRs 2.9 0.0  8.2 6.6 7.4 1.4 0.1  1.7  5.9  3.5 4.2 0.5 Volume of Trade Exports Advanced Economies 5.6 2.8  11.1 12.1 6.0 2.3 3.2 4.0 3.8 2.2 3.8 3.6 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 8.8 3.8  8.0 13.7 8.6 3.5 4.8 3.2 1.8 2.5 4.8 4.5 Imports Advanced Economies 5.6 2.6  11.6 11.4 5.1 1.2 2.4 3.8 4.6 2.7 4.0 3.8 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.9 4.0  9.3 14.6 11.5 5.2 5.2 4.3  0.9 2.0 4.4 4.9 Terms of Trade Advanced Economies  0.5 0.3 2.5  0.9  1.6  0.7 0.9 0.3 1.9 0.9  0.4 0.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2.7  0.6  5.7 2.1 4.2 0.5  0.6  0.6  4.3  1.2 0.1  0.5 Trade in Goods World Trade1 Volume 6.7 3.0  11.7 14.5 7.0 2.3 3.3 3.1 2.3 2.3 4.3 4.1 Price Deflator In US Dollars 4.5  1.4  11.7 6.4 12.6  1.7  1.2  2.5  14.4  4.8 4.3 2.1 In SDRs 2.9  0.3  9.5 7.6 8.8 1.3  0.5  2.4  7.1  4.2 4.7 0.4 World Trade Prices in US Dollars2 Manufactures 1.7  0.1  1.4 2.3 4.2 2.8  3.0  0.4  2.3  5.2 1.5 1.0 Oil 22.2  6.4  36.3 27.9 31.6 1.0  0.9  7.5  47.2  15.7 17.4  0.2 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 6.2  0.7  16.0 26.6 18.0  10.1  1.4  3.9  17.5  1.8 7.1 0.5 Food 5.6  0.5  15.2 12.1 20.3  2.6 0.7  4.1  17.2 2.1 3.6 1.1 Beverages 2.4  0.1 1.6 14.1 16.6  18.6  11.9 20.7  3.1  5.0  8.7 0.6 Agricultural Raw Materials 1.9  0.1  17.1 33.2 22.7  12.7 1.6 2.0  13.5  5.7 2.1  2.5 Metal 11.8  1.4  19.2 48.2 13.5  16.8  4.3  10.1  23.0  5.4 20.6 1.4 World Trade Prices in SDRs2 Manufactures 0.2 1.1 1.0 3.3 0.7 6.0  2.2  0.4 6.1  4.5 1.9  0.7 Oil 20.3  5.3  34.8 29.3 27.2 4.1  0.1  7.5  42.7  15.1 17.8  1.9 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 4.6 0.5  13.9 28.0 14.1  7.3  0.6  3.8  10.4  1.2 7.5  1.2 Food 4.0 0.7  13.1 13.3 16.2 0.4 1.5  4.0  10.2 2.8 4.0  0.6 Beverages 0.9 1.1 4.1 15.3 12.7  16.1  11.2 20.8 5.2  4.4  8.4  1.1 Agricultural Raw Materials 0.4 1.1  15.1 34.6 18.5  10.0 2.4 2.0  6.1  5.1 2.4  4.1 Metal 10.1  0.3  17.2 49.8 9.7  14.3  3.5  10.1  16.4  4.8 21.1  0.3 World Trade Prices in Euros2 Manufactures  1.1 2.2 4.2 7.3  0.6 11.3  6.1  0.5 17.1  4.9  0.4  3.2 Oil 18.8  4.3  32.7 34.3 25.5 9.3  4.1  7.6  36.8  15.4 15.2  4.3 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 3.3 1.6  11.2 32.9 12.6  2.7  4.5  3.9  1.2  1.6 5.0  3.6 Food 2.7 1.8  10.4 17.7 14.7 5.4  2.5  4.1  0.9 2.4 1.7  3.1 Beverages  0.4 2.2 7.3 19.8 11.2  11.9  14.7 20.7 16.1  4.8  10.5  3.5 Agricultural Raw Materials  0.9 2.2  12.5 39.8 17.0  5.5  1.7 1.9 3.6  5.5 0.1  6.5 Metal 8.7 0.8  14.6 55.5 8.3  10.0  7.3  10.2  7.8  5.2 18.4  2.8  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 256 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued) (Annual percent change) Averages Projections 1999 2008 2009 18 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Trade in Goods Volume of Trade Exports Advanced Economies 5.6 2.7  13.0 14.9 6.0 1.9 2.7 3.4 3.1 1.9 4.1 3.6 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 8.9 3.7  8.3 15.1 7.6 3.8 4.7 2.7 1.5 2.6 4.4 4.3 Fuel Exporters 5.7 1.8  6.5 6.5 5.7 2.7 2.0  0.6 3.5 1.3 0.1 3.4 Nonfuel Exporters 10.1 4.4  9.1 18.5 8.4 4.2 5.9 4.1 0.8 3.0 5.5 4.6 Imports Advanced Economies 5.7 2.4  12.7 13.1 5.3 0.3 2.1 3.5 3.7 2.3 4.5 3.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.9 3.8  10.7 15.6 11.1 5.0 4.8 2.6  0.3 2.4 4.4 5.0 Fuel Exporters 11.4 0.5  16.0 8.0 11.6 8.2 4.0 0.7  8.0  4.4 0.4 3.2 Nonfuel Exporters 9.6 4.5  9.4 17.6 11.0 4.3 5.0 3.0 1.5 3.8 5.2 5.3 Price Deflators in SDRs Exports Advanced Economies 1.7  0.3  7.4 4.3 6.4  0.3 0.3  2.0  6.1  2.2 4.0 1.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 6.6  0.3  13.1 12.7 13.3 3.1  1.3  3.2  9.1  7.0 5.7  0.9 Fuel Exporters 14.6  3.1  25.9 21.6 25.6 4.5  2.4  6.7  30.0  13.1 12.8  1.2 Nonfuel Exporters 3.7 0.6  6.9 9.1 8.4 2.5  0.8  1.6  1.0  5.4 3.9  0.8 Imports Advanced Economies 2.5  0.6  10.7 6.3 8.7 1.0  0.5  2.1  7.9  3.4 4.1 0.8 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 3.7 0.4  7.2 10.8 8.3 2.6  0.7  2.7  5.2  5.8 5.6  0.4 Fuel Exporters 3.3 0.9  2.1 8.2 6.6 3.5 0.0  2.4  3.2  3.9 3.4  0.3 Nonfuel Exporters 3.8 0.2  8.4 11.4 8.7 2.4  0.9  2.8  5.6  6.2 6.1  0.5 Terms of Trade Advanced Economies  0.8 0.3 3.7  1.9  2.1  1.2 0.9 0.1 1.9 1.3 0.0 0.4 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2.8  0.7  6.3 1.7 4.6 0.5  0.6  0.5  4.2  1.3 0.1  0.4 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States3 7.6  3.2  25.8 12.8 20.7 1.8  6.6  1.5  20.0  12.1 9.1  0.4 Emerging and Developing Asia  1.6 0.5 2.6  6.1  2.3 1.2 0.9 2.3 8.8 0.4  2.5 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe 0.1 0.1 3.6  3.7  1.9  1.1 1.5 1.3 2.7 1.6  3.6 1.4 Latin America and the Caribbean 3.7  0.8  5.4 8.6 5.6  1.3  1.4  2.4  9.0 1.8  0.2  2.6 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 9.5  3.5  17.9 7.6 13.5 0.3  0.3  4.7  26.5  6.4 6.9  0.3 Middle East and North Africa 10.0  3.6  18.3 7.5 13.7 0.9  0.3  4.7  27.3  7.0 7.2  0.7 Sub-Saharan Africa 5.4  1.2  11.0 12.0 11.6  1.9  0.2  3.3  15.9  2.2 4.1  1.4 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 10.9  4.0  24.3 12.4 17.8 1.0  2.4  4.4  27.7  9.6 9.1  1.0 Nonfuel  0.1 0.4 1.6  2.1  0.3 0.1 0.1 1.2 4.8 0.9  2.0  0.3 Memorandum World Exports in Billions of US Dollars Goods and Services 11,471 21,362 15,750 18,707 22,275 22,505 23,223 23,647 20,996 20,614 22,260 23,645 Goods 9,123 16,743 12,234 14,908 17,930 18,061 18,489 18,585 16,185 15,756 17,122 18,160 Average Oil Price4 22.2  6.4  36.3 27.9 31.6 1.0  0.9  7.5  47.2  15.7 17.4  0.2 In US Dollars a Barrel 44.79 74.42 61.78 79.03 104.01 105.01 104.07 96.25 50.79 42.84 50.28 50.17 Export Unit Value of Manufactures5 1.7  0.1  1.4 2.3 4.2 2.8  3.0  0.4  2.3  5.2 1.5 1.0 1Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports. 2As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies  trade (export of goods) weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2002 04 shares in world commodity exports. 3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 4Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 5Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 257 Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (Billions of US dollars) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Advanced Economies  78.5 13.9  29.1 28.3 238.5 251.9 325.1 361.1 390.6 368.3 388.4 United States  372.5  430.7  444.6  426.2  349.5  373.8  434.6  451.7  462.0  528.7  578.5 Euro Area  9.3 0.4  0.8 177.1 291.3 332.3 373.3 412.7 382.7 402.9 399.8 Germany 196.7 192.3 229.7 248.9 251.8 289.7 288.5 290.4 296.0 304.3 307.6 France  22.5  22.2  28.3  32.7  24.6  36.2  10.7  24.7  28.9  21.4  1.7 Italy  41.4  72.7  68.6  7.5 20.5 40.5 26.3 47.3 52.8 47.5 16.8 Spain  64.3  56.2  47.4  3.1 20.7 14.9 16.3 23.8 24.3 28.3 31.9 Japan 145.3 221.0 129.8 59.7 45.9 36.8 134.1 188.1 175.0 191.1 201.9 United Kingdom  70.1  66.6  46.6  97.4  119.6  140.0  122.7  114.5  91.4  86.6  74.0 Canada  40.4  58.2  49.6  65.7  59.4  43.6  52.8  50.5  55.6  51.2  43.7 Other Advanced Economies1 206.9 287.0 270.7 279.4 354.6 371.9 371.1 369.8 373.1 366.6 398.9 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 238.8 277.6 374.3 357.6 173.2 168.4  51.1  96.2  92.0  147.2  387.2 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States2 42.9 68.5 107.3 67.6 17.3 57.0 53.0  0.2 18.1 26.8 56.1 Russia 50.4 67.5 97.3 71.3 33.4 57.5 68.8 25.5 41.5 48.4 72.6 Excluding Russia  7.4 1.0 10.0  3.7  16.1  0.5  15.9  25.8  23.4  21.5  16.5 Emerging and Developing Asia 274.3 233.4 100.2 122.3 99.4 230.9 313.1 222.7 155.8 125.1  97.4 China 243.3 237.8 136.1 215.4 148.2 236.0 304.2 196.4 162.5 152.0 28.8 India  38.4  47.9  76.4  87.8  32.3  26.8  22.1  15.2  33.7  40.5  95.1 ASEAN-53 66.1 45.4 49.4 6.4  3.6 22.3 30.8 45.9 36.9 27.9  12.1 Emerging and Developing Europe  53.9  86.9  119.5  81.9  72.0  59.0  35.8  32.6  45.7  52.0  70.3 Latin America and the Caribbean  34.5  97.9  114.8  135.4  165.0  184.1  172.9  99.0  107.9  131.4  181.4 Brazil  26.3  75.8  77.0  74.2  74.8  104.2  59.4  23.5  29.0  39.2  52.9 Mexico  8.6  5.6  13.2  15.8  31.1  23.1  28.8  23.0  19.8  25.2  34.2 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 36.0 170.5 413.1 412.1 331.8 190.1  116.5  128.2  60.1  54.4  5.6 Sub-Saharan Africa  26.0  10.0  11.9  27.1  38.4  66.6  92.0  58.9  52.2  61.4  88.6 South Africa  8.1  5.6  9.2  20.3  21.6  18.7  14.0  9.6  9.8  11.8  15.8 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 131.3 309.5 616.8 597.1 462.1 308.4  68.5  85.7 10.9 18.2 99.0 Nonfuel 109.0  30.1  242.5  239.5  288.9  140.0 17.4  10.5  102.9  165.5  486.2 Of Which, Primary Products  2.5  9.4  26.0  61.3  76.9  50.2  52.8  40.5  48.8  55.8  81.6 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies  165.1  282.3  385.3  430.7  399.2  365.9  301.5  209.2  248.5  295.9  468.5 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16  27.0  19.6  31.7  46.4  48.9  34.6  43.3  49.5  35.5  33.6  55.0 Memorandum World 160.3 291.5 345.2 385.9 411.7 420.3 274.0 264.9 298.6 221.0 1.2 European Union  19.9 2.1 78.0 203.8 300.5 310.2 359.9 359.7 404.9 432.7 431.1 Low-Income Developing Countries  17.4  15.2  21.7  31.2  41.2  48.1  77.0  44.5  43.8  54.9  97.5 Middle East and North Africa 40.2 170.0 408.1 414.5 334.2 192.1  114.4  124.7  49.0  38.6 8.4  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 258 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued) (Percent of GDP) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Advanced Economies  0.2 0.0  0.1 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 United States  2.6  2.9  2.9  2.6  2.1  2.1  2.4  2.4  2.4  2.6  2.5 Euro Area  0.1 0.0 0.0 1.4 2.2 2.5 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.0 2.6 Germany 5.7 5.6 6.1 7.0 6.7 7.4 8.5 8.3 8.1 7.7 6.9 France  0.8  0.8  1.0  1.2  0.9  1.3  0.4  1.0  1.1  0.8  0.1 Italy  1.9  3.4  3.0  0.4 1.0 1.9 1.4 2.6 2.7 2.3 0.7 Spain  4.3  3.9  3.2  0.2 1.5 1.1 1.4 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0 Japan 2.8 3.9 2.1 1.0 0.9 0.8 3.1 3.8 3.6 3.8 3.7 United Kingdom  3.0  2.7  1.8  3.7  4.4  4.7  4.3  4.4  3.6  3.3  2.5 Canada  2.9  3.6  2.8  3.6  3.2  2.4  3.4  3.3  3.4  2.9  2.1 Other Advanced Economies1 4.2 5.0 4.1 4.2 5.2 5.4 5.9 5.7 5.4 5.0 4.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 1.3 1.2 1.4 1.3 0.6 0.5  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.9 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States2 2.5 3.2 4.0 2.4 0.6 2.1 2.8 0.0 0.9 1.3 2.2 Russia 3.8 4.1 4.7 3.2 1.5 2.8 5.0 2.0 2.8 3.2 4.0 Excluding Russia  1.8 0.2 1.7  0.6  2.3  0.1  3.0  5.6  4.6  4.0  2.2 Emerging and Developing Asia 3.4 2.4 0.9 1.0 0.7 1.5 2.0 1.4 0.9 0.7  0.4 China 4.7 3.9 1.8 2.5 1.5 2.2 2.7 1.7 1.4 1.2 0.2 India  2.8  2.8  4.2  4.8  1.7  1.3  1.1  0.7  1.4  1.5  2.4 ASEAN-53 4.9 2.7 2.6 0.3  0.2 1.1 1.5 2.1 1.6 1.1  0.3 Emerging and Developing Europe  3.4  5.0  6.3  4.4  3.6  2.9  2.0  1.8  2.4  2.5  2.8 Latin America and the Caribbean  0.9  1.9  2.0  2.3  2.8  3.1  3.4  2.0  2.0  2.3  2.6 Brazil  1.6  3.4  2.9  3.0  3.0  4.2  3.3  1.3  1.4  1.8  2.0 Mexico  1.0  0.5  1.1  1.3  2.5  1.8  2.5  2.2  1.7  2.0  2.2 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 1.5 6.2 12.8 12.4 9.7 5.5  3.7  4.1  1.9  1.6  0.1 Sub-Saharan Africa  2.4  0.8  0.8  1.8  2.4  3.9  6.1  4.2  3.4  3.6  4.1 South Africa  2.7  1.5  2.2  5.1  5.9  5.3  4.4  3.3  2.9  3.3  3.8 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 3.3 6.5 10.5 9.7 7.3 5.0  1.4  1.9 0.2 0.4 1.6 Nonfuel 0.7  0.2  1.2  1.1  1.2  0.6 0.1 0.0  0.4  0.6  1.2 Of Which, Primary Products  0.2  0.7  1.6  3.7  4.5  3.0  3.2  2.6  2.7  3.0  3.3 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies  1.8  2.5  3.0  3.3  2.9  2.6  2.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.4 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16  4.9  3.1  4.5  6.0  6.0  4.3  5.6  6.4  4.9  4.3  4.9 Memorandum World 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.0 European Union  0.1 0.0 0.4 1.2 1.7 1.7 2.2 2.2 2.4 2.4 2.1 Low-Income Developing Countries  1.6  1.2  1.5  1.9  2.3  2.5  4.2  2.5  2.3  2.6  3.3 Middle East and North Africa 1.8 6.6 13.6 13.5 10.6 6.0  4.0  4.4  1.7  1.3 0.2  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 259 Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued) (Percent of exports of goods and services) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Advanced Economies  0.8 0.1  0.2 0.2 1.7 1.7 2.4 2.7 2.7 2.4 2.1 United States  23.5  23.2  20.9  19.2  15.2  15.7  19.2  20.5  19.7  21.5  19.5 Euro Area  0.4 0.0 0.0 5.5 8.6 9.3 11.7 12.8 . . . . . . . . . Germany 15.2 13.3 13.6 15.3 14.7 16.3 18.2 18.1 17.2 16.2 13.7 France  3.4  3.1  3.4  4.1  2.9  4.2  1.4  3.3  3.6  2.6  0.2 Italy  8.4  13.5  11.1  1.3 3.3 6.4 4.8 8.5 8.9 7.3 2.1 Spain  18.9  15.3  11.0  0.8 4.7 3.3 4.1 5.8 5.4 5.7 5.2 Japan 21.7 25.4 13.9 6.5 5.5 4.3 17.1 23.2 20.3 21.3 20.2 United Kingdom  11.2  9.7  5.9  12.3  14.8  16.6  15.5  15.4  12.0  11.0  9.0 Canada  10.4  12.4  9.1  11.9  10.7  7.7  10.8  10.7  10.6  9.0  6.5 Other Advanced Economies1 7.8 8.8 7.0 7.1 8.7 9.1 10.2 10.3 9.7 9.0 8.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 4.3 4.0 4.5 3.9 2.0 2.1  0.5  1.2  1.2  1.8  3.7 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States2 8.2 10.2 12.1 7.4 1.9 6.8 9.0 0.0 3.1 4.3 7.3 Russia 14.7 15.3 17.0 12.1 5.6 10.2 17.5 7.7 10.6 11.9 14.6 Excluding Russia  4.1 0.5 3.2  1.1  5.3  0.2  8.2  14.8  11.6  10.1  6.1 Emerging and Developing Asia 12.5 8.3 2.9 3.3 2.6 5.7 8.2 6.1 3.9 3.0  1.9 China 19.5 14.8 6.8 9.9 6.3 9.6 12.9 8.9 6.9 6.2 1.0 India  13.8  12.6  16.8  19.4  6.9  5.6  5.3  3.4  6.8  7.5  12.1 ASEAN-53 10.9 6.1 5.5 0.7  0.4 2.3 3.4 5.0 3.7 2.6  0.9 Emerging and Developing Europe  10.3  14.8  17.3  11.9  9.7  7.5  5.1  4.5  5.7  6.0  6.2 Latin America and the Caribbean  4.3  9.7  9.2  10.7  13.1  14.9  16.1  9.5  9.5  11.1  12.3 Brazil  14.6  32.7  26.3  26.4  26.8  39.5  26.5  10.8  12.2  16.2  18.5 Mexico  3.5  1.8  3.6  4.1  7.8  5.5  7.1  5.8  4.5  5.5  5.6 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 2.9 13.6 27.0 24.3 20.8 13.6  9.4  11.5  5.2  4.8  0.3 Sub-Saharan Africa  8.6  2.6  2.4  5.7  8.0  14.7  26.6  18.8  14.9  16.5  19.1 South Africa  9.8  5.2  7.3  17.3  19.0  17.0  14.5  10.8  10.2  12.1  14.0 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel 8.7 16.5 25.2 22.5 18.3 13.6  3.6  5.5 0.6 0.8 4.9 Nonfuel 2.8  0.6  4.1  4.0  4.6  2.2 0.3  0.2  1.6  2.5  5.7 Of Which, Primary Products  0.8  2.5  5.8  14.3  18.1  12.1  14.8  11.7  13.0  14.2  16.6 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies  6.9  9.5  10.7  11.8  10.6  9.6  8.9  6.2  6.6  7.4  8.8 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16  16.8  9.9  13.5  20.2  21.4  16.5  25.3  31.9  20.2  17.3  21.2 Memorandum World 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.3 1.3 1.3 0.9 0.0 European Union  0.3 0.0 1.0 2.8 3.9 3.9 5.0 5.0 5.2 5.1 4.3 Low-Income Developing Countries  5.9  4.1  4.6  6.5  8.0  9.1  16.0  9.3  8.1  9.2  11.3 Middle East and North Africa 3.4 13.9 27.3 25.0 21.4 14.0  9.4  11.5  4.3  3.6 0.6 1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 3Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 260 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account (Percent of GDP) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Advanced Economies  0.2 0.0  0.1 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 United States  2.6  2.9  2.9  2.6  2.1  2.1  2.4  2.4  2.4  2.6  2.5 Euro Area1  0.1 0.0 0.0 1.4 2.2 2.5 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.0 2.6 Germany 5.7 5.6 6.1 7.0 6.7 7.4 8.5 8.3 8.1 7.7 6.9 France  0.8  0.8  1.0  1.2  0.9  1.3  0.4  1.0  1.1  0.8  0.1 Italy  1.9  3.4  3.0  0.4 1.0 1.9 1.4 2.6 2.7 2.3 0.7 Spain  4.3  3.9  3.2  0.2 1.5 1.1 1.4 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0 Netherlands 5.8 7.4 9.1 10.8 9.9 8.9 8.6 8.5 10.0 10.0 9.3 Belgium  1.1 1.8  1.1  0.1  0.3  0.7 0.4  0.4  0.3 0.0 0.8 Austria 2.6 2.9 1.6 1.5 2.0 2.4 1.9 1.7 2.1 2.2 2.2 Greece  12.3  11.4  10.0  3.8  2.0  1.6 0.1  0.6  0.2  0.1 0.0 Portugal  10.4  10.1  6.0  1.8 1.6 0.1 0.1 0.7 0.4 0.3  1.4 Ireland  4.7  1.2  1.6  2.6 2.1 1.6 10.9 3.3 3.4 3.5 4.0 Finland 1.9 1.2  1.8  1.9  1.6  1.3  0.6  1.1 0.4 0.4 0.4 Slovak Republic  3.4  4.7  5.0 0.9 1.9 1.1 0.2  0.7 0.3 0.2 1.2 Lithuania 2.1  0.3  3.9  1.2 1.5 3.6  2.3  0.9  1.6  1.4  2.6 Slovenia  0.6  0.1 0.2 2.1 4.4 5.8 4.4 5.2 5.0 4.9 2.7 Luxembourg 7.2 6.7 6.0 5.9 5.6 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.7 4.9 5.5 Latvia 7.8 2.0  3.2  3.6  2.7  2.0  0.8 1.5  0.3  1.5  2.1 Estonia 2.5 1.8 1.3  2.4  0.1 1.0 2.3 1.9 1.8 1.4  2.0 Cyprus  7.7  11.3  4.1  6.0  4.9  4.3  2.9  5.3  3.8  2.7  3.7 Malta  6.6  4.7  0.2 1.7 2.8 9.6 5.3 7.9 8.9 8.8 8.4 Japan 2.8 3.9 2.1 1.0 0.9 0.8 3.1 3.8 3.6 3.8 3.7 United Kingdom  3.0  2.7  1.8  3.7  4.4  4.7  4.3  4.4  3.6  3.3  2.5 Korea 3.7 2.6 1.6 4.2 6.2 6.0 7.7 7.0 5.6 5.4 5.3 Canada  2.9  3.6  2.8  3.6  3.2  2.4  3.4  3.3  3.4  2.9  2.1 Australia  4.6  3.6  3.0  4.1  3.2  2.9  4.7  2.6  1.6  2.4  2.3 Taiwan Province of China 10.9 8.9 8.2 9.5 10.4 12.0 14.5 14.0 13.8 13.9 14.6 Switzerland 7.4 14.8 8.0 10.4 11.5 8.7 11.4 10.5 9.9 9.4 8.6 Sweden 6.0 6.0 5.5 5.6 5.3 4.6 4.7 4.5 3.9 3.7 3.0 Singapore 16.8 23.4 22.1 17.4 16.9 19.7 18.1 19.0 19.6 19.5 16.9 Hong Kong SAR 9.9 7.0 5.6 1.6 1.5 1.4 3.3 4.6 3.0 3.1 3.5 Norway 10.6 10.9 12.4 12.4 10.2 11.0 8.7 5.0 5.5 5.7 6.1 Czech Republic  2.3  3.6  2.1  1.6  0.5 0.2 0.2 1.1 0.6 0.1  1.4 Israel 3.3 3.7 2.2 0.4 3.1 4.0 4.8 3.6 4.1 3.1 3.2 Denmark 3.5 6.6 6.6 6.3 7.8 8.9 9.2 7.9 7.3 7.0 6.2 New Zealand  2.2  2.3  2.8  3.9  3.2  3.2  3.4  2.8  3.6  3.8  3.9 Puerto Rico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Macao SAR 28.2 39.4 40.9 39.3 40.2 34.2 25.4 27.4 33.0 34.5 37.0 Iceland  9.6  6.6  5.3  4.0 6.0 4.0 5.4 7.9 6.2 6.1 5.1 San Marino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Memorandum Major Advanced Economies  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  0.7  0.6  0.5  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.4 Euro Area2 0.4 0.5 0.8 2.2 2.8 3.0 3.7 3.5 3.6 3.5 3.2 1Data corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 2Data calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 261 Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (Percent of GDP) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Commonwealth of Independent States1 2.5 3.2 4.0 2.4 0.6 2.1 2.8 0.0 0.9 1.3 2.2 Russia 3.8 4.1 4.7 3.2 1.5 2.8 5.0 2.0 2.8 3.2 4.0 Excluding Russia  1.8 0.2 1.7  0.6  2.3  0.1  3.0  5.6  4.6  4.0  2.2 Armenia  16.5  13.6  10.4  10.0  7.3  7.6  2.6  2.3  3.6  3.2  5.1 Azerbaijan 23.0 28.0 26.5 21.9 16.1 13.3  0.4  3.6 1.9 2.5 5.4 Belarus  12.5  14.5  8.2  2.8  10.0  6.6  3.3  3.6  5.3  4.6  2.5 Georgia  10.5  10.3  12.8  11.7  5.8  10.7  12.0  13.3  11.9  10.7  9.1 Kazakhstan  3.6 0.9 5.3 0.5 0.5 2.8  2.8  6.4  5.3  3.8 0.5 Kyrgyz Republic 0.9  2.2  2.9 3.7  13.3  16.0  16.0  9.7  11.6  12.0  9.7 Moldova  8.2  7.5  11.7  7.5  5.2  5.3  5.0  3.8  4.0  4.0  5.4 Tajikistan  3.6  9.6  7.3  9.2  7.8  2.8  6.0  3.8  6.3  6.2  4.3 Turkmenistan  16.6  12.9  0.8  0.9  7.3  6.4  14.0  21.0  15.4  14.3  11.9 Ukraine2  1.4  2.2  6.3  8.1  9.2  3.9  0.3  4.1  3.3  3.0  3.0 Uzbekistan 2.6 6.6 5.8 1.2 2.9 1.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 0.3  2.0 Emerging and Developing Asia 3.4 2.4 0.9 1.0 0.7 1.5 2.0 1.4 0.9 0.7  0.4 Bangladesh 2.4 0.4  1.0 0.7 1.2 1.2 1.6 0.6  0.7  1.3  2.4 Bhutan  6.3  22.2  29.8  21.5  25.4  26.4  28.3  29.1  29.4  16.6 10.0 Brunei Darussalam 32.3 36.6 34.7 29.8 20.9 30.7 16.0 9.6 4.8  2.1 14.1 Cambodia  9.9  9.3  5.9  8.2  13.0  9.8  9.3  8.8  8.6  8.6  8.0 China 4.7 3.9 1.8 2.5 1.5 2.2 2.7 1.7 1.4 1.2 0.2 Fiji  4.0  4.3  5.1  1.4  9.7  7.6  1.5  5.1  5.0  4.7  3.3 India  2.8  2.8  4.2  4.8  1.7  1.3  1.1  0.7  1.4  1.5  2.4 Indonesia 1.8 0.7 0.2  2.7  3.2  3.1  2.0  1.8  1.7  1.8  1.9 Kiribati  13.3  2.2  13.5  4.5 8.4 25.1 35.2 15.4  4.6  5.9  2.9 Lao P.D.R.  17.0  15.6  14.3  24.9  26.7  18.3  16.5  10.6  9.6  10.9  4.8 Malaysia 15.0 10.1 10.9 5.2 3.5 4.4 3.0 2.4 2.4 2.2 1.8 Maldives  9.6  7.3  14.8  6.6  4.3  3.2  7.3  19.6  17.2  17.0  10.3 Marshall Islands  10.3  20.9 2.0 0.1  5.3 1.9 16.5 8.5 5.9 4.5  0.7 Micronesia  19.0  15.4  18.8  13.4  10.1 1.2 4.2 3.2 3.4 3.0 2.9 Mongolia  6.0  13.0  26.5  27.4  25.4  11.5  4.0  6.3  4.9  8.7  4.1 Myanmar  1.2  1.1  1.8  4.0  4.9  3.3  5.2  5.9  6.6  6.6  6.4 Nauru 63.8 46.3 26.1 38.1 18.8  13.5  9.5 1.7 0.7  1.3 2.1 Nepal 4.2  2.4  1.0 4.8 3.3 4.5 5.0 6.3  0.4  0.7  1.9 Palau  9.9  9.0  11.8  11.2  11.6  15.0  7.7  10.3  12.1  14.4  12.3 Papua New Guinea  8.3  20.4  24.0  36.1  31.3 2.9 19.8 20.1 18.6 17.3 16.5 Philippines 5.0 3.6 2.5 2.8 4.2 3.8 2.5 0.2  0.1  0.3  1.0 Samoa  4.9  7.0  4.3  6.3  0.4  8.1  3.0  6.1  5.7  5.0  4.0 Solomon Islands  21.9  32.9  8.3 1.7  3.4  4.3  3.0  3.9  5.0  5.0  6.0 Sri Lanka  0.4  1.9  7.1  5.8  3.4  2.5  2.4  2.4  2.5  2.3  2.0 Thailand 7.9 3.4 2.5  0.4  1.2 3.7 8.1 11.5 10.1 8.1 2.9 Timor-Leste 40.4 42.0 41.4 41.0 42.3 27.0 7.7  19.3  5.6  15.9  17.0 Tonga  19.7  19.0  16.8  12.3  8.3  10.7  14.7  12.8  13.5  13.6  11.4 Tuvalu 6.9  42.2  63.6  36.4  22.3  23.1  27.0  34.0  37.7  39.0  27.8 Vanuatu  7.9  5.4  8.1  6.5  3.3  0.3  10.5  3.7  14.4  13.6  4.7 Vietnam  6.5  3.8 0.2 6.0 4.5 4.9  0.1 4.1 1.3 1.4 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe  3.4  5.0  6.3  4.4  3.6  2.9  2.0  1.8  2.4  2.5  2.8 Albania  15.9  11.3  13.2  10.1  9.3  10.8  8.6  7.6  9.2  8.2  6.2 Bosnia and Herzegovina  6.4  6.1  9.5  8.7  5.3  7.4  5.5  4.5  4.3  4.2  4.9 Bulgaria  8.3  1.7 0.3  0.9 1.3 0.1  0.1 4.2 2.5 1.9  0.4 Croatia  5.1  1.1  0.7 0.0 1.0 2.1 4.8 2.6 3.8 3.0 0.5 Hungary  0.8 0.3 0.7 1.8 3.8 2.1 3.4 5.5 4.8 4.2 1.4 Kosovo  9.2  11.6  12.7  5.8  3.6  7.0  8.5  9.8  11.0  11.3  10.0 FYR Macedonia  6.8  2.0  2.5  3.2  1.6  0.5  2.1  3.1  2.3  2.5  3.1 Montenegro  27.9  22.7  17.6  18.5  14.5  15.2  13.3  19.0  20.2  21.2  14.0 Poland  4.1  5.4  5.2  3.7  1.3  2.1  0.6  0.2  1.0  1.2  2.2 Romania  4.8  5.1  4.9  4.8  1.1  0.7  1.2  2.3  3.0  2.9  2.9 Serbia  6.2  6.4  8.6  11.5  6.1  6.0  4.7  4.0  4.0  3.9  3.7 Turkey  1.8  5.8  8.9  5.5  6.7  4.7  3.7  3.8  4.6  4.6  3.8  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 262 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued) (Percent of GDP) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Latin America and the Caribbean  0.9  1.9  2.0  2.3  2.8  3.1  3.4  2.0  2.0  2.3  2.6 Antigua and Barbuda  13.8  14.5  10.3  14.8  15.1 2.0 6.8 0.2 1.4  0.8  0.1 Argentina 2.2  0.4  1.0  0.4  2.1  1.5  2.7  2.7  3.6  3.7  4.3 The Bahamas  10.3  10.1  14.1  17.1  16.9  21.9  13.6  12.9  17.8  14.0  7.1 Barbados  6.6  5.7  12.6  9.0  8.9  9.9  6.5  4.6  3.3  3.0  2.7 Belize  4.9  2.5  1.1  1.2  4.6  7.5  9.9  9.4  8.0  6.6  4.9 Bolivia 4.3 3.9 0.3 7.2 2.4 1.7  5.7  5.7  4.7  4.8  4.4 Brazil  1.6  3.4  2.9  3.0  3.0  4.2  3.3  1.3  1.4  1.8  2.0 Chile 1.9 1.4  1.7  4.0  4.1  1.7  1.9  1.4  2.3  2.8  3.5 Colombia  2.0  3.0  2.9  3.1  3.3  5.2  6.4  4.3  3.8  3.6  2.9 Costa Rica  1.8  3.2  5.3  5.1  4.8  4.9  4.3  3.2  3.9  4.0  4.1 Dominica  22.7  15.9  14.1  17.3  9.8  7.2  1.9 0.8  6.2  7.3 0.2 Dominican Republic  4.8  7.5  7.5  6.4  4.1  3.3  2.0  1.5  1.6  2.6  3.6 Ecuador 0.5  2.3  0.5  0.2  1.0  0.5  2.1 1.4  0.7  1.6  1.6 El Salvador  1.5  2.5  4.8  5.4  6.5  4.8  3.6  2.0  1.0  2.1  4.4 Grenada  24.3  23.7  23.6  21.1  23.2  4.4  3.8  3.2  7.1  6.3  5.0 Guatemala 0.7  1.4  3.4  2.6  2.5  2.1  0.3 1.0 0.5  0.2  2.5 Guyana  9.1  9.6  13.0  11.6  13.3  9.6  5.7 0.4  2.0  1.1 3.6 Haiti  1.9  1.5  4.3  5.7  6.6  8.5  3.1  0.9  1.1  0.9 0.3 Honduras  3.8  4.3  8.0  8.6  9.6  7.0  5.5  3.8  4.0  4.2  4.4 Jamaica  11.0  8.0  12.2  11.1  9.2  7.5  3.2  2.2  2.7  3.0  3.0 Mexico  1.0  0.5  1.1  1.3  2.5  1.8  2.5  2.2  1.7  2.0  2.2 Nicaragua  8.5  8.9  11.9  10.7  10.9  7.1  9.0  8.6  8.4  8.4  10.2 Panama  0.8  10.8  13.2  10.5  9.8  13.7  7.3  5.7  5.1  3.3  2.8 Paraguay 3.0  0.3 0.4  2.0 1.7  0.4  1.1 1.7 1.1 0.4 0.5 Peru  0.5  2.4  1.9  2.7  4.4  4.4  4.8  2.7  1.5  1.6  2.3 St. Kitts and Nevis  25.2  20.4  13.0  7.6  11.1  4.9  9.7  11.4  12.8  11.1  10.9 St. Lucia  10.8  14.7  16.9  12.2  9.8 3.3 6.8  1.9  0.5  3.6  0.2 St. Vincent and the Grenadines  29.2  30.6  29.4  27.6  30.9  25.7  14.9  15.8  14.7  13.6  11.3 Suriname 2.9 14.9 9.8 3.3  3.8  7.9  16.4  2.8 9.4 6.1 1.1 Trinidad and Tobago 8.6 18.8 16.8 13.1 20.5 15.1 3.9  11.3  9.0  8.4  7.0 Uruguay  1.2  1.8  2.7  5.1  5.0  4.5  2.1  0.1  0.4  0.8  1.5 Venezuela 0.2 1.9 4.9 0.8 2.0 2.3  6.6  1.6  0.4  1.3  1.6 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 1.5 6.2 12.8 12.4 9.7 5.5  3.7  4.1  1.9  1.6  0.1 Afghanistan 41.5 29.2 26.7 10.8 0.3 5.7 3.0 7.1 4.7 1.6  3.8 Algeria 0.3 7.5 9.9 5.9 0.4  4.4  16.5  16.5  13.0  10.8  6.7 Bahrain 2.4 3.0 8.8 8.4 7.4 4.6  2.4  4.7  4.6  4.2  3.1 Djibouti  6.6 2.8  13.1  18.8  23.3  25.1  31.8  30.4  21.0  18.2  17.3 Egypt  3.8  1.9  2.5  3.6  2.2  0.8  3.6  6.0  5.9  3.8  2.2 Iran 2.2 4.4 10.4 6.0 6.7 3.2 2.4 4.1 5.1 5.9 6.2 Iraq  11.5 1.6 10.9 5.1 1.1 2.6  6.5  8.7  6.3  6.7  0.6 Jordan  5.2  7.1  10.3  15.2  10.4  7.3  9.1  9.3  8.4  8.3  6.2 Kuwait 26.7 31.8 42.9 45.5 39.9 33.4 3.5  4.5  0.6  1.4  1.0 Lebanon  11.9  20.3  15.4  24.0  26.7  26.4  18.7  18.6  18.0  16.8  15.6 Libya3 18.5 21.1 9.9 29.9 0.0  78.4  52.6  22.4 1.8 9.8  0.5 Mauritania  13.4  8.2  5.0  24.1  22.0  27.3  19.7  14.9  14.2  9.6  7.9 Morocco  5.4  4.4  7.6  9.3  7.6  5.9  2.1  4.4  4.0  2.9  1.0 Oman  1.0 8.3 13.0 10.1 6.6 5.8  15.5  18.6  14.3  13.2  6.1 Pakistan  5.5  2.2 0.1  2.1  1.1  1.3  1.0  1.7  4.0  4.9  3.0 Qatar 6.5 19.1 31.1 33.2 30.4 24.0 8.4  4.9 2.3 1.0 1.0 Saudi Arabia 4.9 12.7 23.6 22.4 18.1 9.8  8.7  4.3 0.6 0.4 1.6 Somalia . . . . . . . . . . . .  4.8  6.3  7.2  10.1  11.1  10.7  10.0 Sudan4  9.6  2.1  0.4  9.3  8.7  7.1  8.0  5.6  1.9  2.0  1.5 Syria5  2.9  2.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tunisia  2.8  4.8  7.4  8.3  8.4  9.1  8.9  9.0  8.7  8.4  6.2 United Arab Emirates 3.1 4.2 12.6 19.7 19.0 13.3 4.7 2.4 2.1 2.1 3.7 Yemen  10.1  3.4  3.0  1.7  3.1  1.7  5.5  5.6  2.3  2.4  3.2  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 263 Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued) (Percent of GDP) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2022 Sub-Saharan Africa  2.4  0.8  0.8  1.8  2.4  3.9  6.1  4.2  3.4  3.6  4.1 Angola  10.0 9.1 12.6 12.0 6.7  3.0  10.0  5.1  4.8  4.5  4.1 Benin  8.3  8.2  7.3  7.4  7.4  8.6  8.4  7.2  8.7  7.1  6.2 Botswana  6.3  2.6 3.1 0.3 8.9 15.4 7.8 11.7 4.5 2.8 3.9 Burkina Faso  4.7  2.2  1.5  7.0  11.3  8.0  8.0  6.8  7.2  7.1  6.7 Burundi 1.7  12.2  14.4  18.6  19.3  18.5  17.7  13.1  12.4  11.8  9.5 Cabo Verde  14.6  12.4  16.3  12.6  4.9  9.1  5.0  3.7  6.1  6.0  5.4 Cameroon  3.5  2.8  3.0  3.6  3.9  4.3  4.1  3.6  3.6  3.5  1.7 Central African Republic  9.1  10.2  7.6  4.6  3.0  5.6  9.0  9.1  9.7  6.5  5.1 Chad  8.2  8.5  5.8  7.8  9.1  8.9  12.3  9.2  2.0  2.8  3.1 Comoros  6.9  0.2  4.9  7.3  8.3  8.0 0.4  10.1  9.5  11.3  13.1 Democratic Republic of the Congo  6.1  10.5  5.2  4.6  5.2  4.8  3.9  3.4  4.6  2.1  2.0 Republic of Congo  14.1 7.8  3.2 17.7 1.7  11.6  42.9  70.1  15.9 2.5  5.0 C te d Ivoire 6.6 1.9 10.4  1.2  1.4 1.4  0.6  1.1  2.9  2.8  2.5 Equatorial Guinea  9.7  20.2  5.7  1.1  2.5  4.3  17.7  10.5  8.0  7.4  4.7 Eritrea  7.6  5.6 0.6 2.3  0.1 0.6  2.2  0.1 0.7 0.3  1.2 Ethiopia  6.7  1.4  2.5  6.9  5.9  6.4  11.6  9.9  8.3  7.4  6.4 Gabon 4.4 14.9 21.0 17.6 7.0 7.3  5.7  10.2  9.3  6.7 1.5 The Gambia  12.5  0.7  12.3  7.9  10.2  10.8  15.0  8.9  9.4  12.0  12.0 Ghana  5.5  8.6  9.0  11.7  11.9  9.5  7.7  6.7  5.8  5.4  4.3 Guinea  5.7  6.4  18.4  20.0  12.5  13.4  15.4  31.9  25.0  21.4  11.8 Guinea-Bissau  5.8  8.3  1.3  8.4  5.0 0.6 2.0 0.9 0.1  0.6  1.2 Kenya  4.4  5.9  9.2  8.4  8.8  10.4  6.8  5.2  6.1  7.0  7.3 Lesotho 1.5  8.4  12.9  8.2  5.5  5.2  4.8  7.7  8.5  9.4  13.2 Liberia  23.2  32.0  27.4  21.5  30.1  26.9  35.2  24.7  26.7  31.3  22.4 Madagascar  21.1  9.7  6.9  6.9  5.9  0.3  1.9 0.8  4.7  5.3  4.0 Malawi  10.2  8.6  8.6  9.3  8.4  8.4  9.5  13.5  9.1  8.1  7.4 Mali  10.8  10.7  5.1  2.2  2.9  4.7  5.3  7.1  7.0  5.6  5.7 Mauritius  7.4  10.3  13.8  7.3  6.3  5.7  4.9  4.4  5.8  6.2  0.3 Mozambique  10.9  16.1  25.3  44.7  42.9  38.2  40.3  38.2  25.6  45.8  114.1 Namibia  1.5  3.5  3.0  5.7  4.0  10.8  12.6  14.0  7.3  6.6  6.0 Niger  24.4  19.8  22.3  14.7  15.0  15.4  18.0  15.5  18.6  18.3  14.1 Nigeria 4.7 3.6 2.6 3.8 3.7 0.2  3.2 0.7 1.9 1.0 0.7 Rwanda  7.0  7.2  7.4  11.2  8.7  11.8  13.4  14.4  10.2  11.2  8.0 S o Tom  and Pr ncipe  24.7  22.9  27.7  21.9  13.8  21.9  13.0  6.2  10.2  9.9  7.8 Senegal  6.7  4.4  8.0  10.9  10.5  9.0  7.5  5.3  5.1  5.2  5.7 Seychelles  14.8  19.4  23.0  21.1  11.9  23.1  18.6  18.4  15.6  14.6  14.4 Sierra Leone  13.3  22.7  65.0  31.8  17.5  18.2  17.4  19.7  21.1  18.5  15.1 South Africa  2.7  1.5  2.2  5.1  5.9  5.3  4.4  3.3  2.9  3.3  3.8 South Sudan . . . . . . 18.2  15.9  3.9  1.6  7.2 4.7 1.7  12.7  4.5 Swaziland  11.2  8.6  6.9 3.3 5.3 3.4 10.8 0.7  1.1 0.2 1.3 Tanzania  7.6  7.7  10.8  11.6  10.6  10.1  8.5  5.6  5.6  6.5  6.7 Togo  5.6  6.3  8.0  7.5  13.2  9.9  11.1  9.7  8.3  7.3  4.3 Uganda  5.7  8.0  10.0  6.8  7.0  8.5  7.1  4.3  5.6  7.2  3.6 Zambia 6.0 7.5 4.7 5.4  0.6 2.1  3.9  4.4  3.6  2.8  0.4 Zimbabwe6  13.7  12.5  20.1  12.9  15.6  15.1  9.3  4.1  3.6  0.8  1.9 1Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. 2Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol. 3See country-specific notes for Libya in the  Country Notes  section of the Statistical Appendix. 4Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan. 5Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation. 6The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in US dollars. IMF staff estimates of US dollar values may differ from authorities  estimates.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 264 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (Billions of US dollars) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Advanced Economies Financial Account Balance 12.8  96.7  210.1  122.3 235.8 380.5 440.8 470.5 389.0 367.2 Direct Investment, Net 303.6 341.0 358.7 112.4 165.9 167.3 74.4  180.7 204.7 152.7 Portfolio Investment, Net  376.4  745.2  900.7  201.8  360.8  152.2  20.0 428.9 272.0 179.6 Financial Derivatives, Net  94.1  118.2 0.7  92.2 33.5  34.5  24.2 67.5 17.1 26.4 Other Investment, Net  287.2 63.9  44.8  215.1 245.1 263.9 183.5 55.7  235.9  62.6 Change in Reserves 469.6 352.9 349.8 273.2 153.1 134.9 226.6 97.8 128.9 72.9 United States Financial Account Balance  239.4  446.4  525.6  448.9  404.0  326.8  333.2  377.7  460.6  528.7 Direct Investment, Net 151.5 85.8 173.1 126.9 104.7 101.2  195.0  167.8  17.2  109.6 Portfolio Investment, Net 18.5  620.8  226.3  498.3  30.7  120.8  53.6  196.7  319.6  421.5 Financial Derivatives, Net  44.8  14.1  35.0 7.1 2.2  54.3  25.2 15.8  16.2  23.8 Other Investment, Net  416.9 100.9  453.4  89.0  477.1  249.4  53.0  31.0  107.4 26.2 Change in Reserves 52.3 1.8 15.9 4.5  3.1  3.6  6.3 2.1  0.2 0.0 Euro Area Financial Account Balance 31.6  20.1  66.0 179.3 437.3 336.2 332.4 396.4 . . . . . . Direct Investment, Net 41.6 84.3 130.3 58.2 36.8 81.3 263.1 199.9 . . . . . . Portfolio Investment, Net  347.0  66.8  349.6  177.3  169.6 43.7 135.5 526.4 . . . . . . Financial Derivatives, Net 15.7  4.4 5.5 38.9 42.1 60.8 100.3 25.0 . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 262.9  46.9 133.5 240.6 521.8 144.6  178.2  372.0 . . . . . . Change in Reserves 58.4 13.7 14.3 19.0 6.2 5.8 11.7 17.1 . . . . . . Germany Financial Account Balance 184.4 123.7 167.7 194.3 300.0 316.3 259.6 260.5 296.0 304.3 Direct Investment, Net 43.0 60.6 10.3 33.6 26.0 96.6 59.9 23.8 60.1 53.8 Portfolio Investment, Net 119.2 154.1  51.4 66.8 209.6 175.0 217.9 230.4 224.4 251.0 Financial Derivatives, Net  7.5 17.6 39.8 30.9 31.8 42.3 29.2 36.1 38.0 38.5 Other Investment, Net 17.4  110.7 165.1 61.1 31.4 5.6  45.0  31.7  26.5  39.0 Change in Reserves 12.4 2.1 3.9 1.7 1.2  3.3  2.4 1.9 0.0 0.0 France Financial Account Balance  30.7  34.2  74.6  48.0  19.2  10.3  13.5  22.7  26.9  19.3 Direct Investment, Net 70.3 34.3 19.8 19.4  13.9 47.2  2.6 1.4 5.6 10.1 Portfolio Investment, Net  328.7  155.0  333.7  50.6  79.3  23.8 51.5 40.7 29.6 31.1 Financial Derivatives, Net 23.6  34.8  19.4  18.4  22.3  31.8 12.0 15.1 19.3 24.3 Other Investment, Net 212.0 105.1 240.3  3.6 98.2  2.9  82.4  82.1  83.7  87.3 Change in Reserves  5.5 7.7  7.7 5.2  1.9 1.0 8.0 2.2 2.3 2.5 Italy Financial Account Balance  51.8  111.2  89.6  13.1 16.9 58.2 30.4 70.7 50.9 47.5 Direct Investment, Net  0.2 21.3 17.2 6.8 0.9 3.1 3.0  6.2 3.1 10.6 Portfolio Investment, Net  53.1 58.4 15.9  31.3  17.5  4.7 99.3 170.3 42.9 40.7 Financial Derivatives, Net  6.9 6.6  10.1 7.5 4.0  4.8 3.7 3.5 3.4 2.5 Other Investment, Net  0.4  198.9  113.9 2.1 27.5 65.9  76.2  95.7 1.4  6.3 Change in Reserves 8.8 1.4 1.3 1.9 2.0  1.3 0.6  1.3 0.0 0.0  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 265 Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued) (Billions of US dollars) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Spain Financial Account Balance  72.8  58.9  43.4 0.5 41.6 14.0 24.8 29.6 29.9 34.4 Direct Investment, Net 2.7  1.9 12.8  27.2  24.6 10.7 32.6 23.5 24.1 25.3 Portfolio Investment, Net  69.6  46.6 43.1 53.7  83.6  13.5 11.2 52.3  17.2  15.7 Financial Derivatives, Net 8.4  11.4 2.9  10.7 1.4 0.2  1.4  3.2 0.0 0.0 Other Investment, Net  20.4 0.0  116.2  18.2 147.8 11.6  23.3  52.1 23.0 24.8 Change in Reserves 6.0 1.1 13.9 2.8 0.7 5.1 5.6 9.1 0.0 0.0 Japan Financial Account Balance 168.8 247.3 158.4 53.9  4.3 58.9 178.6 266.7 171.6 187.7 Direct Investment, Net 61.2 72.5 117.8 117.5 144.7 118.6 131.0 134.6 121.7 126.0 Portfolio Investment, Net 211.7 147.9  162.9 28.8  280.6  42.2 131.5 282.2 198.0 191.0 Financial Derivatives, Net  10.5  11.9  17.1 6.7 58.1 34.0 17.7  16.7  8.2  8.5 Other Investment, Net  120.9  5.5 43.4  61.1 34.8  60.1  106.7  127.7  149.9  131.2 Change in Reserves 27.2 44.3 177.3  37.9 38.7 8.5 5.1  5.7 10.0 10.5 United Kingdom Financial Account Balance  45.4  46.8  37.6  83.7  122.9  129.5  102.7  147.3  92.9  88.4 Direct Investment, Net  61.0  10.1 53.4  34.9  11.2  193.4  115.2  267.5 5.1 0.0 Portfolio Investment, Net  48.5 21.3 11.4 338.3  86.8  204.4  415.8  256.1 0.0 0.0 Financial Derivatives, Net  45.5  39.4 4.8  58.6 18.1  1.0  48.6 35.9  8.0  0.2 Other Investment, Net 100.6  28.0  115.1  340.6  50.7 257.5 444.7 331.5  102.1  100.9 Change in Reserves 9.0 9.4 7.9 12.1 7.8 11.7 32.2 8.8 12.1 12.6 Canada Financial Account Balance  41.6  58.3  49.4  62.7  56.9  43.5  53.4  47.8  55.6  51.2 Direct Investment, Net 16.9 6.3 12.5 12.8  12.0 1.4 25.5 35.3 10.5 11.5 Portfolio Investment, Net  91.0  109.9  104.3  63.8  27.1  26.2  35.8  114.6  47.3  53.3 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 22.3 41.4 34.3  13.4  22.5  24.0  51.6 25.9  18.7  9.3 Change in Reserves 10.2 3.9 8.1 1.7 4.7 5.3 8.5 5.6 0.0 0.0 Other Advanced Economies1 Financial Account Balance 149.9 286.5 287.5 248.5 372.4 368.8 371.2 345.1 364.0 357.0 Direct Investment, Net 21.9 93.9  6.7  35.1 25.5  9.8  85.5  55.4  91.8  82.5 Portfolio Investment, Net  108.0  51.4 38.9 138.8 130.9 185.4 318.3 246.4 235.9 239.1 Financial Derivatives, Net 17.7  17.9 41.1  28.8  28.7  21.9  17.4  0.2  14.5  14.0 Other Investment, Net  114.0  17.3 89.3  101.8 144.2 108.1  21.7 83.7 128.7 170.1 Change in Reserves 332.5 279.3 125.1 274.7 101.3 106.3 175.9 69.7 103.5 46.1 Emerging Market and Developing Economies Financial Account Balance 66.4 135.7 240.4 118.7 24.1 18.9  266.9  419.9  128.6  137.5 Direct Investment, Net  326.4  452.7  531.6  484.3  482.8  412.0  341.0  272.6  217.5  189.8 Portfolio Investment, Net  85.9  224.4  149.9  241.0  160.1  115.4 112.3  10.0  71.0  19.0 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net  44.3  23.8 169.2 411.7 79.8 409.4 472.5 353.0 283.6 44.3 Change in Reserves 524.4 835.6 748.0 431.0 589.5 128.4  515.8  479.6  112.0 39.1  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 266 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued) (Billions of US dollars) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States2 Financial Account Balance 28.7 75.5 100.7 50.1  8.4 12.0 54.2 0.6 22.2 30.1 Direct Investment, Net  15.5  8.5  15.2  27.6  3.7 19.2 0.5  36.0  9.6  4.0 Portfolio Investment, Net  6.1  14.2 17.9 3.5  0.2 28.8 12.0  2.1  5.8  1.9 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 36.4 36.0 64.3 42.6 17.6 72.8 41.3 28.0 12.4 6.2 Change in Reserves 10.6 60.5 31.9 30.1  22.5  114.1  6.9 10.2 24.8 29.5 Emerging and Developing Asia Financial Account Balance 214.2 148.4 65.2 9.7 32.9 147.6 86.7  26.0 161.7 131.8 Direct Investment, Net  114.6  225.0  277.3  221.9  273.2  205.2  141.1  21.9 7.5 44.3 Portfolio Investment, Net  67.0  91.3  58.0  115.6  64.7  123.9 82.7 41.5 27.1 41.7 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . 0.2  0.3 1.5  2.0 0.4  1.5  10.2  10.8  11.3 Other Investment, Net  63.2  97.5  28.7 207.1  78.4 281.0 462.5 345.0 234.3 54.6 Change in Reserves 461.6 563.0 431.3 139.4 450.7 195.1  316.1  380.3  95.9 2.9 Emerging and Developing Europe Financial Account Balance  51.4  89.1  107.1  65.4  61.7  42.5  8.8  13.0  39.9  36.9 Direct Investment, Net  30.6  26.7  39.8  27.5  25.8  32.5  34.0  28.0  27.0  32.2 Portfolio Investment, Net  10.1  45.8  53.5  70.0  40.0  19.3 24.7  5.0  34.0  14.1 Financial Derivatives, Net 0.9 0.0 1.6  2.9  1.4 0.3  1.7 0.1 0.0 0.1 Other Investment, Net  42.5  52.5  30.1 7.3  13.0 9.2 12.6  3.6 9.4  4.6 Change in Reserves 31.0 35.9 14.6 27.8 18.5  0.2  10.4 23.6 11.7 14.0 Latin America and the Caribbean Financial Account Balance  36.0  119.9  127.7  148.9  192.7  201.8  189.2  108.4  112.4  124.9 Direct Investment, Net  73.5  112.3  148.0  154.2  150.2  137.6  133.6  140.2  127.6  129.5 Portfolio Investment, Net  26.0  96.8  110.5  87.6  103.3  110.0  60.0  50.9  51.7  44.0 Financial Derivatives, Net  2.5 0.6 5.5 2.3 1.4 4.4 1.5  1.3  0.5  0.4 Other Investment, Net 11.6  2.0 15.6 31.6 47.4 2.3 32.0 64.0 54.5 34.0 Change in Reserves 54.4 90.7 109.8 59.0 11.9 39.2  29.2 19.9 12.8 15.0 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan Financial Account Balance  41.5 121.8 319.2 286.4 308.0 180.6  130.4  204.6  107.7  81.8 Direct Investment, Net  63.6  48.9  21.6  25.6  8.8  28.8  2.5  9.5  20.8  22.4 Portfolio Investment, Net 31.7 24.1 73.3 57.1 70.4 131.0 67.8 20.1 9.3 7.7 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 16.1 60.5 129.4 100.3 118.0 62.0  56.9  72.5  30.5  41.6 Change in Reserves  25.7 86.1 138.1 154.7 128.2 16.0  139.2  143.1  66.0  25.9 Sub-Saharan Africa Financial Account Balance  47.6  1.0  9.9  13.2  54.0  77.1  79.3  68.5  52.5  55.8 Direct Investment, Net  28.5  31.2  29.7  27.4  21.0  27.0  30.3  37.0  39.9  46.0 Portfolio Investment, Net  8.5  0.4  19.2  28.4  22.3  22.1  15.0  13.7  15.9  8.3 Financial Derivatives, Net  0.2  0.2  1.7  1.7  0.8  1.5  0.4 0.9 0.0 0.0 Other Investment, Net  2.7 31.6 18.8 22.8  11.8  18.0  19.0  7.9 3.5  4.3 Change in Reserves  7.6  0.5 22.2 19.8 2.7  7.7  14.0  9.9 0.6 3.6  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 267 Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued) (Billions of US dollars) Projections 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel Financial Account Balance 17.3 257.2 516.6 453.6 366.7 224.0  79.3  163.2  43.8  10.0 Direct Investment, Net  53.7  25.6  21.1  25.7 13.0 10.6 7.9  26.1  14.3  8.7 Portfolio Investment, Net 11.0 20.3 87.0 47.2 78.1 162.4 80.1 19.0 12.2 15.7 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 104.9 146.5 254.5 196.0 175.4 152.8 15.4 4.7 8.6  8.2 Change in Reserves  48.1 114.2 194.9 234.7 99.8  107.1  190.0  161.2  50.7  9.0 Nonfuel Financial Account Balance 51.5  119.9  276.2  335.0  342.7  205.1  187.6  256.7  84.8  127.6 Direct Investment, Net  270.1  424.8  510.5  458.6  495.7  422.6  348.9  246.5  203.2  181.0 Portfolio Investment, Net  97.1  244.7  236.9  288.1  238.2  277.8 32.1  29.0  83.3  34.7 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . 0.5 5.8  1.0  2.7 3.6  2.0  10.5  11.3  11.7 Other Investment, Net  149.3  170.0  85.3 215.7  95.6 256.6 457.2 348.4 275.0 52.5 Change in Reserves 572.8 720.4 553.1 196.2 489.7 235.5  325.8  318.4  61.3 48.1 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies Financial Account Balance  187.7  287.9  392.2  427.8  430.5  375.8  282.7  225.4  235.8  265.6 Direct Investment, Net  196.3  222.9  283.7  283.0  281.3  289.0  281.8  297.2  287.7  311.6 Portfolio Investment, Net  61.4  212.2  182.8  202.3  179.2  198.4  40.3  52.7  103.6  61.7 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net  73.8  86.0  63.5  51.3  28.3  10.7 38.4 41.4 70.3 35.8 Change in Reserves 149.1 233.5 135.1 109.7 60.2 117.3 2.8 95.5 97.1 84.4 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16 Financial Account Balance  19.9  11.7  25.2  47.4  49.5  27.7  39.4  50.3  31.1  28.6 Direct Investment, Net  20.7  21.6  22.5  25.8  25.0  18.2  25.4  25.5  23.2  26.5 Portfolio Investment, Net 14.1  11.2 1.0  1.4  10.1  0.4 1.7  0.9  14.1  7.2 Financial Derivatives, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Investment, Net 0.1 9.1 6.9  0.7  11.7 1.8  20.9  21.9 4.3  6.7 Change in Reserves  13.1 12.2  10.2  21.4  2.1  10.5 5.4  1.5 2.2 12.3 Memorandum World Financial Account Balance 79.1 38.9 30.3  3.7 259.9 399.4 174.0 50.6 260.4 229.7 Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries  national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available because of data constraints. 1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 268 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (Percent of GDP) Projections Averages Average 1999 2008 2003 10 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 22 Advanced Economies Net Lending and Borrowing  0.8  0.7 0.0 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 Current Account Balance  0.8  0.7  0.1 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 Savings 22.4 21.5 21.0 21.4 21.6 22.2 22.5 22.0 22.0 22.0 22.3 Investment 23.0 22.2 21.1 21.0 20.9 21.2 21.2 20.9 21.1 21.3 21.6 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0  0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 United States Net Lending and Borrowing  4.5  4.5  2.9  2.6  2.1  2.1  2.4  2.4  2.4  2.6  2.6 Current Account Balance  4.5  4.5  2.9  2.6  2.1  2.1  2.4  2.4  2.4  2.6  2.6 Savings 18.3 16.7 15.7 17.7 18.3 19.3 19.4 18.0 17.5 17.4 17.7 Investment 22.4 21.2 18.5 19.4 19.8 20.1 20.4 19.7 19.8 20.0 20.3 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Euro Area Net Lending and Borrowing  0.1 0.1 0.1 1.5 2.4 2.6 3.1 3.4 . . . . . . . . . Current Account Balance  0.2  0.1 0.0 1.4 2.2 2.5 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.0 2.8 Savings 23.1 22.6 22.4 22.3 22.4 22.9 23.7 23.8 24.2 24.3 24.6 Investment 22.8 22.3 21.5 20.1 19.6 19.9 20.0 20.3 20.6 20.8 21.3 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1  0.1 0.0 . . . . . . . . . Germany Net Lending and Borrowing 2.7 5.0 6.1 7.0 6.7 7.5 8.5 8.4 8.1 7.7 7.1 Current Account Balance 2.7 5.0 6.1 7.0 6.7 7.4 8.5 8.3 8.1 7.7 7.1 Savings 23.5 24.6 27.2 26.3 26.2 27.0 27.7 27.5 27.6 27.3 27.2 Investment 20.9 19.6 21.1 19.3 19.5 19.5 19.1 19.2 19.4 19.6 20.1 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 France Net Lending and Borrowing 1.5 0.2  0.9  1.2  0.8  1.2  0.4  0.9  1.0  0.7  0.1 Current Account Balance 1.5 0.1  1.0  1.2  0.9  1.3  0.4  1.0  1.1  0.8  0.2 Savings 23.8 22.6 22.2 21.4 21.4 21.5 22.3 22.0 22.1 22.3 22.9 Investment 22.4 22.5 23.2 22.6 22.3 22.7 22.8 23.0 23.3 23.0 23.0 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Italy Net Lending and Borrowing  0.5  1.5  2.9  0.1 0.9 2.1 1.6 2.4 2.6 2.3 1.5 Current Account Balance  0.6  1.6  3.0  0.4 1.0 1.9 1.4 2.6 2.7 2.3 1.4 Savings 20.6 19.5 17.5 17.5 17.9 18.9 18.8 19.6 19.6 19.6 19.3 Investment 21.2 21.1 20.5 17.9 17.0 17.0 17.3 17.0 16.9 17.3 17.9 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.2  0.1  0.1 0.0 0.1 Spain Net Lending and Borrowing  5.3  6.0  2.8 0.3 2.2 1.6 2.0 2.1 2.3 2.4 2.4 Current Account Balance  6.1  6.6  3.2  0.2 1.5 1.1 1.4 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0 Savings 22.3 21.7 18.7 19.8 20.2 20.5 21.4 22.3 22.5 22.8 22.8 Investment 28.4 28.4 21.9 20.0 18.7 19.4 20.1 20.4 20.6 20.8 20.9 Capital Account Balance 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.7 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 Japan Net Lending and Borrowing 3.0 3.5 2.1 0.9 0.7 0.7 3.0 3.7 3.5 3.7 3.7 Current Account Balance 3.2 3.6 2.1 1.0 0.9 0.8 3.1 3.8 3.6 3.8 3.7 Savings 28.5 27.3 24.2 23.6 24.1 24.6 27.0 27.2 27.0 27.3 27.6 Investment 25.3 23.7 22.1 22.7 23.2 23.9 23.9 23.3 23.4 23.5 23.9 Capital Account Balance  0.1  0.1 0.0 0.0  0.1 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1 United Kingdom Net Lending and Borrowing  2.2  2.3  1.8  3.7  4.4  4.7  4.3  4.5  3.6  3.3  2.8 Current Account Balance  2.1  2.3  1.8  3.7  4.4  4.7  4.3  4.4  3.6  3.3  2.7 Savings 15.9 14.9 14.1 12.4 12.0 12.7 13.0 12.6 13.4 13.6 14.6 Investment 18.1 17.2 15.8 16.0 16.4 17.3 17.2 17.0 17.0 16.8 17.3 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  0.1  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 269 Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued) (Percent of GDP) Projections Averages Average 1999 2008 2003 10 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 22 Canada Net Lending and Borrowing 1.4 0.1  2.5  3.6  3.2  2.4  3.4  3.3  3.4  2.9  2.3 Current Account Balance 1.4 0.1  2.8  3.6  3.2  2.4  3.4  3.3  3.4  2.9  2.3 Savings 23.1 22.9 21.4 21.3 21.7 22.2 20.4 19.6 19.9 20.5 21.2 Investment 21.7 22.7 24.2 24.9 24.9 24.7 23.8 22.9 23.3 23.4 23.5 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other Advanced Economies1 Net Lending and Borrowing 3.7 4.1 4.2 4.2 5.3 5.2 5.7 5.6 5.2 4.9 4.7 Current Account Balance 3.8 4.2 4.1 4.2 5.2 5.4 5.9 5.7 5.4 5.0 4.8 Savings 29.8 30.2 30.7 30.4 30.5 30.7 31.1 30.5 30.7 30.4 30.0 Investment 25.8 25.8 26.2 26.1 25.2 25.2 24.9 24.7 25.3 25.3 25.2 Capital Account Balance  0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1  0.1  0.2  0.1  0.2  0.1  0.1 Emerging Market and Developing Economies Net Lending and Borrowing 2.4 2.9 1.5 1.3 0.7 0.6 0.0  0.2  0.2  0.3  0.6 Current Account Balance 2.4 2.8 1.4 1.3 0.6 0.5  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.7 Savings 28.7 31.4 33.6 33.4 32.8 33.0 32.7 32.0 31.7 31.5 31.4 Investment 26.6 28.8 32.2 32.4 32.4 32.6 33.0 32.3 32.0 31.9 32.0 Capital Account Balance 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Regional Groups Commonwealth of Independent States2 Net Lending and Borrowing 6.6 5.0 4.1 2.2 0.6 0.6 2.8 0.0 0.9 1.3 2.0 Current Account Balance 7.0 5.3 4.0 2.4 0.6 2.1 2.8 0.0 0.9 1.3 2.0 Savings 27.7 26.9 28.6 27.4 24.7 25.0 26.3 26.0 25.6 26.5 26.2 Investment 20.9 21.5 24.5 25.0 24.0 22.8 23.2 25.5 24.3 24.9 23.8 Capital Account Balance  0.4  0.3 0.0  0.2 0.0  1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Emerging and Developing Asia Net Lending and Borrowing 3.5 4.1 0.9 1.0 0.8 1.6 2.0 1.4 1.0 0.7 0.1 Current Account Balance 3.4 4.0 0.9 1.0 0.7 1.5 2.0 1.4 0.9 0.7 0.0 Savings 37.0 41.5 43.9 43.7 43.0 43.6 42.6 41.1 40.5 39.8 38.5 Investment 34.0 37.7 42.9 42.6 42.3 42.1 40.6 39.7 39.6 39.2 38.5 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Emerging and Developing Europe Net Lending and Borrowing  4.6  5.1  5.5  3.4  2.5  1.6  0.7  1.1  1.7  1.6  2.1 Current Account Balance  4.9  5.5  6.3  4.4  3.6  2.9  2.0  1.8  2.4  2.5  2.7 Savings 19.6 19.6 20.4 20.5 21.5 22.1 22.9 22.6 22.5 22.6 22.7 Investment 24.2 25.1 26.6 24.9 25.0 24.9 24.7 24.2 24.8 25.0 25.3 Capital Account Balance 0.3 0.4 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.6 Latin America and the Caribbean Net Lending and Borrowing  0.4 0.2  1.9  2.3  2.7  3.1  3.3  2.0  1.9  2.3  2.5 Current Account Balance  0.5 0.1  2.0  2.3  2.8  3.1  3.4  2.0  2.0  2.3  2.5 Savings 19.9 20.9 20.3 19.8 19.0 18.0 18.6 17.7 17.7 17.5 18.3 Investment 20.5 21.0 22.2 22.3 22.3 21.8 22.5 20.0 19.7 19.8 20.8 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan Net Lending and Borrowing 8.0 8.8 12.8 11.9 9.9 6.2  3.5  4.0  1.8  1.6  0.5 Current Account Balance 8.3 9.3 12.8 12.4 9.7 5.5  3.7  4.1  1.9  1.6  0.7 Savings 34.3 36.4 39.5 37.9 36.1 32.9 24.8 23.7 25.2 25.4 27.0 Investment 26.4 27.8 26.7 25.9 26.0 26.8 28.1 27.2 26.8 26.6 26.7 Capital Account Balance 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0  0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Sub-Saharan Africa Net Lending and Borrowing 1.9 2.3  0.3  0.6  1.8  3.4  5.6  3.7  3.0  3.2  3.6 Current Account Balance 0.7 0.8  0.8  1.8  2.4  3.9  6.1  4.2  3.4  3.6  4.0 Savings 19.0 20.3 18.7 18.2 17.5 17.1 14.2 14.8 15.3 15.3 15.8 Investment 18.4 19.4 19.3 19.9 19.9 20.8 19.9 18.6 18.7 18.9 19.7 Capital Account Balance 1.2 1.5 0.6 1.2 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 270 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued) (Percent of GDP) Projections Averages Average 1999 2008 2003 10 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 22 Analytical Groups By Source of Export Earnings Fuel Net Lending and Borrowing 9.3 9.7 10.5 9.3 7.3 4.6  1.3  1.8 0.3 0.3 1.3 Current Account Balance 9.7 10.0 10.5 9.7 7.3 5.0  1.4  1.9 0.2 0.4 1.2 Savings 33.6 33.9 35.8 34.5 31.9 29.8 26.0 24.4 25.4 25.4 26.2 Investment 24.4 24.4 25.2 25.3 24.9 25.0 27.6 25.9 24.7 24.4 24.1 Capital Account Balance 0.0 0.0 0.0  0.1 0.0  0.7  0.1  0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Nonfuel Net Lending and Borrowing 0.6 1.0  1.0  0.9  1.0  0.4 0.2 0.1  0.3  0.5  0.9 Current Account Balance 0.4 0.8  1.2  1.1  1.2  0.6 0.1 0.0  0.4  0.6  1.0 Savings 27.4 30.7 33.0 33.2 33.0 33.8 34.0 33.3 32.9 32.6 32.2 Investment 27.2 30.0 34.0 34.2 34.2 34.3 34.0 33.4 33.3 33.2 33.3 Capital Account Balance 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 By External Financing Source Net Debtor Economies Net Lending and Borrowing  1.1  1.1  2.8  3.0  2.6  2.3  2.0  1.5  1.6  1.8  2.1 Current Account Balance  1.4  1.5  3.0  3.3  2.9  2.6  2.4  1.6  1.8  2.0  2.2 Savings 21.7 23.1 23.4 22.8 22.4 22.5 22.5 22.6 22.5 22.6 23.1 Investment 23.3 24.7 26.3 26.1 25.2 25.1 24.8 24.2 24.3 24.6 25.4 Capital Account Balance 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Net Debtor Economies by Debt-Servicing Experience Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling during 2012 16 Net Lending and Borrowing  0.4  1.3  3.9  5.3  5.6  3.8  5.1  6.2  4.6  4.0  4.4 Current Account Balance  0.9  1.9  4.5  6.0  6.0  4.3  5.6  6.4  4.9  4.3  4.7 Savings 20.7 20.8 16.4 14.8 13.3 14.0 12.2 12.2 13.9 15.4 16.8 Investment 22.1 22.7 20.5 20.5 19.3 18.2 17.8 18.5 19.0 19.9 21.7 Capital Account Balance 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.7 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 Memorandum World Net Lending and Borrowing 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.1 Current Account Balance 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.1 Savings 24.0 24.3 25.6 26.0 26.0 26.4 26.5 25.8 25.8 25.8 26.1 Investment 23.9 24.1 25.1 25.3 25.3 25.6 25.8 25.3 25.4 25.5 26.0 Capital Account Balance 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries  national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries  national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S ) minus investment (I ) is equal to the current account balance (CAB ) (S   I = CAB ). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB ) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB ) (NLB = CAB + KAB ). In practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability. 1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries. 2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution STATISTICAL APPENDIX International Monetary Fund | October 2017 271 Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario Projections Averages Averages 1999 2008 2009 18 2015 2016 2017 2018 2015 18 2019 22 World Real GDP 4.2 3.4 3.4 3.2 3.6 3.7 3.5 3.7 Advanced Economies 2.5 1.4 2.2 1.7 2.2 2.0 2.0 1.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 6.2 5.0 4.3 4.3 4.6 4.9 4.5 5.0 Memorandum Potential Output Major Advanced Economies 2.1 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.5 World Trade, Volume1 6.6 3.1 2.8 2.4 4.2 4.0 3.4 3.9 Imports Advanced Economies 5.6 2.6 4.6 2.7 4.0 3.8 3.8 3.5 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.9 4.0  0.9 2.0 4.4 4.9 2.6 5.0 Exports Advanced Economies 5.6 2.8 3.8 2.2 3.8 3.6 3.4 3.4 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 8.8 3.8 1.8 2.5 4.8 4.5 3.4 4.4 Terms of Trade Advanced Economies  0.5 0.3 1.9 0.9  0.4 0.2 0.6 0.0 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2.7  0.6  4.3  1.2 0.1  0.5  1.5 0.0 World Prices in US Dollars Manufactures 1.7  0.1  2.3  5.2 1.5 1.0  1.3 1.2 Oil 22.2  6.4  47.2  15.7 17.4  0.2  15.0 1.4 Nonfuel Primary Commodities 6.2  0.7  17.5  1.8 7.1 0.5  3.4  0.5 Consumer Prices Advanced Economies 2.2 1.4 0.3 0.8 1.7 1.7 1.1 2.0 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 7.6 5.1 4.7 4.3 4.2 4.4 4.4 4.0 Interest Rates Real Six-Month LIBOR2 1.5  0.7  0.6  0.3  0.3 0.2  0.3 1.1 World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3 2.1 0.8 1.3 0.4  0.1 0.2 0.5 0.5 Current Account Balances Advanced Economies  0.8 0.4 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 Emerging Market and Developing Economies 2.4 0.5  0.2  0.3  0.3  0.4  0.3  0.7 Total External Debt Emerging Market and Developing Economies 32.3 28.0 28.5 29.7 29.5 28.8 29.1 27.6 Debt Service Emerging Market and Developing Economies 9.4 9.9 12.3 10.7 10.2 9.7 10.7 9.5 1Data refer to trade in goods and services. 2London interbank offered rate on US dollar deposits minus percent change in US GDP deflator. 3GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Annual Percent Change Percent Percent of GDP  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 1 CHAPTER International Monetary Fund | October 2017 273 World Economic Outlook Archives World Economic Outlook: Financial Systems and Economic Cycles September 2006 World Economic Outlook: Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy April 2007 World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality October 2007 World Economic Outlook: Housing and the Business Cycle April 2008 World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries October 2008 World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery April 2009 World Economic Outlook: Sustaining the Recovery October 2009 World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth April 2010 World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing October 2010 World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery Unemployment, Commodities, and Capital Flows April 2011 World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks September 2011 World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain April 2012 World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth October 2012 World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks April 2013 World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions October 2013 World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven April 2014 World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties October 2014 World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth Short- and Long-Term Factors April 2015 World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices October 2015 World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long April 2016 World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand Symptoms and Remedies October 2016 World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum? April 2017 World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-term Recovery, Long-term Challenges October 2017 I. Methodology Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting Measuring Inequality: Conceptual, Methodological, and Measurement Issues October 2007, Box 4.1 New Business Cycle Indices for Latin America: A Historical Reconstruction October 2007, Box 5.3 Implications of New PPP Estimates for Measuring Global Growth April 2008, Appendix 1.1 Measuring Output Gaps October 2008, Box 1.3 Assessing and Communicating Risks to the Global Outlook October 2008, Appendix 1.1 Fan Chart for Global Growth April 2009, Appendix 1.2 Indicators for Tracking Growth October 2010, Appendix 1.2 Inferring Potential Output from Noisy Data: The Global Projection Model View October 2010, Box 1.3 Uncoordinated Rebalancing October 2010, Box 1.4 World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios April 2011, Box 1.2 Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement October 2014, Box 3.3 Tariff Scenarios October 2016, Scenario box World Growth Projections over the Medium Term October 2016, Box 1.1 WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK SELECTED TOPICS  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 274 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 II. Historical Surveys Historical Perspective on Growth and the Current Account October 2008, Box 6.3 A Historical Perspective on International Financial Crises October 2009, Box 4.1 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs October 2012, Chapter 3 What Is the Effect of Recessions? October 2015, Box 1.1 III. Economic Growth Sources and Patterns Asia Rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth September 2006, Chapter 3 Japan s Potential Output and Productivity Growth September 2006, Box 3.1 The Evolution and Impact of Corporate Governance Quality in Asia September 2006, Box 3.2 Decoupling the Train? Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy April 2007, Chapter 4 Spillovers and International Business Cycle Synchronization: A Broader Perspective April 2007, Box 4.3 The Discounting Debate October 2007, Box 1.7 Taxes versus Quantities under Uncertainty (Weitzman, 1974) October 2007, Box 1.8 Experience with Emissions Trading in the European Union October 2007, Box 1.9 Climate Change: Economic Impact and Policy Responses October 2007, Appendix 1.2 What Risks Do Housing Markets Pose for Global Growth? October 2007, Box 2.1 The Changing Dynamics of the Global Business Cycle October 2007, Chapter 5 Major Economies and Fluctuations in Global Growth October 2007, Box 5.1 Improved Macroeconomic Performance Good Luck or Good Policies? October 2007, Box 5.2 House Prices: Corrections and Consequences October 2008, Box 1.2 Global Business Cycles April 2009, Box 1.1 How Similar Is the Current Crisis to the Great Depression? April 2009, Box 3.1 Is Credit a Vital Ingredient for Recovery? Evidence from Industry-Level Data April 2009, Box 3.2 From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How Strong? April 2009, Chapter 3 What s the Damage? Medium-Term Output Dynamics after Financial Crises October 2009, Chapter 4 Will the Recovery Be Jobless? October 2009, Box 1.3 Unemployment Dynamics during Recessions and Recoveries: Okun s Law and Beyond April 2010, Chapter 3 Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Economies? October 2010, Box 1.1 The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand? April 2012, Box 1.2 How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance? October 2012, Box 1.3 Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last? October 2012, Chapter 4 Jobs and Growth: Can t Have One without the Other? October 2012, Box 4.1 Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe April 2013, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It? April 2013, Chapter 4 What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS? October 2013, Box 1.2 Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages October 2013, Chapter 3 Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the Caucasus and Central Asia October 2013, Box 3.1 Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy October 2013, Box 3.2 Saving and Economic Growth April 2014, Box 3.1 On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during, and after the Global Financial Crisis April 2014, Chapter 4 The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies April 2014, Box 4.1 The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011 October 2014, Box 1.2  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution SELECTED TOPICS International Monetary Fund | October 2017 275 Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers October 2014, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment October 2014, Chapter 3 The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies October 2014, Box 3.4 Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output April 2015, Chapter 3 Steady As She Goes Estimating Sustainable Output April 2015, Box 3.1 Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries  The Role of External Factors April 2016, Box 1.2 Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market Reforms in Advanced Economies April 2016, Chapter 3 Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated External Environment April 2017, Chapter 3 Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data April 2017, Box 2.2 Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence Overthe Forecast Horizon October 2017, Box 1.3 IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets The Boom in Nonfuel Commodity Prices: Can It Last? September 2006, Chapter 5 International Oil Companies and National Oil Companies in a Changing Oil Sector Environment September 2006, Box 1.4 Commodity Price Shocks, Growth, and Financing in Sub-Saharan Africa September 2006, Box 2.2 Has Speculation Contributed to Higher Commodity Prices? September 2006, Box 5.1 Agricultural Trade Liberalization and Commodity Prices September 2006, Box 5.2 Recent Developments in Commodity Markets September 2006, Appendix 2.1 Who Is Harmed by the Surge in Food Prices? October 2007, Box 1.1 Refinery Bottlenecks October 2007, Box 1.5 Making the Most of Biofuels October 2007, Box 1.6 Commodity Market Developments and Prospects April 2008, Appendix 1.2 Dollar Depreciation and Commodity Prices April 2008, Box 1.4 Why Hasn t Oil Supply Responded to Higher Prices? April 2008, Box 1.5 Oil Price Benchmarks April 2008, Box 1.6 Globalization, Commodity Prices, and Developing Countries April 2008, Chapter 5 The Current Commodity Price Boom in Perspective April 2008, Box 5.2 Is Inflation Back? Commodity Prices and Inflation October 2008, Chapter 3 Does Financial Investment Affect Commodity Price Behavior? October 2008, Box 3.1 Fiscal Responses to Recent Commodity Price Increases: An Assessment October 2008, Box 3.2 Monetary Policy Regimes and Commodity Prices October 2008, Box 3.3 Assessing Deflation Risks in the G3 Economies April 2009, Box 1.3 Will Commodity Prices Rise Again When the Global Economy Recovers? April 2009, Box 1.5 Commodity Market Developments and Prospects April 2009, Appendix 1.1 Commodity Market Developments and Prospects October 2009, Appendix 1.1 What Do Options Markets Tell Us about Commodity Price Prospects? October 2009, Box 1.6 What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatility? October 2009, Box 1.7 How Unusual Is the Current Commodity Price Recovery? April 2010, Box 1.2 Commodity Futures Price Curves and Cyclical Market Adjustment April 2010, Box 1.3 Commodity Market Developments and Prospects October 2010, Appendix 1.1  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 276 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 Dismal Prospects for the Real Estate Sector October 2010, Box 1.2 Have Metals Become More Scarce and What Does Scarcity Mean for Prices? October 2010, Box 1.5 Commodity Market Developments and Prospects April 2011, Appendix 1.2 Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances April 2011, Chapter 3 Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production April 2011, Box 3.1 Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer? April 2011, Box 3.2 Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity April 2011, Box 3.3 Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends April 2011, Appendix 3.1 The Energy and Oil Empirical Models April 2011, Appendix 3.2 Commodity Market Developments and Prospects September 2011, Appendix 1.1 Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices September 2011, Box 1.4 Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy September 2011, Chapter 3 Commodity Market Review April 2012, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters April 2012, Chapter 4 Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries April 2012, Box 4.1 Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries April 2012, Box 4.2 Commodity Market Review October 2012, Chapter 1, Special Feature Unconventional Energy in the United States October 2012, Box 1.4 Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable? October 2012, Box 1.5 Commodity Market Review April 2013, Chapter 1, Special Feature The Dog That Didn t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? April 2013, Chapter 3 Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve? April 2013, Box 3.1 Commodity Market Review October 2013, Chapter 1, Special Feature Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience October 2013, Box 1.SF.1 Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread October 2013, Box 1.SF.2 Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting April 2014, Box 1.3 Commodity Prices and Forecasts April 2014, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas October 2014, Chapter 1, in the World Economy Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment April 2015, Chapter 1, in an Era of Low Oil Prices Special Feature The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply? April 2015, Box 1.1 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy October 2015, Chapter 1, Special Feature The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift October 2015, Chapter 1, Special Feature Box 1.SF.1 Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath of the Commodity Boom October 2015, Chapter 2 The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon October 2015, Box 2.1 Do Commodity Exporters  Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms? October 2015, Box 2.4 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the April 2016, Chapter 1, Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices Special Feature Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy October 2016, Chapter 3  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution SELECTED TOPICS International Monetary Fund | October 2017 277 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and Markets in the World Economy October 2016, Chapter 1, Special Feature How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation? October 2016, Box 3.3 Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, With a Focus on the Role Technology and Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market April 2017, Chapter 1, Special Feature Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts October 2017, Chapter 1, Special Feature V. Fiscal Policy Improved Emerging Market Fiscal Performance: Cyclical or Structural? September 2006, Box 2.1 When Does Fiscal Stimulus Work? April 2008, Box 2.1 Fiscal Policy as a Countercyclical Tool October 2008, Chapter 5 Differences in the Extent of Automatic Stabilizers and Their Relationship with Discretionary Fiscal Policy October 2008, Box 5.1 Why Is It So Hard to Determine the Effects of Fiscal Stimulus? October 2008, Box 5.2 Have the U.S. Tax Cuts Been  TTT  [Timely, Temporary, and Targeted]? October 2008, Box 5.3 Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation October 2010, Chapter 3 Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances September 2011, Chapter 4 Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers? October 2012, Box 1.1 The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies October 2012, Box 1.2 The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs October 2012, Chapter 3 The Great Divergence of Policies April 2013, Box 1.1 Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance April 2013, Box 1.2 Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment October 2014, Chapter 3 Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment October 2014, Box 3.2 The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies October 2014, Box 3.4 Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment October 2014, Box 3.5 Commodity Booms and Public Investment October 2015, Box 2.2 Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant October 2017, Chapter 4 The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions October 2017, Box 4.1 VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds How Do Financial Systems Affect Economic Cycles? September 2006, Chapter 4 Financial Leverage and Debt Deflation September 2006, Box 4.1 Financial Linkages and Spillovers April 2007, Box 4.1 Macroeconomic Conditions in Industrial Countries and Financial Flows to Emerging Markets April 2007, Box 4.2 Macroeconomic Implications of Recent Market Turmoil: Patterns from Previous Episodes October 2007, Box 1.2 What Is Global Liquidity? October 2007, Box 1.4 The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for Monetary Policy April 2008, Chapter 3 Is There a Credit Crunch? April 2008, Box 1.1 Assessing Vulnerabilities to Housing Market Corrections April 2008, Box 3.1 Financial Stress and Economic Downturns October 2008, Chapter 4 The Latest Bout of Financial Distress: How Does It Change the Global Outlook? October 2008, Box 1.1 Policies to Resolve Financial System Stress and Restore Sound Financial Intermediation October 2008, Box 4.1  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 278 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 How Vulnerable Are Nonfinancial Firms? April 2009, Box 1.2 The Case of Vanishing Household Wealth April 2009, Box 2.1 Impact of Foreign Bank Ownership during Home-Grown Crises April 2009, Box 4.1 A Financial Stress Index for Emerging Economies April 2009, Appendix 4.1 Financial Stress in Emerging Economies: Econometric Analysis April 2009, Appendix 4.2 How Linkages Fuel the Fire April 2009, Chapter 4 Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations October 2009, Chapter 3 Were Financial Markets in Emerging Economies More Resilient than in Past Crises? October 2009, Box 1.2 Risks from Real Estate Markets October 2009, Box 1.4 Financial Conditions Indices April 2011, Appendix 1.1 House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets April 2011, Box 1.1 International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking April 2011, Box 1.3 Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications September 2011, Box 1.2 Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession? September 2011, Box 1.3 Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging April 2012, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy October 2012, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature The Great Divergence of Policies April 2013, Box 1.1 Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening October 2013, Box 1.1 Credit Supply and Economic Growth April 2014, Box 1.1 Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies? April 2014, Chapter 2, Spillover Feature Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates April 2014, Chapter 3 Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update October 2014, Box 1.1 U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets April 2016, Box 2.2 A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy October 2016, Box 3.5 Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets be Sustained? October 2017, Box 1.2 VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality The Globalization of Labor April 2007, Chapter 5 Emigration and Trade: How Do They Affect Developing Countries? April 2007, Box 5.1 Labor Market Reforms in the Euro Area and the Wage-Unemployment Trade-Off October 2007, Box 2.2 Globalization and Inequality October 2007, Chapter 4 The Dualism between Temporary and Permanent Contracts: Measures, Effects, and Policy Issues April 2010, Box 3.1 Short-Time Work Programs April 2010, Box 3.2 Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies September 2011, Box 1.1 The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession April 2012, Box 1.1 Jobs and Growth: Can t Have One without the Other? October 2012, Box 4.1 Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment April 2016, Box 3.2 Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares April 2017, Chapter 3 VIII. Exchange Rate Issues How Emerging Market Countries May Be Affected by External Shocks September 2006, Box 1.3 Exchange Rates and the Adjustment of External Imbalances April 2007, Chapter 3  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution SELECTED TOPICS International Monetary Fund | October 2017 279 Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices and External Adjustment April 2007, Box 3.3 Depreciation of the U.S. Dollar: Causes and Consequences April 2008, Box 1.2 Lessons from the Crisis: On the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime April 2010, Box 1.1 Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets April 2014, Box 1.4 Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected? October 2015, Chapter 3 The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade October 2015, Box 3.1 Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains October 2015, Box 3.2 Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies October 2017, Box 1.1 Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications October 2017, Chapter 2 Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level October 2017, Box 2.1 Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-level Evidence October 2017, Box 2.2 Wage and Employment Adjustment After the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-level Evidence October 2017, Box 2.3 IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt Capital Flows to Emerging Market Countries: A Long-Term Perspective September 2006, Box 1.1 How Will Global Imbalances Adjust? September 2006, Box 2.1 External Sustainability and Financial Integration April 2007, Box 3.1 Large and Persistent Current Account Imbalances April 2007, Box 3.2 Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances October 2007, Box 1.3 Managing the Macroeconomic Consequences of Large and Volatile Aid Flows October 2007, Box 2.3 Managing Large Capital Inflows October 2007, Chapter 3 Can Capital Controls Work? October 2007, Box 3.1 Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances: Progress Report April 2008, Box 1.3 How Does the Globalization of Trade and Finance Affect Growth? Theory and Evidence April 2008, Box 5.1 Divergence of Current Account Balances across Emerging Economies October 2008, Chapter 6 Current Account Determinants for Oil-Exporting Countries October 2008, Box 6.1 Sovereign Wealth Funds: Implications for Global Financial Markets October 2008, Box 6.2 Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis April 2009, Box 1.4 Trade Finance and Global Trade: New Evidence from Bank Surveys October 2009, Box 1.1 From Deficit to Surplus: Recent Shifts in Global Current Accounts October 2009, Box 1.5 Getting the Balance Right: Transitioning out of Sustained Current Account Surpluses April 2010, Chapter 4 Emerging Asia: Responding to Capital Inflows October 2010, Box 2.1 Latin America-5: Riding Another Wave of Capital Inflows October 2010, Box 2.2 Do Financial Crises Have Lasting Effects on Trade? October 2010, Chapter 4 Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery April 2011, Box 2.1 International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle? April 2011, Chapter 4 External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points September 2011, Box 1.5 The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area April 2013, Box 1.3 External Rebalancing in the Euro Area October 2013, Box 1.3 The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows October 2013, Chapter 4 Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions October 2013, Box 4.1 The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom October 2014, Box 1.SF.1 Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point? October 2014, Chapter 4 Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment October 2014, Box 4.1  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 280 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area October 2014, Box 4.2 Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown April 2015, Box 1.2 Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits October 2015, Box 1.2 Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies October 2015, Box 1.3 Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown April 2016, Box 1.1 Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets April 2016, Chapter 2 Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries April 2016, Box 2.1 The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization April 2016, Box 3.3 Global Trade: What s Behind the Slowdown October 2016, Chapter 2 The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies  Trade Integration with China s Final Demand April 2017, Box 2.3 Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and Developing Economies April 2017, Box 2.4 Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters October 2017, Box 1.4 Remittances and Consumption Smoothing October 2017, Box 1.5 X. Regional Issues EMU: 10 Years On October 2008, Box 2.1 Vulnerabilities in Emerging Economies April 2009, Box 2.2 East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe April 2012, Box 2.1 The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area April 2013, Box 1.3 XI. Country-Specific Analyses Why Is the U.S. International Income Account Still in the Black, and Will This Last? September 2005, Box 1.2 Is India Becoming an Engine for Global Growth? September 2005, Box 1.4 Saving and Investment in China September 2005, Box 2.1 China s GDP Revision: What Does It Mean for China and the Global Economy? April 2006, Box 1.6 What Do Country Studies of the Impact of Globalization on Inequality Tell Us? Examples from Mexico, China, and India October 2007, Box 4.2 Japan after the Plaza Accord April 2010, Box 4.1 Taiwan Province of China in the Late 1980s April 2010, Box 4.2 Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan s Lost Decades? April 2011, Box 1.4 Where Is China s External Surplus Headed? April 2012, Box 1.3 The U.S. Home Owners  Loan Corporation April 2012, Box 3.1 Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland April 2012, Box 3.2 Abenomics: Risks after Early Success? October 2013, Box 1.4 Is China s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)? April 2014, Box 1.2 Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade October 2014, Box 3.1 Japanese Exports: What s the Holdup? October 2015, Box 3.3 The Japanese Experience with Deflation October 2016, Box 3.2 XII. Special Topics Climate Change and the Global Economy April 2008, Chapter 4 Rising Car Ownership in Emerging Economies: Implications for Climate Change April 2008, Box 4.1 South Asia: Illustrative Impact of an Abrupt Climate Shock April 2008, Box 4.2  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution SELECTED TOPICS International Monetary Fund | October 2017 281 Macroeconomic Policies for Smoother Adjustment to Abrupt Climate Shocks April 2008, Box 4.3 Catastrophe Insurance and Bonds: New Instruments to Hedge Extreme Weather Risks April 2008, Box 4.4 Recent Emission-Reduction Policy Initiatives April 2008, Box 4.5 Complexities in Designing Domestic Mitigation Policies April 2008, Box 4.6 Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up Human Development? October 2015, Box 2.3 Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms April 2016, Box 3.1 Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method April 2016, Box 3.4 A Global Rush for Land October 2016, Box 1.SF.1 Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Case of the Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa April 2017, Box 2.1 Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview April 2017, Box 3.1 The Elasticity of Substitution Between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation April 2017, Box 3.2 Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation Around the World April 2017, Box 3.3 Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income April 2017, Box 3.4 Conflict, Growth, and Migration April 2017, Box 1.1 Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity April 2017, Box 1.2 The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope? October 2017, Chapter 3 The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones October 2017, Box 3.1 The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis October 2017, Box 3.2 Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies October 2017, Box 3.3 Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets October 2017, Box 3.4 Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution October 2017, Box 3.5 Mitigating Climate Change October 2017, Box 3.6  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution International Monetary Fund | October 2017 283 E xecutive Directors broadly shared the assess- ment of global economic prospects and risks. They observed that global activity has strengthened further and is expected to rise steadily into next year. The pickup is broad based across countries, driven by investment and trade. Nev- ertheless, the recovery is not complete, with medium- term global growth remaining modest, especially in advanced economies and fuel exporters. In most advanced economies, inflation remains subdued amid weak wage growth, while slow productivity growth and worsening demographic profiles weigh on medium- term prospects. Meanwhile, several emerging markets and developing economies continue to adjust to a range of factors, including lower commodity revenues. Directors noted that, while risks are broadly bal- anced in the near term, medium-term risks remain skewed to the downside, with rising financial vulnera- bilities. These include the possibility of a sudden tight- ening of global financial conditions, a rapid increase in private sector debt in key emerging market economies, low bank profitability and pockets of still-elevated non- performing loan ratios, and policy uncertainty about financial deregulation. Directors also pointed to risks associated with inward-looking policies, rising geopo- litical tensions, and weather-related factors. Given this landscape, Directors underscored the continued importance of employing a range of policy tools, in a comprehensive, consistent, and well-  communicated manner, to secure the recovery and improve medium-term prospects. They recognized that major central banks have made every effort to commu- nicate their monetary normalization policies to markets. The cyclical upturn in economic activity provides a window of opportunity to accelerate critical structural reforms, increase resilience, and promote inclusiveness. Directors stressed that a cooperative multilateral framework remains vital for amplifying the mutual benefits of national policies and minimizing any cross-border spillovers. Common challenges include maintaining the rules-based, open trading system; preserving the resilience of the global financial system; avoiding competitive races to the bottom in taxation and financial regulation; and further strengthening the global financial safety net. Multilateral cooperation is also essential to tackle various noneconomic challenges, among which are refugee flows, cyberthreats and, as most Directors highlighted, mitigating and adapting to climate change. Concerted effort is also needed to reduce excess global imbalances, through a recalibra- tion of policies with a view to achieving their domestic objectives as well as strengthening prospects for strong, sustainable, and balanced global growth. In this con- text, as a few Directors emphasized, the IMF also has a role to play by continuing to strengthen its multilateral analysis of external imbalances and exchange rates. Directors agreed that continued accommodative monetary policy is still needed in countries with low core inflation, consistent with central banks  mandates. Fiscal policy should gear toward long-term sustain- ability, avoid procyclicality, and promote inclusive growth. At the same time, fiscal policy should be as growth friendly as possible, using space, where avail- able, to support productivity and growth-enhancing structural reforms. In many cases, policymakers should prioritize rebuilding buffers, improving medium-term debt dynamics, and enhancing resilience. Efforts to raise potential output should be prioritized based on country-specific circumstances, including increasing the supply of labor, upgrading skills and human capi- tal, investing in infrastructure, and lowering product and labor market distortions. Social safety nets remain important to protect those adversely affected by tech- nological progress and other structural transformation. Directors noted that income disparities among countries have narrowed, but inequality has increased in some economies. They saw a role that well-designed fiscal policies can play in achieving redistributive The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board s discussion of the Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 21, 2017. IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK, OCTOBER 2017  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SEEKING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SHORT-TERM RECOVERY, LONG-TERM CHALLENGES 284 International Monetary Fund | October 2017 objectives without necessarily undermining growth and incentives to work. Directors generally concurred that there may be scope for strengthening means-testing of transfers in many countries and for increasing the progressivity of taxation in some others. Most Direc- tors noted that any consideration of a universal basic income would have to be weighed carefully against a host of country-specific factors including existing social safety schemes, financing modalities, fiscal cost, and social preferences, as well as its impact on incen- tives to work which, in the view of many Directors, raised questions about its attractiveness and practical- ity. Directors emphasized that improving education and health care is key to reducing inequality and enhancing social mobility over time. Directors underlined the continued need for emerg- ing market and developing economies to bolster economic and financial resilience to external shocks, including through enhanced macroprudential policy frameworks and exchange rate flexibility. They noted that a common challenge across these economies is how to speed up their convergence toward living standards in advanced economies. While priorities differ across coun- tries, many need to improve governance, infrastructure, education, and access to health care. In several countries, policies should also facilitate greater labor force partici- pation, reduce barriers to entry into product markets, and enhance the efficiency of credit allocation. Directors observed that the global financial system continues to strengthen, and market confidence has improved generally. They recognized the substan- tial progress made in resolving weak banks in many advanced economies, while a majority of systemic institutions are adjusting business models and restoring profitability. However, a prolonged period of monetary accommodation could lead to further increases in asset valuations and a buildup of leverage in the nonfi- nancial sector that could signal higher risks to finan- cial stability. These developments call for continued vigilance about household debt ratios and investors  exposure to market and credit risks. In this context, Directors stressed the need to calibrate the path of nor- malization of monetary policies carefully, implement macro- and microprudential measures as needed, and address remaining legacy problems. Directors noted a generally subdued outlook for commodity prices. They encouraged low-income developing countries that are commodity export- ers to continue improving revenue mobilization and strengthening debt management, while safeguarding social outlays and capital expenditures. Countries with more diversified export bases should further strengthen fiscal positions and foreign exchange buffers. Across all low-income developing countries, an overarching chal- lenge is to maintain progress toward their Sustainable Development Goals.  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution To order, visit bookstore.imf.org/we1017 Highlights from IMF Publications Unleashing Growth and Strengthening Resilience in the Caribbean $25.  2017. Paperback ISBN 978-1-48431-519-4. Approx. 400pp. From Great Depression to Great Recession: The Elusive Quest for International Policy Cooperation $27.  2017. Paperback ISBN 978-1-51351-427-7. 256pp. Fiscal Policies and Gender Equality $25.  2017. Paperback ISBN 978-1-51359-036-3. Digital Revolutions in Public Finance $25.  2017. Paperback ISBN 978-1-48431-522-4. Approx. 263pp Free download visit: bookstore.imf.org/drpf Financial Integration in Latin America: A New Strategy for a New Normal $25.  2017. Paperback ISBN 978-1-51352-024-7. 177pp. Shifting Commodity Markets in a Globalized World $25.  2017. Paperback ISBN 978-1-48431-032-8. Approx. 256pp. FREE DOWNLOAD AVAILABLE COMING SOON COMING SOON  International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 