WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
2022
OCT
Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
WORLD 
ECONOMIC 
OUTLOOK
2022
OCT
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
©2022 International Monetary Fund
 
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
 
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and 
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some 
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional 
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial 
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. | 
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
 
HC10.80	
ISBN 979-8-40021-843-9 (English Paper)
	
979-8-40022-121-7 (English ePub)
	
979-8-40022-128-6 (English Web PDF)
The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a 
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited 
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the 
report on September 29, 2022. The views expressed in this publication are those of the 
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors 
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2022. World Economic Outlook: 
Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis. Washington, DC. October.
Errata
October 17, 2022
At publication on October 11, certain tables in this report failed to incorporate the gross 
domestic product data for Italy that was available before the report’s deadline for data 
submission. As a result, the data row for Italy has been corrected where appropriate in 
the following tables:
Table 1.1. (pages 9–10)
Annex Table 1.1.1. (page 42)
Annex Table 1.1.6. (page 47)
Statistical Appendix Table A2. (page 126)
Statistical Appendix Table A3. (page 128)
Statistical Appendix Table B1. (page 2)
Additionally, certain tables in this report included incorrect projections for gross domestic 
product in US dollars for China and the world, and current account balance in percent of 
GDP for China. These projections have been corrected in the following tables:
Annex Table 1.1.2. (page 43)
Statistical Appendix Table A1. (page 125) 
Statistical Appendix Table A12. (page 144)  
This PDF version of the report now contains the proper data in the above tables.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail: 
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services 
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
iii
CONTENTS
Assumptions and Conventions	
viii
Further Information	
x
Data	
xi
Preface	
xii
Foreword	
xiii
Executive Summary	
xvi
Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies	
1
Inflation and Uncertainty	
1
Central Banks Tackle Stubbornly High Inflation	
2
War in Ukraine Causes More Human Suffering and Economic Damage	
6
COVID-19 Continues to Hold Back Economic Progress	
7
The Forecast: Output Lower Still, but Inflation Peaking	
8
Risks to the Outlook: The Downside Still Dominates	
16
Policy Actions: From Inflation to Growth	
20
Box 1.1. Dissecting Recent WEO Inflation Forecast Errors	
26
Box 1.2. Market Power and Inflation during COVID-19	
30
Box 1.3. Risk Assessment around the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection	
33
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers	
37
References	
48
Chapter 2. Wage Dynamics Post–COVID-19 and Wage-Price Spiral Risks	
51
Introduction	
51
Historical Episodes Similar to Today	
54
Wage Drivers during the COVID-19 Shock and Recovery	
56
Inflation De-anchoring: Expectations and Policy Responses	
61
Conclusions	
66
Box 2.1. Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States	
68
References	
69
Chapter 3. Near-Term Macroeconomic Impact of Decarbonization Policies	
71
Introduction	
71
Decarbonizing the Economy: Now Is the Time to Become Credible	
74
Climate Policies to Keep Paris within Reach	
75
Credible Policies: Key for a Successful Transition	
80
Transition Costs under Further Delays	
83
Conclusions and Policy Implications	
84
Box 3.1. Near-Term Implications of Carbon Pricing: A Review of the Literature	
86
Box 3.2. Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden,  
and Uruguay	
89
Box 3.3. Decarbonizing the Power Sector while Managing Renewables’ Intermittence	
91
References	
93
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
iv	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Statistical Appendix	
97
Assumptions	
97
What’s New	
97
Data and Conventions	
98
Country Notes	
99
Classification of Countries	
101
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook  
Classification	
101
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in  
Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2021	
103
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup	
104
Table C. European Union	
104
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source  
of Export Earnings	
105
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position,  
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and per Capita Income Classification 	
106
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods	
108
Table G. Key Data Documentation	
109
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies	
119
List of Tables	
124
Output (Tables A1–A4)	
125
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)	
132
Financial Policies (Table A8)	
137
Foreign Trade (Table A9)	
138
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)	
140
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)	
147
Flow of Funds (Table A14)	
151
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)	
154
World Economic Outlook Selected Topics	
155
IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, September 2022	
165
Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections	
9
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at  
Market Exchange Rate Weights	
11
Table 1.SF.1. Oil, Cereal, and Food Price Boom Phases	
39
Table 1.SF.2. Oil-Cereal Price Correlation	
39
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
42
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
43
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
44
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP,  
Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
45
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,  
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment	
46
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 	
47
Table 3.1. Three Policy Packages Reducing Emissions by 25 Percent in 2030	
79
Table 3.1.1. Cross-Model Comparison of Changes in GDP	
87
contents
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
v
Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor  
Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing  
Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government  
Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of  
Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of  
Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of  
External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region:  
External Debt by Maturity 
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by  
Analytical Criteria: External Debt by Maturity 
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term  
Baseline Scenario: Selected Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. Leading Indicators Show Signs of Slowdown	
2
Figure 1.2. Change in Monetary Policy Cycle among G20 Economies	
2
Figure 1.3. EMDE Sovereign Spreads	
3
Figure 1.4. Wholesale Food and Fuel Prices Expected to Moderate	
3
Figure 1.5. Mean Land Temperature	
3
Figure 1.6. Core Inflation and Its Distribution across Countries	
3
Figure 1.7. Inflation Hits the Poorest Hardest	
4
Figure 1.8. Rebalancing of Demand: Goods versus Services	
4
Figure 1.9. Inflation Driven by Food and Fuel	
4
Figure 1.10. Real Short-Term Rates Are Rising	
6
Figure 1.11. A Transatlantic Divergence	
6
Figure 1.12. Russian Pipeline Gas Supplies to EU by Route	
7
Figure 1.13. New Confirmed COVID-19 Deaths	
7
Figure 1.14. Countries in Contraction as a Share of Global GDP, 2022–23	
11
Figure 1.15. Global Growth and Inflation Forecasts	
11
Figure 1.16. The Shocks of 2022: Persistent Output Losses	
13
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
vi	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Figure 1.17. Scarring from the Pandemic	
14
Figure 1.18. Inflation Likely to Decline Next Year	
15
Figure 1.19. Current Account and International Investment Positions	
16
Figure 1.20. Corporate Talk of Key Macroeconomic Risks	
16
Figure 1.21. Long-Term Inflation Expectations	
17
Figure 1.22. Africa Least Vaccinated against COVID-19	
19
Figure 1.23. Slowdown in China	
20
Figure 1.24. Natural Rate of Interest, United States	
21
Figure 1.25. Broad-Based Dollar Appreciation	
22
Figure 1.26. Change in Cyclically Adjusted Primary Balance	
22
Figure 1.27. Debt in Distress in Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
23
Figure 1.1.1. Headline Inflation Forecasts	
26
Figure 1.1.2. WEO Annual Headline Forecast Errors with Respect to  
Preceding January WEO Updates	
27
Figure 1.1.3. Core Inflation and Output Forecast Errors	
27
Figure 1.1.4. Impacts on Core Inflation Forecast Errors	
28
Figure 1.2.1. Decomposition of GDP Deflator Growth by Income Components	
30
Figure 1.2.2. Sales-Weighted Markups and CPI for Selected Advanced Economies	
31
Figure 1.2.3. Coefficient of Production Costs Pass-Through to Prices	
31
Figure 1.3.1. Distribution of World GDP Growth Forecast	
34
Figure 1.3.2. Impact of Downside Scenario on GDP and Inflation	
35
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments	
37
Figure 1.SF.2. Russian Gas Exports and Prices	
38
Figure 1.SF.3. Selected Commodity Price Indices	
39
Figure 1.SF.4. Response of Cereal Prices to Major Drivers	
40
Figure 1.SF.5. Response of Food CPI to International Food Price Shock	
40
Figure 1.SF.6. Conditional Forecast Domestic Food Price Inflation	
41
Figure 2.1. Recent Wage, Price, and Unemployment Dynamics	
52
Figure 2.2. Changes in Wages, Prices, and Unemployment after Similar Past Episodes	
55
Figure 2.3. Changes in Wages, Prices, and Unemployment after Past Episodes with  
Accelerating Prices and Wages	
56
Figure 2.4. A Look at Nominal Wage Growth through the Lens of the  
Wage Phillips Curve	
57
Figure 2.5. The Role of Structural Characteristics in Wage Dynamics	
58
Figure 2.6. Drivers of Changes in Wages, Prices, and Employment during the  
COVID-19 Pandemic and Recovery	
60
Figure 2.7. Cumulative Effects of Supply Chain Pressures and Monetary Tightening on  
Wages and Prices	
63
Figure 2.8. Cumulative Effects of Supply Chain Pressures on Inflation Expectations	
64
Figure 2.9. Near-Term Scenarios with Set Interest Rate Path under Different Expectations	
65
Figure 2.10. Optimal Policy Scenario under Adaptive Learning Expectations	
66
Figure 2.1.1. Pass-Through from Wages to Prices	
68
Figure 3.1. Historical and Projected Global Emissions	
74
Figure 3.2. Macroeconomic Impact in 2030 of a GHG Tax under  
Different Calibrations of Elasticities	
77
Figure 3.3. Macroeconomic Impact of Different Recycling Options in the United States	
78
Figure 3.4. Macroeconomic Impact of the Three Policy Packages in  
Regions in the Simulation	
80
Figure 3.5. Impact in 2030 of Fully and Partially Credible Mitigation Policies	
81
Figure 3.6. Macroeconomic Impact of Different Monetary Policy Targets in the  
United States	
82
contents
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
vii
Figure 3.7. Macroeconomic Impact of Different Monetary Policy Targets under  
Wage Indexation	
83
Figure 3.8. Gradual and Delayed GHG Mitigation Policies in the United States	
84
Figure 3.1.1. Carbon Pricing in 2022 for Selected Economies	
86
Figure 3.2.1. Carbon Price in Sweden	
89
Figure 3.2.2. Carbon Price and Emissions Coverage, 2022	
90
Figure 3.3.1. Monthly Wholesale Electricity Prices in Selected European Economies	
91
Figure 3.3.2. Daily Electricity Prices in Selected European Countries as a Function of  
Share of Renewables in Power Production	
92
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
viii	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS
A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook 
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during 
July 22, 2022, to August 19, 2022, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate 
mechanism II, which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established 
policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for 
selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $98.19 a barrel in 
2022 and $85.52 a barrel in 2023; that the three-month government bond yield for the United States will average 
1.8 percent in 2022 and 4.0 percent in 2023, for the euro area will average –0.2 percent in 2022 and 0.8 percent 
in 2023, and for Japan will average –0.1 percent in 2022 and 0.0 percent in 2023; and that the 10-year ­government 
bond yield for the United States will average 3.2 percent in 2022 and 4.4 percent in 2023, that for the euro area 
will average 0.9 percent in 2022 and 1.3 percent in 2023, and that for Japan will average 0.2 percent in 2022 and 
0.3 percent in 2023. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties sur-
rounding them add to the margin of error that would, in any event, be involved in the projections. The estimates 
and projections are based on statistical information available through September 26, 2022.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
•	 . . .  to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
•	 –  between years or months (for example, 2021–22 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered, 
including the beginning and ending years or months; and 
•	 /  between years or months (for example, 2021/22) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
•	 “Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
•	 “Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 1 
percentage point).
•	 Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in 
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and 
government finance data for each country. 
•	 For some countries, the figures for 2021 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please 
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the 
national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments for each country.
What is new in this publication:
•	 For Algeria, starting with the October 2022 WEO, total government expenditure and net lending/borrowing 
include net lending by the government, which mostly reflects support to the pension system and other public 
sector entities.
•	 Ecuador’s fiscal sector projections, which were previously omitted because of ongoing program review discus-
sions, are now included.
•	 Tunisia’s forecast data, which were previously omitted because of ongoing technical discussions pending potential 
program negotiations, are now included.
•	 Turkey is now referred to as Türkiye.
•	 For Sri Lanka, certain projections for 2023–27 are excluded from publication owing to ongoing discussions on 
sovereign debt restructuring, following the recently reached staff-level agreement on an IMF-supported program.
•	 For Venezuela, following methodological upgrades, historical data have been revised from 2012 onward. Nominal 
variables that were omitted from publication in the April 2022 WEO are now included.
Assumptions and Conventions
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
ix
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
•	 Tables and figures in this report that list their source as “IMF staff calculations” or “IMF staff estimates” draw 
on data from the WEO database. 
•	 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
•	 Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
•	 Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or 
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of 
the weighted group data.
•	 The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on maps do not imply, on the part of 
the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is 
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities 
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
x	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
FURTHER INFORMATION
Corrections and Revisions 
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the 
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are 
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and 
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.
Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/512000.
Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the 
IMF eLibrary at http://www.elibrary.imf.org/OCT22WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at  
www.imf.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly:
Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
xi
This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compi-
lation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series most 
frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The histori-
cal data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context 
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each 
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural 
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF 
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a 
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International 
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their 
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a 
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are 
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF 
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and 
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail, or online forum 
(telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum
DATA
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
xii	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
PREFACE
The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s 
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international 
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a 
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information 
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out 
in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, 
European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—
together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and 
the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Pierre-
Olivier Gourinchas, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Petya Koeva 
Brooks, Deputy Director, Research Department, and Daniel Leigh, Division Chief, Research Department. 
The primary contributors to this report are Silvia Albrizio, Jorge Alvarez, Philip Barrett, Mehdi Benatiya 
Andaloussi, John Bluedorn, Christian Bogmans, Benjamin Carton, Christopher Evans, Allan Dizioli, Niels-
Jakob Hansen, Florence Jaumotte, Christoffer Koch, Toh Kuan, Dirk Muir, Jean-Marc Natal, Diaa Noureldin, 
Augustus J. Panton, Andrea Pescatori, Ervin Prifti, Alexandre Sollaci, Martin Stuermer, Nico Valckx, Simon Voigts, 
and Philippe Wingender.
Other contributors include Michael Andrle, Gavin Asdorian, Jared Bebee, Rachel Brasier, Moya Chin, Yaniv 
Cohen, Federico Díez, Wenchuan Dong, Angela Espiritu, Rebecca Eyassu, Ziyan Han, Jinjin He, Youyou Huang, 
Eduard Laurito, Jungjin Lee, Li Lin, Li Longj, Yousef F. Nazer, Cynthia Nyanchama Nyakeri, Emory Oakes, 
Myrto Oikonomou, Clarita Phillips, Carlo Pizzinelli, Rafael Portillo, Evgenia Pugacheva, Tianchu Qi, Yiyuan Qi, 
Aneta Radzikowski, Max Rozycki, Muhammad Ahsan Shafique, Nicholas Tong, Yarou Xu, Jiaqi Zhao, and Canran 
Zheng.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with production 
and editorial support from Michael Harrup, and additional assistance from Lucy Scott Morales, James Unwin, 
Harold Medina (and team), The Grauel Group, and TalentMEDIA Services.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments as 
well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 29, 2022. However, estimates, 
projections, and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive 
Directors or to their national authorities.
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
xiii
As storm clouds gather, policymakers need to keep 
a steady hand.
The global economy continues to face steep 
challenges, shaped by the lingering effects of three 
powerful forces: the Russian invasion of Ukraine, a 
cost-of-living crisis caused by persistent and broaden-
ing inflation pressures, and the slowdown in China.
Our latest forecasts project global growth to remain 
unchanged in 2022 at 3.2 percent and to slow to 
2.7 percent in 2023—0.2 percentage points lower 
than the July forecast—with a 25 percent probability 
that it could fall below 2 percent. More than a third 
of the global economy will contract this year or next, 
while the three largest economies—the United States, 
the European Union, and China—will continue to 
stall. In short, the worst is yet to come, and for many 
people 2023 will feel like a recession. 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine continues to powerfully 
destabilize the global economy. Beyond the escalating 
and senseless destruction of lives and livelihoods, 
it has led to a severe energy crisis in Europe that 
is sharply increasing costs of living and hampering 
economic activity. Gas prices in Europe have increased 
more than four-fold since 2021, with Russia cutting 
deliveries to less than 20 percent of their 2021 levels, 
raising the prospect of energy shortages over the next 
winter and beyond. More broadly, the conflict has also 
pushed up food prices on world markets, despite the 
recent easing after the Black Sea grain deal, causing 
serious hardship for low-income households world-
wide, and especially so in low-income countries.
Persistent and broadening inflation pressures have 
triggered a rapid and synchronized tightening of mon-
etary conditions, alongside a powerful appreciation of 
the US dollar against most other currencies. Tighter 
global monetary and financial conditions will work 
their way through the economy, weighing demand 
down and helping to gradually subjugate inflation. 
So far, however, price pressures are proving quite stub-
born and a major source of concern for policymakers. 
We expect global inflation to peak in late 2022 but to 
remain elevated for longer than previously expected, 
decreasing to 4.1 percent by 2024.
In China, the frequent lockdowns under its zero 
COVID policy have taken a toll on the economy, 
especially in the second quarter of 2022. Furthermore, 
the property sector, representing about one-fifth of 
economic activity in China, is rapidly weakening. 
Given the size of China’s economy and its importance 
for global supply chains, this will weigh heavily on 
global trade and activity. 
The external environment is already very chal-
lenging for many emerging market and developing 
economies. The sharp appreciation of the US dollar 
adds significantly to domestic price pressures and to 
the cost-of-living crisis for these countries. Capital 
flows have not recovered, and many low-income and 
developing economies remain in debt distress. The 
2022 shocks will re-open economic wounds that were 
only partially healed following the pandemic. 
Downside risks to the outlook remain elevated, 
while policy trade-offs to address the cost-of-living 
crisis have become acutely challenging. The risk of 
monetary, fiscal, or financial policy miscalibration 
has risen sharply at a time when the world economy 
remains historically fragile and financial markets are 
showing signs of stress. 
Increasing price pressures remain the most immedi-
ate threat to current and future prosperity by squeezing 
real incomes and undermining macroeconomic stability. 
Central banks around the world are now laser-focused 
on restoring price stability, and the pace of tightening 
has accelerated sharply. There are risks of both under- 
and over-tightening. Under-tightening would entrench 
further the inflation process, erode the credibility of 
central banks, and de-anchor inflation expectations. As 
history repeatedly teaches us, this would only increase 
the eventual cost of bringing inflation under control. 
Over-tightening risks pushing the global economy into 
an unnecessarily harsh recession. As several prominent 
voices have argued recently, over-tightening is more 
likely when central banks act in an uncoordinated 
fashion. Financial markets may also struggle to cope 
with an overly rapid pace of tightening. Yet, the costs 
of these policy mistakes are not symmetric. Misjudging 
yet again the stubborn persistence of inflation could 
FOREWORD
prove much more detrimental to future macroeconomic 
stability by gravely undermining the hard-won credibil-
ity of central banks. As economies start slowing down, 
and financial fragilities emerge, calls for a pivot toward 
looser monetary conditions will inevitably become 
louder. Where necessary, financial policy should ensure 
that markets remain stable, but central banks around 
the world need to keep a steady hand with monetary 
policy firmly focused on taming inflation. 
These challenges do not imply that a large down-
turn is inevitable. In many countries, including the 
United States, the United Kingdom, and the euro 
area, labor markets remain tight, with historically 
low unemployment rates and high levels of vacan-
cies. Chapter 2 of this report documents how the 
current environment—despite rapidly rising prices 
and wages—may still avert a wage-price spiral, unless 
inflation expectations become de-anchored. 
Formulating the appropriate fiscal policy given 
the juxtaposed cost-of-living, energy, and food crises 
has become an acute challenge for many countries. 
I shall mention a few important principles. First, for 
countries where the pandemic is now firmly receding, 
it is time to rebuild fiscal buffers. As the pandemic 
vividly illustrated, fiscal space is essential for dealing 
with crises. Countries with more fiscal room were 
better able to protect households and businesses. 
Second, fiscal policy should not work at cross-
purposes with monetary authorities’ efforts to quell 
inflation. Doing otherwise will only prolong the fight 
to bring inflation down, risk de-anchoring inflation 
expectations, increase funding costs, and stoke further 
financial instability, complicating the task of fiscal as 
well as monetary and financial authorities, as recent 
events illustrated. Third, the energy crisis, especially 
in Europe, is not a transitory shock. The geopolitical 
re-alignment of energy supplies in the wake of Russia’s 
war against Ukraine is broad and permanent. Winter 
2022 will be challenging for Europe, but winter 2023 
will likely be worse. Fiscal authorities in the region 
need to plan and coordinate accordingly. Fourth, 
price signals are essential to help curb demand and 
stimulate supply. Price controls, untargeted subsidies, 
or export bans are fiscally costly and lead to excess 
demand, undersupply, misallocation, rationing, and 
black-market premiums. History teaches us they rarely 
work. Fiscal policy should instead aim to protect the 
most vulnerable through targeted and temporary 
transfers. If some aggregate fiscal support cannot be 
avoided, especially in countries hardest hit by the 
energy crisis, it is important to embed policy in a 
credible medium-term fiscal framework. Fifth, fiscal 
policy can help economies adapt to a more volatile 
environment and bounce back from adversity by 
investing in expanding productive capacity: human 
capital, digitalization, green energy, and supply chain 
diversification can make economies more resilient 
when the next crisis comes. Unfortunately, these 
simple principles are not uniformly guiding current 
policy, and the risk of outsized, poorly targeted, and 
broadly stimulative fiscal packages in many countries 
is not negligible. 
For many emerging markets, the strength of the 
dollar is causing acute challenges, tightening financial 
conditions, and increasing the cost of imported goods. 
The dollar is now at its highest level since the early 
2000s. So far, this appreciation appears mostly driven 
by fundamental forces, such as the tightening of 
monetary policy in the United States and the energy 
crisis. The appropriate response in most countries is to 
calibrate monetary policy to maintain price stabil-
ity, while letting exchange rates adjust, conserving 
valuable foreign exchange reserves for when financial 
conditions really worsen.
As the global economy is headed for stormy waters, 
financial turmoil may well erupt, prompting investors 
to seek the protection of safe-haven investments, such 
as US Treasuries, and pushing the dollar even higher. 
Now is the time for emerging market policymakers 
to batten down the hatches. Eligible countries with 
sound policies should urgently consider improving 
their liquidity buffers by requesting access to precau-
tionary instruments from the Fund. Looking ahead, 
countries should also aim to minimize the impact of 
future financial turmoil through a combination of 
preemptive macroprudential and capital flow mea-
sures, where appropriate, in line with our Integrated 
Policy Framework. Too many low-income countries 
are in or close to debt distress. Progress toward orderly 
debt restructurings through the Group of Twenty’s 
Common Framework for the most affected is urgently 
needed to avert a wave of sovereign debt crisis. Time 
may soon be running out. 
Finally, the energy and food crises, coupled with 
extreme summer temperatures, starkly remind us of 
what an uncontrolled climate transition would look 
like. Much action is needed to implement climate 
policies that will ward off catastrophic climate change. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
xiv	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
As discussed in Chapter 3, these policies may have 
some modest adverse implications for activity and 
inflation in the near term that pale in comparison to 
the catastrophic costs of doing nothing. Importantly, 
these costs rise sharply the more we delay the green 
transition. The message is clear: a timely and credible 
transition, in addition to being critical for our planet’s 
future, also helps macroeconomic stability. 
Progress on climate policies, as well as on debt 
resolution and other targeted multilateral issues, will 
prove that a focused multilateralism can, indeed, 
achieve progress for all and succeed in overcoming 
geo-economic fragmentation pressures.
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Economic Counsellor
FOREWORD
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
xv
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
xvi	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY
The global economy is experiencing a number of 
turbulent challenges. Inflation higher than seen in 
several decades, tightening financial conditions in 
most regions, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and the 
lingering COVID-19 pandemic all weigh heavily on 
the outlook. Normalization of monetary and fiscal 
policies that delivered unprecedented support during 
the pandemic is cooling demand as policymakers aim 
to lower inflation back to target. But a growing share 
of economies are in a growth slowdown or outright 
contraction. The global economy’s future health rests 
critically on the successful calibration of monetary 
policy, the course of the war in Ukraine, and the 
possibility of further pandemic-related supply-side 
disruptions, for example, in China.
Global growth is forecast to slow from 6.0 percent 
in 2021 to 3.2 percent in 2022 and 2.7 percent in 
2023. This is the weakest growth profile since 2001 
except for the global financial crisis and the acute 
phase of the COVID-19 pandemic and reflects 
significant slowdowns for the largest economies: a 
US GDP contraction in the first half of 2022, a euro 
area contraction in the second half of 2022, and 
prolonged COVID-19 outbreaks and lockdowns in 
China with a growing property sector crisis. About 
a third of the world economy faces two consecutive 
quarters of negative growth. Global inflation is fore-
cast to rise from 4.7 percent in 2021 to 8.8 percent 
in 2022 but to decline to 6.5 percent in 2023 and to 
4.1 percent by 2024. Upside inflation surprises have 
been most widespread among advanced economies, 
with greater variability in emerging market and 
developing economies.
Risks to the outlook remain unusually large and to 
the downside. Monetary policy could miscalculate the 
right stance to reduce inflation. Policy paths in the 
largest economies could continue to diverge, leading 
to further US dollar appreciation and cross-border 
tensions. More energy and food price shocks might 
cause inflation to persist for longer. Global tighten-
ing in financing conditions could trigger widespread 
emerging market debt distress. Halting gas supplies by 
Russia could depress output in Europe. A resurgence 
of COVID-19 or new global health scares might 
further stunt growth. A worsening of China’s property 
sector crisis could spill over to the domestic banking 
sector and weigh heavily on the country’s growth, 
with negative cross-border effects. And geopoliti-
cal fragmentation could impede trade and capital 
flows, further hindering climate policy cooperation. 
The balance of risks is tilted firmly to the downside, 
with about a 25 percent chance of one-year-ahead 
global growth falling below 2.0 percent—in the 
10th percentile of global growth outturns since 1970.
Warding off these risks starts with monetary 
policy staying the course to restore price stability. As 
demonstrated in Chapter 2, front-loaded and aggres-
sive monetary tightening is critical to avoid inflation 
de-anchoring as a result of households and businesses 
basing their wage and price expectations on their 
recent inflation experience. Fiscal policy’s priority is 
the protection of vulnerable groups through targeted 
near-term support to alleviate the burden of the cost-
of-living crisis felt across the globe. But its overall 
stance should remain sufficiently tight to keep mone-
tary policy on target. Addressing growing government 
debt distress caused by lower growth and higher bor-
rowing costs requires a meaningful improvement in 
debt resolution frameworks. With tightening financial 
conditions, macroprudential policies should remain 
on guard against systemic risks. Intensifying struc-
tural reforms to improve productivity and economic 
capacity would ease supply constraints and in doing 
so support monetary policy in fighting inflation. Poli-
cies to fast-track the green energy transition will yield 
long-term payoffs for energy security and the costs of 
ongoing climate change. As Chapter 3 shows, phasing 
in the right measures over the coming eight years will 
keep the macroeconomic costs manageable. And last, 
successful multilateral cooperation will prevent frag-
mentation that could reverse the gains in economic 
well-being from 30 years of economic integration.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
1
Inflation and Uncertainty
The world is in a volatile period: economic, geo-
political, and ecological changes all impact the 
global outlook. Inflation has soared to multidecade 
highs, prompting rapid monetary policy tight-
ening and squeezing household budgets, just as 
COVID-19-pandemic-related fiscal support is waning. 
Many low-income countries are facing deep fiscal 
difficulties. At the same time, Russia’s ongoing war in 
Ukraine and tensions elsewhere have raised the possi-
bility of significant geopolitical disruption. Although 
the pandemic’s impact has moderated in most coun-
tries, its lingering waves continue to disrupt economic 
activity, especially in China. And intense heat waves 
and droughts across Europe and central and south Asia 
have provided a taste of a more inhospitable future 
blighted by global climate change.
Amid these volatile conditions, recent data releases 
confirm that the global economy is in a broad-based 
slowdown as downside risks—including risks high-
lighted in the July 2022 World Economic Outlook 
(WEO) Update—materialize, although with some 
conflicting signals. The second quarter of 2022 
saw global real GDP modestly contract (growth of 
–0.1 percentage point at a quarterly annualized rate), 
with negative growth in China, Russia, and the US, as 
well as sharp slowdowns in eastern European coun-
tries most directly affected by the war in Ukraine and 
international sanctions aimed at pressuring Russia to 
end hostilities. At the same time, some major econ-
omies did not contract—euro area growth surprised 
on the upside in the second quarter, led by growth 
in tourism-dependent southern European economies. 
Forward-looking indicators, including new manufac-
turing orders and sentiment gauges, suggest a slow-
down among major economies (Figure 1.1). In some 
cases, however, signals conflict—with some indicators 
showing output weakness amid labor market strength.
An important factor underpinning the slowdown 
in the first half of this year is the rapid removal of 
monetary accommodation as many central banks seek 
to moderate persistently high inflation (Figure 1.2). 
Higher interest rates and the associated rise in 
borrowing costs, including mortgage rates, are having 
their desired effect in taking the heat out of domestic 
demand, with the housing market showing the earliest 
and most evident signs of slowdown in such econo-
mies as the US. Monetary policy tightening has been 
generally—although not everywhere—accompanied 
by a scaling back of fiscal support, which had previ-
ously propped up households’ disposable incomes. 
Broadly speaking, nominal policy rates are now above 
pre-pandemic levels in both advanced and emerging 
market and developing economies. With elevated infla-
tion, real interest rates have generally not yet reverted 
to pre-pandemic levels. Tightening financial conditions 
in most regions, with the notable exception of China 
(October 2022 Global Financial Stability Report), 
reflected in a strong real appreciation of the US dollar
This has also driven up yield spreads—the difference 
between countries’ US dollar– or euro-denominated 
government bond yield and US or German govern-
ment bond yields—for debt-distressed lower- and 
middle-income economies (Figure 1.3). In sub-Saharan 
Africa, yield spreads for more than two-thirds of sover-
eign bonds breached the 700 basis point level in August 
2022––significantly more than a year ago. In eastern 
and central Europe, the effects of the war in Ukraine 
have exacerbated the shifting global risk appetite.
Beyond monetary policy alone, China’s COVID-19 
outbreaks and mobility restrictions as part of the 
authorities’ zero-COVID strategy and Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine have also pulled down economic activity. China’s 
lockdowns have imposed sizable constraints domestically 
and gummed up already strained global supply chains. 
The war in Ukraine and deepening cuts to supplies 
of gas to Europe have amplified preexisting stresses in 
global commodity markets, driving natural gas prices 
higher once more (Figure 1.4). European economies—
including the largest, Germany—are exposed to the 
impact of the gas supply cuts. Continued uncertainty 
over energy supplies has contributed to slower real eco-
nomic activity in Europe, particularly in manufacturing, 
dampening consumer and, to a lesser extent, business 
confidence (Figure 1.1). However, a strong recovery 
in the tourism-dependent southern economies helped 
GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
1
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
2
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
deliver better-than-anticipated overall growth in the first 
half of 2022.
Food prices—a prime driver of global inflation so 
far this year—have provided a rare slice of good news, 
with futures prices falling (Figure 1.4) and the Black 
Sea grain deal giving some hope of improved supply in 
coming months. More generally, some signs show that 
commodity prices might be starting to ease off as global 
demand slows, helping to moderate inflation. How-
ever, recent extreme heat waves and droughts are a stark 
reminder of the near-term threat from climate change and 
its likely impact on agricultural productivity (Figure 1.5).
Although a slight rebound is forecast for the second 
half of the year, full-year growth in 2022 will likely fall 
far short of average pre-pandemic performance and the 
strong growth rebound in 2021. In 2022, the world 
economy is predicted to be 3.2 percent larger than in 
2021, with advanced economies growing 2.4 percent 
and emerging market and developing economies grow-
ing 3.7 percent. The world economy will expand even 
more slowly in 2023, at 2.7 percent, with advanced 
economies growing 1.1 percent and emerging market 
and developing economies 3.7 percent.
Three key factors critically shape this economic 
outlook: monetary policy’s stance in response to ele-
vated inflation, the impact of the war in Ukraine, and 
the ongoing impact of pandemic-related lockdowns 
and supply chain disruptions. The following sections 
discuss each of these forces in turn before presenting 
the outlook in detail.
Central Banks Tackle Stubbornly High Inflation
Since 2021, inflation has risen faster and more per-
sistently than expected. In 2022, inflation in advanced 
economies reached its highest rate since 1982. Although 
inflation is a broad phenomenon, affecting most econ-
omies across the world (Figure 1.6), it has the most 
United States
Euro area
Japan
United Kingdom
Brazil
China
India
Figure 1.1.  Leading Indicators Show Signs of Slowdown
(Indices)
1. Manufacturing PMIs
45
50
55
60
65
Jul.
2021
Oct.
21
Jan.
22
Apr.
22
Jul.
22
Aug.
22
2. Consumer Sentiment
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
Jul.
2021
Oct.
21
Jan.
22
Apr.
22
Jul.
22
Aug.
22
3. Business Sentiment
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
Jul.
2021
Oct.
21
Jan.
22
Apr.
22.
Jul.
22
Aug.
22
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: For panel 1, purchasing managers’ indices (PMIs) greater than 50 denote 
expansion. In panels 2 and 3, values are normalized z-scores.
Tightening AEs
Easing AEs
Tightening EMs
Easing EMs
Figure 1.2.  Change in Monetary Policy Cycle among G20 
Economies
(Number of increases and cuts in policy rates)
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
2007
09
11
13
15
17
19
21 Aug.
22
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging market economies.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
3
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
August 2021
August 2022
Figure 1.3.  EMDE Sovereign Spreads
(Basis points)
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
EMDE Asia
SSA
EMDE Europe
ME&CA
LAC
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: For each region, box denotes upper quartile, median, and lower quartile of 
the members, and whiskers show maximum and minimum values within the 
boundary of 1.5 times interquartile range from upper and lower quartiles. Y-axis is 
cut off at 2,500 basis points. EMDE = emerging market and developing economy; 
LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; ME&CA = Middle East and Central Asia; 
SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.
Natural gas index
Brent crude oil
Wheat
Natural gas index—July 2022 WEO Update
Brent crude oil—July 2022 WEO Update
Wheat—July 2022 WEO Update
Figure 1.4.  Wholesale Food and Fuel Prices Expected to 
Moderate
(Index, January 2019 = 100)
0
200
400
600
800
2019:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
22:Q1
23:Q1
23:Q4
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Natural gas index comprises European, Japanese, and US natural gas price 
indices. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
Middle East and 
Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Europe
Figure 1.5.  Mean Land Temperature
(Degrees Celsius; departures from 1960–91 normal)
Uzbekistan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Pakistan
Kyrgyz Republic
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
Kuwait
Armenia
Israel
April 2022
BIH
France
Morocco
Spain
Slovenia
Portugal
Croatia
Austria
Tunisia
Ethiopia
May 2022
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Sources: Osborn and others (2021); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows deviation from 1960 to 1991 normal monthly temperatures 
and hottest 10 countries by month. BIH = Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Mean
Median
25th–75th percentile
Figure 1.6.  Core Inﬂation and Its Distribution across Countries
(Annualized percent)
–3
0
3
6
9
12
15
2000
03
06
09
12
15
18
21 Jul.
22
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The set of economies includes ARG, BRA, CAN, CHE, CHL, CHN, COL, CZE, 
DEU, DNK, ESP, FRA, GBR, HKG, HUN, IDN, IND, ISR, ITA, JPN, KOR, MEX, MYS, 
NOR, PER, PHL, POL, RUS, SGP, SWE, THA, TUR, TWN, USA, and ZAF. The group 
represents 89.4 percent of advanced economy GDP, 75 percent of emerging 
market and developing economy GDP, and 81 percent of world GDP based on 
purchasing-power-parity weights. Economy list uses International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
4
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
severe impact on lower-income groups in developing 
economies. In these countries, up to half of household 
consumption expenditure is on food, meaning that 
inflation can have particularly acute impacts on human 
health and living standards (Figure 1.7). Despite a 
slight decline in the consumer price index in July and 
August, US inflation reached one of its highest levels 
in about 40 years, with prices in August 8.3 percent 
higher than those one year earlier. Euro area saw infla-
tion reach 10 percent in September, while the UK saw 
annual inflation of 9.9 percent. Emerging market and 
developing economies are estimated to have seen infla-
tion of 10.1 percent in the second quarter of 2022 and 
face a peak inflation rate of 11.0 percent in the third 
quarter: the highest rate since 1999. The reverberations 
of last year’s strong demand recovery and a continued 
rebalancing of demand toward services such as travel 
(Figure 1.8) have driven up inflation. Although futures 
prices have fallen, the delayed pass-through of past 
increases in food and energy prices from global com-
modity markets to consumer prices may continue to 
drive inflation yet higher in the short term. In Europe, 
a significant impact from war-related energy shocks 
compounds these effects, whereas in Asia, a more mod-
erate impact on food prices is helping to keep inflation 
from rising as much as elsewhere (Figure 1.9).
An important recent development is that although 
volatile headline shocks to items such as energy and 
food prices still account for much of inflation, they 
are no longer the overwhelmingly dominant drivers. 
Instead, underlying inflation has also increased—as 
measured by different gauges of core inflation—and 
is likely to remain elevated well into the second half 
Advanced economies
Emerging market and middle-income economies
Low-income developing countries
Figure 1.7.  Inﬂation Hits the Poorest Hardest
(Percent, 2022)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Wheat stores as a share of annual consumption
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Import share of wheat consumption
Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; US Department 
of Agriculture, Foreign Agricultural Service; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data reﬂect storage-level estimates at the end of the ﬁrst quarter of 2022 
and projected consumption levels for 2022. Import share can exceed 100 because 
of stock building and reexport. Triangles show country group averages. 
Core goods: Advanced economies
Core goods: Emerging markets
Services: Advanced economies
Services: Emerging markets
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Jan.
2019
July
19
Jan.
20
July
20
Jan.
21
July
21
Jan.
22
Aug.
22
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Lines show the difference between the year-over-year percent change in 
price indices each month and the average observed during 2018 and 2019 for 
each sector. Core goods exclude energy and food. Countries are aggregated using 
purchasing-power-parity weights. Advanced economies comprise Australia, 
Canada, the euro area, Japan, Korea, and the United States. Emerging markets 
comprise Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Russia, and South 
Africa.
Figure 1.8.  Rebalancing of Demand: Goods versus Services
(Percent deviation from pre–COVID-19 averages)
Food
Energy, transport, and housing
Other
Consumer price index, all items
Figure 1.9.  Inﬂation Driven by Food and Fuel
(Annualized percent)
Sources: IMF, Consumer Price Index database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows inﬂation contributions from broad categories. Contributions are 
computed ﬁrst by country, annualized over available months in cases in which data 
are partial (for example, for 2022). The ﬁgure shows both the median contributions 
and aggregate inﬂation rate for each region.
Western
Hemisphere
Sub-Saharan
Africa
Asia and Paciﬁc
Europe
Middle East 
and Central Asia
2020 21 22
20 21 22
20 21 22
20 21 22
20 21 22
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
5
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
of 2022. Global core inflation, measured by excluding 
food and energy prices, is expected to be 6.6 percent 
on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis, reflecting 
the pass-through of energy prices, supply chain cost 
pressure, and tight labor markets, especially in advanced 
economies. In contrast, the cooling of economic activity 
in China has also eased core inflation. On average, nom-
inal wages take time to increase in response to inflation, 
leading real wages to decline and acting as a dampener 
on demand (see Chapter 2). Yet despite some pockets of 
uncertainty, long-term inflation expectations have gener-
ally remained stable in most major economies.
High inflation in 2021 and 2022 has surprised many 
macroeconomic forecasters, including IMF staff. Upside 
inflation surprises have occurred for most economies 
but have been especially widespread among advanced 
economies. The simple question is, Why? While 
our understanding is still evolving, forecasters likely 
underestimated the impact of the strong economic 
recovery in 2021—supported by fiscal intervention 
in advanced economies—coinciding with strained 
supply chains and tight labor markets (Box 1.1). Across 
advanced economies, forecast errors are related to the 
size of COVID-19–related fiscal stimulus packages. 
The correlation of output and inflation forecast errors 
is positive in both 2021 and 2022, but the relationship 
was stronger in 2021 than it has been so far in 2022. 
That errors were in the same direction suggests that 
excess demand has been a dominant factor, particu-
larly in 2021, as some large economies may have been 
at the steeper end of the aggregate supply curve. The 
declining cross-country correlation in 2022 hints at 
an increased role for supply shocks, related to clogged 
supply chains and, more recently, the war in Ukraine. 
Headline inflation forecast errors have been larger for 
eastern European economies in 2022, consistent with 
the war in Ukraine driving up headline inflation. More 
generally, forecast errors for the noncore part of infla-
tion (mainly reflecting food and energy prices), which 
can reflect supply shocks, have contributed more to 
unexpected increases in inflation in 2022 than in 2021. 
Core inflation forecast errors in China and developing 
Asia have been negative and relatively small so far this 
year, consistent with the slowdown in real activity.
Public debate has also included discussion of the 
role of business markups—the price-to-marginal-cost 
ratio—during the pandemic as a potential driver of 
inflation. Markups have risen steadily over several years, 
prompting intense debate. Yet their recent dynamics 
do not suggest that markups are contributing in any 
sizable way to the current inflationary environment 
(Box 1.2). Elevated markups in fact make persistent 
wage-price spirals less likely, since they provide flexible 
buffers between general wage and general price increases 
(see Chapter 2 and in particular, Box 2.1). And despite 
historically tight labor markets in advanced economies, 
incipient wage-price spirals are not yet on the horizon.
The rise in US inflation has attracted especially 
intense attention, as it came earlier than in other 
advanced economies and surprised many economists. 
One factor explaining the surprise was unexpected 
adverse shocks from the disruption of supply chains 
and the rise in energy prices. The effects of those 
shocks appear to have passed through to underlying 
inflation. Another reason that economists’ expectations 
missed the high-inflation episode was that econo-
mists typically measured labor market tightness using 
the unemployment rate, which has historically had a 
relatively flat relationship with inflation and did not 
decline below pre-pandemic levels. Meanwhile, other 
measures of labor market tightness, including the ratio 
of vacancies to unemployed workers and the intensity 
of on-the-job search, unexpectedly rose to historic 
highs and better explain the rise in inflation (Ball, 
Leigh, and Mishra, forthcoming).
To prevent inflation from becoming entrenched, cen-
tral banks have rapidly lifted nominal policy rates. The 
Federal Reserve has increased the federal funds target 
rate by 3 percentage points since early 2022 and has 
communicated that further rises are likely. The Bank 
of England has raised its policy rate by 2 percentage 
points since the start of the year despite projecting weak 
growth. The European Central Bank has raised its pol-
icy rate by 1.25 percentage points this year. But because 
inflation has outstripped these increases, with a few 
exceptions, real policy rates remain below pre-pandemic 
levels (Figure 1.10). Differences in the paths of mone-
tary policy normalization are due in part to core infla-
tion rising rapidly in some advanced economies, most 
notably in the US, before it did in others. Real activity 
and financial markets have responded to the removal 
of monetary accommodation, with tentative signs of 
cooling housing markets, especially in the US, and of 
slowing momentum in labor markets. Interest rates and 
spreads have also risen in many countries and across the 
yield curve, inducing volatility in financial markets.
The Federal Reserve has raised interest rates more 
aggressively than the European Central Bank in part 
because of differences in underlying inflation dynamics 
and economic conditions to date. Core inflation rose 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
6
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
sooner and has run higher in the US than in the euro 
area, with tighter labor markets and a higher estimated 
output gap (Figure 1.11). These differences partly reflect 
transatlantic differences in the level of direct fiscal 
stimulus earlier in the pandemic, as well as differences 
in the impacts of commodity price shocks and changes 
in private saving (see Figure 2.6). The gap between real 
and nominal wage growth has also closed more rapidly 
in the US than in the euro area, which has added further 
to underlying US inflation momentum. But inflation-
ary pressures are building in the euro area: the war in 
Ukraine continues to have a very clear impact, with 
energy and food prices accounting for about two-thirds 
of the rise in headline inflation and energy price increases 
passing through into broader inflation measures.
War in Ukraine Causes More Human Suffering 
and Economic Damage
Russia’s war in Ukraine continues to leave a mark on 
the region and internationally. The war has displaced 
millions of people and led to substantial loss of human 
life and damage to physical capital in Ukraine. In 
addition to financial and technological sanctions aimed 
at pressuring Russia to end hostilities, the European 
Union implemented embargoes on imports of coal in 
August 2022. It also announced a ban on imports of 
seaborne oil starting at the end of 2022 and a maritime 
insurance ban. Reduced exports from Russia, most 
notably of gas, have also affected fossil fuel trade, with 
the flow of Russian pipeline gas to Europe down to 
about 20 percent of its level one year ago (Figure 1.12). 
This has contributed to the steep increase in natural gas 
prices. The war is having severe economic repercussions 
in Europe, with higher energy prices, weaker consumer 
confidence, and slower momentum in manufacturing 
resulting from persistent supply chain disruptions and 
rising input costs. Adjoining economies––Baltic and 
United States
Euro area
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Brazil
China
Russia
South Africa
Figure 1.10.  Real Short-Term Rates Are Rising
(Percent)
1. Advanced Economies
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
2019:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
22:Q1
22:Q4
2019:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
22:Q1
22:Q4
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
–15
0
–5
–10
5
10
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Projection for the euro area is estimated using projections for 16 individual 
euro area countries. Real rate computed as short-term nominal interest rate less 
core inﬂation one year ahead.
United States
Euro area
Figure 1.11.  A Transatlantic Divergence
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
1. Core Inﬂation
2. Unemployment Rate
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
2
4
6
8
10
2021:
Q1
22:Q1
23:Q1
23:
Q4
2021:
Q1
22:Q1
23:Q1
23:
Q4
3. Vacancies to
Unemployment
(Ratio)
4. Output Gap
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
2020:
Q4
21:
Q2
21:
Q4
22:
Q2
2021
22
23
Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Vacancies to unemployment is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of 
vacancies to the number of unemployed people. For the latter, the age group is 
15–64 in the euro area and 16 or older in the United States. Job vacancy data may 
comprise all sectors or only industry-construction-services depending on data 
availability at the country level. The euro area vacancy-to-unemployment ratio is 
computed by summing the country-level data on number of vacancies and 
unemployed and then computing the ratio.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
7
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
eastern European states––have felt the largest impact, 
with their growth slowing sharply in the second and 
third quarters and their inflation rates soaring.
Russia’s economy is estimated to have contracted by 
21.8 percent (at a quarterly annualized rate) during 
the second quarter, although crude oil and nonenergy 
exports held up. Russian domestic demand is showing 
some stability, thanks to containment of the effect 
of sanctions on the domestic financial sector policy 
support, and a resilient labor market.
The war in Ukraine is also having global conse-
quences for food prices. Despite the recent agreement 
on Black Sea grain exports, global food prices remain 
elevated, although they are expected to soften some-
what. This chapter’s Special Feature, “Commodity 
Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers,” 
points to supply-side factors dominating current food 
price dynamics, compounded by the export restric-
tions several countries have implemented. Overall, 
international inflation has moved higher, propelled 
by further increases in consumer energy and food 
prices, as the war has led to a broadening of infla-
tionary pressures. Countries with diets tilted toward 
foods with the largest price gains, especially wheat 
and corn; those more dependent on food imports; 
and those with diets including sizable quantities of 
foods with large pass-throughs from global to local 
prices have suffered most. Low-income countries 
whose citizens were already experiencing acute mal-
nutrition and excess mortality before the war have 
suffered a particularly severe impact, with especially 
serious effects in sub-Saharan Africa, as food accounts 
for about 40 percent of that region’s consumption 
basket, on average, and the pass-through from 
global to domestic food prices is relatively high at 
30 percent (April 2022 Regional Economic Outlook: 
Sub-Saharan Africa).
COVID-19 Continues to Hold Back 
Economic Progress
As inflation, monetary and fiscal tightening, and 
the war in Ukraine continue to squeeze global activ-
ity, the pandemic (Figure 1.13) is also weighing on 
the macroeconomic outlook. Pandemic-related forces 
have been particularly important in China, where 
a second-quarter contraction contributed to slower 
global activity. Temporary lockdowns in Shanghai 
and elsewhere due to COVID-19 outbreaks have 
weakened local demand, which is reflected in the 
new-orders component of the purchasing managers’ 
index (Figure 1.1). Other data corroborate this picture 
of slowing economic activity in China. Manufacturing 
capacity utilization in the country, for example, 
slowed to less than 76 percent in the second quarter: 
Baltics and Finland
Belarus
Nord Stream 1
TurkStream
Ukraine
Total 
Figure 1.12.  Russian Pipeline Gas Supplies to EU by Route
(Million cubic meters a day)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Jan.
2021
Mar.
21
May
21
July
21
Sep.
21
Nov.
21
Jan.
22
Mar.
22
May
22
July
22
Sep.
22
Sources: European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas; Gas 
Transmission System Operator of Ukraine; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Latest data available are for September 18, 2022. Recent data are 
provisional. Gas ﬂow volumes are measured at EU border crossing points; Belarus 
excludes ﬂows to Kaliningrad (Russia). EU = European Union. 
Russia, Türkiye, South Africa
Rest of the world
United States
Euro area
Other AEs
India
EMDE Asia ex. IND
LAC
Figure 1.13.  New Conﬁrmed COVID-19 Deaths
(Persons; seven-day moving average)
Sources: Our World in Data; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data as of September 13, 2022. Economy group and regional classiﬁcations 
are those in the World Economic Outlook. “Other AEs” by International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) country codes are AUS, CAN, CHE, CZE, DNK, GBR, HKG, 
ISL, ISR, JPN, KOR, MAC, NOR, NZL, SGP, SMR, SWE, and TWN. AEs = advanced 
economies; EMDE Asia ex. IND = emerging market and developing economies in 
Asia excluding India; LAC = Latin American and Caribbean economies.
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
12,500
15,000
17,500
Mar.
2020
Sep.
20
Mar.
21
Sep.
21
Mar.
22
Sep.
22
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
8
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
its lowest level in five years, except during the acute 
phase of the pandemic. Such disruptions in China not 
only have a domestic effect but also spill over inter-
nationally, as lower demand implies fewer exports for 
foreign suppliers. And capacity constraints in pro-
duction and logistics delay the unclogging of supply 
chains, keeping global supply pressures—and hence 
inflation—elevated.
Resurgent variants of the COVID-19 virus threaten 
economic recovery elsewhere too. Limited vaccinations 
make sub-Saharan Africa more prone to ongoing ill-
ness and increase the risk of exposures to new variants. 
African vaccination rates are still a fraction of those of 
all other regions, at about 26 percent, compared with 
about 66 percent in other regions. Booster shots have 
been administered to a mere 2 percent of people in 
African countries, on average—orders of magnitude 
lower than the rate on other continents, where booster 
shots cover between a third and half of their popula-
tions. This low vaccination rate has partly contributed 
to sub-Saharan Africa’s real per capita GDP growth 
lagging behind that of advanced economies in 2022. 
Pandemic-induced scarring has also slowed human 
capital buildup as a result of learning losses from 
lack of schooling and on-the-job skill acquisition (see 
Barrett and others 2021).
The Forecast: Output Lower Still, but 
Inflation Peaking
The developments described in the preceding 
section, with downside risks materializing, mean that 
projected global growth is declining and, in 2023, 
now falls between the July WEO Update baseline and 
alternative scenarios. Uncertainties continue to cloud 
forecasts of global growth and inflation. The baseline 
forecasts described in the following discussion are pred-
icated on several assumptions that plausibly may fail 
to hold: that no further sharp reductions in flows of 
natural gas from Russia to the rest of Europe occur in 
2022, beyond the current 80 percent reduction com-
pared with a year ago; that long-term inflation expecta-
tions remain stable; and that disinflationary monetary 
policy tightening does not induce widespread recession 
(a broad-based contraction in economic activity that 
usually lasts more than a few months) and disorderly 
adjustments in global financial markets.
To recognize the uncertainty surrounding the 
global economy’s evolution, this World Economic 
Outlook report presents a baseline forecast in this 
section and—later on—a fan chart illustrating the 
distribution of probabilities around the baseline as 
well as a downside scenario (Box 1.3).
Global Growth: Near-Term Slowdown
A slowdown in global growth is forecast, from 
6.0 percent in 2021 to 3.2 percent in 2022 and 
2.7 percent in 2023 (Table 1.1). The global slowdown 
in 2022 is as projected in the July 2022 WEO Update, 
while the forecast for 2023 is lower than projected by 
0.2 percentage point (Table 1.1). This prognosis for 
the global economy is far below average: global eco-
nomic growth averaged 3.6 percent during 2000–21 
(and the same during 1970–2021). For most econo-
mies, the outlook is significantly weaker than projected 
six months ago, in the April 2022 WEO. Forecasts are 
weaker than expected for 143 economies (accounting 
for 92 percent of world GDP) for 2023. The forecast 
for 2023 is the weakest since the 2.5 percent growth 
rate seen during the global slowdown of 2001—with 
the exception of those during the global financial and 
COVID-19 crises.
The world’s three largest economies—China, the 
euro area, and the US—will slow significantly in 
2022 and 2023, with downgrades compared with 
the predictions made in April and, in most cases, 
July. The negative revisions reflect the materializa-
tion of downside risks highlighted in the April 2022 
WEO and July 2022 WEO Update and discussed 
at length in the previous section: tightening global 
financial conditions in most regions, associated with 
expectations of steeper interest rate hikes by major 
central banks to fight inflation (October 2022 Global 
Financial Stability Report); a sharper slowdown in 
China due to extended lockdowns and the worsen-
ing property market crisis; and spillover effects from 
the war in Ukraine with gas supplies from Russia to 
Europe tightening.
A decline in global GDP or in global GDP per 
capita—which often happens when there is a global 
recession—is not currently in the baseline forecast. 
However, a contraction in real GDP lasting for at 
least two consecutive quarters (which some econ-
omists refer to as a “technical recession”) is seen at 
some point during 2022–23 in about 43 percent of 
economies with quarterly data forecasts (31 out of 
72 economies), amounting to more than one-third of 
world GDP (Figure 1.14). Moreover, projections for 
global growth on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter 
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
9
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Projections
Difference from July 
2022 WEO Update1
Difference from April 
2022 WEO1
2021
2022
2023
2022
2023
2022
2023
World Output
6.0
3.2
2.7
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.9
Advanced Economies
5.2
2.4
1.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.9
–1.3
United States 
5.7
1.6
1.0
–0.7
0.0
–2.1
–1.3
Euro Area
5.2
3.1
0.5
0.5
–0.7
0.3
–1.8
Germany
2.6
1.5
–0.3
0.3
–1.1
–0.6
–3.0
France
6.8
2.5
0.7
0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.7
Italy
6.7
3.2
–0.2
0.2
–0.9
0.9
–1.9
Spain
5.1
4.3
1.2
0.3
–0.8
–0.5
–2.1
Japan 
1.7
1.7
1.6
0.0
–0.1
–0.7
–0.7
United Kingdom2
7.4
3.6
0.3
0.4
–0.2
–0.1
–0.9
Canada
4.5
3.3
1.5
–0.1
–0.3
–0.6
–1.3
Other Advanced Economies3
5.3
2.8
2.3
–0.1
–0.4
–0.3
–0.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.6
3.7
3.7
0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.7
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.2
4.4
4.9
–0.2
–0.1
–1.0
–0.7
China
8.1
3.2
4.4
–0.1
–0.2
–1.2
–0.7
India4
8.7
6.8
6.1
–0.6
0.0
–1.4
–0.8
ASEAN-55
3.4
5.3
4.9
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–1.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
6.8
0.0
0.6
1.4
–0.3
2.9
–0.7
Russia
4.7
–3.4
–2.3
2.6
1.2
5.1
0.0
Latin America and the Caribbean 
6.9
3.5
1.7
0.5
–0.3
1.0
–0.8
Brazil
4.6
2.8
1.0
1.1
–0.1
2.0
–0.4
Mexico
4.8
2.1
1.2
–0.3
0.0
0.1
–1.3
Middle East and Central Asia
4.5
5.0
3.6
0.2
0.1
0.4
–0.1
Saudi Arabia
3.2
7.6
3.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
Sub-Saharan Africa 
4.7
3.6
3.7
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
–0.3
Nigeria
3.6
3.2
3.0
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
–0.1
South Africa
4.9
2.1
1.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.2
–0.3
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
5.8
2.9
2.1
0.0
–0.3
–0.6
–1.0
European Union
5.4
3.2
0.7
0.4
–0.9
0.3
–1.8
Middle East and North Africa
4.1
5.0
3.6
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.0
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
6.8
3.6
3.6
0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.1
4.8
4.9
–0.2
–0.3
0.2
–0.5
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
10.1
4.3
2.5
0.2
–0.7
–0.7
–1.9
Imports
Advanced Economies
9.5
6.0
2.0
–0.2
–0.8
–0.1
–2.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
11.8
2.4
3.0
1.3
–0.3
–1.5
–1.8
Exports
Advanced Economies
8.7
4.2
2.5
–0.3
–1.0
–0.8
–2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
11.8
3.3
2.9
0.1
–0.4
–0.8
–0.7
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil6
65.9
41.4
–12.9
–9.0
–0.6
–13.3
0.4
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import 
weights) 
26.3
7.3
–6.2
–2.8
–2.7
–4.1
–3.7
World Consumer Prices7
4.7
8.8
6.5
0.5
0.8
1.4
1.7
Advanced Economies8
3.1
7.2
4.4
0.6
1.1
1.5
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7
5.9
9.9
8.1
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during July 22, 2022–August 19, 2022. Economies are listed on 
the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2022 WEO Update, and April 2022 WEO forecasts. 
2See the country-specific note for the United Kingdom in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
4For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as 
a base year.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
10
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
basis are pointing to a significant weakening, to only 
1.7 percent in 2022 and to 2.7 percent in 2023 
(Table 1.1). Negative revisions are more pronounced 
for advanced economies than those for emerg-
ing market and developing economies, for which 
differing exposures to the underlying developments 
imply a more mixed outlook (Figure 1.15). Overall, 
the outlook is one of increasing growth divergence 
between advanced and emerging market and develop-
ing economies.
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (continued)
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Q4 over Q49
Projections
Difference from July 
2022 WEO Update1
Difference from April 
2022 WEO1
2021
2022
2023
2022
2023
2022
2023
World Output
4.5
1.7
2.7
0.0
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
Advanced Economies
4.7
0.9
1.3
–0.4
–0.2
–1.6
–0.7
United States 
5.5
0.0
1.0
–1.0
0.4
–2.8
–0.7
Euro Area
4.6
1.0
1.4
0.3
–0.7
–0.8
–0.9
Germany
1.2
0.6
0.5
0.1
–1.0
–1.8
–2.0
France
5.0
0.4
0.9
0.0
–0.2
–0.5
–0.6
Italy
6.6
0.6
0.5
0.0
–1.1
0.1
–1.7
Spain
5.5
1.3
2.0
0.0
–0.3
–1.0
–2.0
Japan 
0.5
2.1
0.9
–0.3
0.3
–1.4
0.1
United Kingdom2
6.6
1.0
0.2
0.9
–1.1
–0.1
–1.3
Canada
3.2
2.2
1.3
–0.3
–0.4
–1.3
–0.9
Other Advanced Economies3
4.9
1.5
2.3
–0.5
–0.5
–1.0
–0.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.3
2.5
3.9
0.4
–0.8
0.0
–1.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
3.8
4.0
4.2
0.0
–0.5
–0.4
–1.6
China
3.5
4.3
2.6
0.2
–0.6
–0.5
–2.1
India4
3.9
3.3
6.8
–0.8
–0.4
0.6
–2.2
ASEAN-55
4.7
3.8
6.0
0.4
–0.1
–1.3
0.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
6.4
–4.0
4.5
3.0
–3.2
2.0
1.2
Russia
4.8
–7.6
1.0
6.3
–3.8
6.5
–2.3
Latin America and the Caribbean 
4.0
2.1
2.2
0.3
0.1
0.5
–0.3
Brazil
1.6
2.9
0.7
1.4
–0.8
2.1
–1.2
Mexico
1.2
2.4
1.2
–0.5
0.2
–0.9
–0.7
Middle East and Central Asia
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
6.7
4.5
3.7
–2.4
0.0
–2.4
0.1
Sub-Saharan Africa 
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
2.4
2.1
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
South Africa
1.8
2.1
1.0
–0.1
–0.7
–0.2
–0.1
Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
4.5
1.5
2.1
–0.1
–0.4
–1.1
–0.8
European Union
5.0
0.9
2.0
0.0
–0.8
–0.9
–0.7
Middle East and North Africa
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.3
2.4
3.9
0.4
–0.8
0.0
–1.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil6
77.0
15.7
–8.3
–12.9
5.1
–12.9
3.3
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import 
weights) 
16.7
–0.3
–0.3
–6.0
0.3
–9.7
2.2
World Consumer Prices7
5.6
9.3
4.7
1.0
0.6
2.4
0.8
Advanced Economies8
4.9
7.5
3.1
1.2
0.8
2.7
0.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7
6.2
10.9
6.1
0.9
0.4
2.1
0.8
5Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.
6Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $69.42 in 
2021; the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $98.19 in 2022 and $85.52 in 2023.
7Excludes Venezuela. See the country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8The inflation rates for 2022 and 2023, respectively, are as follows: 8.3 percent and 5.7 percent for the euro area, 2.0 percent and 1.4 percent for Japan, and 
8.1 percent and 3.5 percent for the United States.
9For world output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights. 
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 85 percent of annual emerging market 
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
11
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Figure 1.14.  Countries in Contraction as a Share of Global
GDP, 2022–23
(Percent)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Contraction” is deﬁned as consecutive negative quarter-over-quarter 
growth in 2022 or 2023. The bars show the countries’ share in global GDP using 
purchasing-power-parity-based GDP in 2022 as weights. WEO = World Economic 
Outlook.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
January 2022
WEO Update
April 2022
WEO 
July 2022
WEO Update
October 2022
WEO
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Exchange Rate Weights
(Percent change)
Projections
Difference from July 
2022 WEO Update1
Difference from April 
2022 WEO1
2021
2022
2023
2022
2023
2022
2023
World Output
5.8
2.9
2.1
0.0
–0.3
–0.6
–1.0
Advanced Economies
5.2
2.3
1.1
–0.2
–0.3
–1.0
–1.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.7
3.6
3.6
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.6
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.4
4.0
4.7
–0.1
–0.1
–1.0
–0.7
Emerging and Developing Europe
6.5
0.9
0.2
1.4
0.1
3.0
–0.6
Latin America and the Caribbean 
6.7
3.3
1.6
0.5
–0.3
0.9
–0.8
Middle East and Central Asia
4.4
4.7
3.3
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.1
Sub-Saharan Africa 
4.6
3.5
3.6
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
–0.3
Memorandum
European Union
5.3
3.1
0.6
0.4
–0.9
0.3
–1.8
Middle East and North Africa
4.2
4.7
3.2
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
0.0
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
6.9
3.5
3.5
0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.7
Low-Income Developing Countries
4.1
4.7
4.8
–0.2
–0.3
0.1
–0.5
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, in which a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years 
is used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2022 WEO Update, and April 2022 WEO forecasts.
World
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies
Figure 1.15.  Global Growth and Inﬂation Forecasts
(Percent)
1. GDP Growth Rate
0
2
4
6
8
2021
22
23
24
2. Inﬂation Rate
0
2
4
6
8
10
2021
22
23
24
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Solid lines = October 2022 World Economic Outlook; dashed lines = April 
2022 World Economic Outlook.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
12
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Growth Forecast for Advanced Economies
For advanced economies, growth is projected to slow 
from 5.2 percent in 2021 to 2.4 percent in 2022 and 
1.1 percent in 2023. With the slowdown gathering 
strength, growth is revised down compared with the 
July WEO Update (by 0.1 percentage point for 2022 
and 0.3 percentage point for 2023). The projected 
slowdown and the downgrades are concentrated in the 
US and European economies.
Growth in the United States is projected to decline 
from 5.7 percent in 2021 to 1.6 percent in 2022 and 
1.0 percent in 2023, with no growth in 2022 on a 
fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis. Growth in 
2022 has been revised down by 0.7 percentage point 
since July, reflecting the unexpected real GDP con-
traction in the second quarter. Declining real dispos-
able income continues to eat into consumer demand, 
and higher interest rates are taking an important 
toll on spending, especially spending on residen-
tial investment.
In the euro area, the growth slowdown is less pro-
nounced than that in the United States in 2022 but 
is expected to deepen in 2023. Projected growth is 
3.1 percent in 2022 and 0.5 percent in 2023. There is 
an upward revision of 0.5 percentage point since July 
for 2022, on account of a stronger-than-projected 
second-quarter outturn in most euro area economies, 
and a downward revision of 0.7 percentage point for 
2023. This average for the euro area hides significant 
heterogeneity among individual member countries. In 
Italy and Spain, a recovery in tourism-related services 
and industrial production in the first half of 2022 has 
contributed to projected growth of 3.2 percent and 
4.3 percent, respectively, in 2022. However, growth 
in both countries is set to slow sharply in 2023, with 
Italy experiencing negative annual growth. Projected 
growth in 2022 is lower in France, at 2.5 percent, 
and in Germany, at 1.5 percent, and the slowdown in 
2023 is especially sharp for Germany, with negative 
annual growth. Weak 2023 growth across Europe 
reflects spillover effects from the war in Ukraine, with 
especially sharp downward revisions for economies 
most exposed to the Russian gas supply cuts, and 
tighter financial conditions, with the European Central 
Bank having ended net asset purchases and rapidly 
raising policy rates by 50 basis points in July 2022 and 
75 basis points in September 2022. At the same time, 
a number of factors have contributed to a less rapid 
near-term slowdown than in the United States, includ-
ing policy interest rates at still lower levels and, in a 
number of European economies, NextGenerationEU 
funds supporting economic activity.
In the United Kingdom too, a significant slowdown is 
projected. Growth is forecast at 3.6 percent in 2022 and 
0.3 percent in 2023 as high inflation reduces purchasing 
power and tighter monetary policy takes a toll on con-
sumer spending and business investment. This forecast 
was prepared before the announcement (September 23) 
of the sizable fiscal package and incorporates a less sub-
stantial fiscal expansion. The fiscal package is expected 
to lift growth somewhat above the forecast in the near 
term, while complicating the fight against inflation.
Growth in Japan is expected to be more stable at 
1.7 percent in both 2021 and 2022 and 1.6 percent 
2023, with a downward revision for 2023 since July 
of 0.1 percentage point. The revisions reflect mainly 
external factors, with a negative shift in the terms of 
trade (ratio of export to import prices) from higher 
energy import prices as well as lower consumption as 
price inflation outpaces wage growth.
Growth Forecast for Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies
Growth in the emerging market and developing 
economy group is expected to decline to 3.7 percent 
in 2022 and remain there in 2023, in contrast to the 
deepening slowdown in advanced economies. The 
forecast for 2022 is modestly upgraded from the July 
forecast, reflecting a smaller-than-expected contraction 
in emerging and developing Europe.
In emerging and developing Asia, growth is projected to 
decline from 7.2 percent in 2021 to 4.4 percent in 2022 
before rising to 4.9 percent in 2023, with a 0.2 percent-
age point and 0.1 percentage point downgrade since July 
for 2022 and 2023, respectively. The revisions reflect the 
downgrade for growth in China, to 3.2 percent in 2022 
(the lowest growth in more than four decades, exclud-
ing the initial COVID-19 crisis in 2020). COVID-19 
outbreaks and lockdowns in multiple localities, as well 
as the worsening property market crisis, have held back 
economic activity in China, although growth is expected 
to rise to 4.4 percent in 2023. The outlook for India is 
for growth of 6.8 percent in 2022––a 0.6 percentage 
point downgrade since the July forecast, reflecting a 
weaker-than-expected outturn in the second quarter and 
more subdued external demand––and 6.1 percent in 
2023, with no change since July. For the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)-5 economies, pro-
jected growth in 2023 is revised down to reflect mainly 
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
13
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
less favorable external conditions, with slower growth 
in major trading partners such as China, the euro area, 
and the US; the decline in household purchasing power 
from higher food and energy prices; and in most cases, 
more rapid monetary policy tightening to bring inflation 
back to target.
In emerging and developing Europe, growth is pro-
jected at 0.0 percent in 2022 and 0.6 percent in 2023, 
with a 1.4 percentage point upgrade for 2022 and a 
0.3 percentage point downgrade for 2023, compared 
with the July forecast. The economic weakness reflects 
–3.4 percent and –2.3 percent projected growth in 
Russia in 2022 and 2023 and a forecast contraction 
of 35.0 percent in Ukraine in 2022, as a result of the 
war in Ukraine and international sanctions aimed at 
pressuring Russia to end hostilities. The contraction 
in Russia’s economy is less severe than earlier pro-
jected, reflecting resilience in crude oil exports and 
in domestic demand with greater fiscal and monetary 
policy support and a restoration of confidence in the 
financial system.
Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean is 
forecast at 3.5 percent in 2022 and 1.7 percent 
in 2023. Growth for 2022 is higher by 0.5 per-
centage point than projected in July, reflecting 
stronger-than-expected activity in the first half of 
2022 on the back of favorable commodity prices, 
still-favorable external financing conditions, and the 
normalization of activities in contact-intensive sectors. 
However, growth in the region is expected to slow 
in late 2022 and 2023 as partner country growth 
weakens, financial conditions tighten, and commodity 
prices soften.
Growth in the Middle East and Central Asia is 
projected to increase to 5.0 percent in 2022, largely 
reflecting a favorable outlook for the region’s oil 
exporters and an unexpectedly mild impact of the war 
in Ukraine on the Caucasus and Central Asia. In 2023 
growth in the region is set to moderate to 3.6 percent 
as oil prices decline and the headwinds from the global 
slowdown and the war in Ukraine take hold.
In sub-Saharan Africa, the growth outlook is 
slightly weaker than predicted in July, with a 
decline from 4.7 percent in 2021 to 3.6 percent 
and 3.7 percent in 2022 and 2023, respectively—
downward revisions of 0.2 percentage point and 
0.3 percentage point, respectively. This weaker out-
look reflects lower trading partner growth, tighter 
financial and monetary conditions, and a negative 
shift in the commodity terms of trade.
Medium-Term Scarring
The adverse shocks of 2022 are expected to have 
long-lasting effects on output. The fall in global real 
GDP in 2022 compared with forecasts made at the 
start of 2022 (published in the January WEO Update) 
amounts to 1.3 percent (Figure 1.16). Although wind-
fall gains and gains from reform may protect some 
countries (for example, Gulf Cooperation Council 
members), by 2026, the output loss (cumulative 
growth) compared with those early 2022 forecasts is 
projected at 3.0 percent: more than double the initial 
impact. About half of the projected 2022 decline is 
due to lower growth in China, the euro area, Russia, 
and the US, with this composition holding fairly 
steady over the forecast horizon. Long-lasting and 
widening output losses across economies from the 
shocks of 2022 reflect several factors, including the 
combination of the supply-side nature of the initial 
shocks and macroeconomic policy tightening. For 
economies directly affected by the war in Ukraine, 
the damage to activity is likely to last long and affect 
most industries (Novta and Pugacheva 2021, 2022). 
The fading of COVID-19 fiscal support packages 
and anti-inflation monetary policy tightening con-
trast with the expansive policy support put in place 
in many economies in 2020. The persistent effects 
are consistent with economic slowdowns resulting 
in less investment in capital, training, and research 
United States
Euro area
Other AEs
China
India
Russia
Other EMDEs
Total
Figure 1.16.  The Shocks of 2022: Persistent Output Losses
(Percentage point deviation from preshock growth forecast)
2022
2026
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Figure reports deviations of cumulative growths since 2021 from forecasts in 
the January 2022 World Economic Outlook Update. AEs = advanced economies; 
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
14
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
and development, implying scarring to economic 
potential.1
The shocks of 2022 are exacerbating the ongoing 
economic scarring from the pandemic (Figure 1.17), 
particularly for emerging market and developing 
economies. At the start of 2022, the pandemic’s 
medium-term impact on global GDP was already pro-
jected at about –2.4 percent by 2024 (the difference 
between the January 2022 WEO Update projection 
and the January 2020 projection, which preceded the 
pandemic’s onset). Emerging market and developing 
economies bore the projected output and employment 
1For a discussion of such hysteresis effects on the supply side 
of the economy, see, for example, Yellen (2016); Ball (2009, 
2014); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Adler and 
others (2017).
losses disproportionately. Advanced economies had on 
average no projected economic losses, reflecting their 
ability to implement exceptionally large policy support 
packages. For the US as of January 2022, real GDP in 
2024 was expected to surpass pre-pandemic forecasts 
by 1.8 percent. In contrast, in emerging market and 
developing economies, with a younger population, 
greater pandemic disruption to schooling, less policy 
space, and greater preexisting investment needs, output 
and employment were expected to remain somewhere 
below previous trends for years to come (with average 
losses of 4.3 percent for output and 2.6 percent for 
employment in 2024). The shocks of 2022 have nearly 
doubled the projected global output loss for 2024, to 
4.6 percent.
Inflation Peaking
The forecast for global headline consumer price 
index inflation is for a rise from 4.7 percent in 
2021 to 8.8 percent in 2022—an upward revision 
of 0.5 percentage point since July—and a decline 
to 6.5 percent in 2023 and 4.1 percent in 2024. 
Forecasts for most economies have been revised up 
modestly since July but are significantly above fore-
casts made earlier in 2022. On a four-quarter basis, 
projected global headline inflation peaks at 9.5 per-
cent in the third quarter of 2022 before declining 
to 4.7 percent by the fourth quarter of 2023. The 
disinflation projected for 2023 occurs in almost all 
economies for which forecasts are available but is most 
pronounced in advanced economies (Figure 1.18). The 
faster disinflation for advanced economies—a sharper 
reduction in 2023 for a given level of inflation in 
2022—is consistent with the notion that these econo-
mies benefit more than emerging markets from greater 
credibility of monetary frameworks and that this helps 
to reduce inflation.
The upward inflation revision is especially large 
for advanced economies, in which inflation is expected 
to rise from 3.1 percent in 2021 to 7.2 percent in 
2022 before declining to 4.4 percent by 2023 (up 
by 0.6 percentage point and 1.1 percentage point in 
2022 and 2023, respectively, compared with the July 
forecast). Significant increases in headline inflation 
among such major economies as the US (a 0.4 per-
centage point upward revision to 8.1 percent) and the 
euro area (a 1.0 percentage point upward revision to 
8.3 percent) are driving the increase for the group. 
Forecasts for 2024 are relatively unchanged––up by 
January 2022 World Economic Outlook Update
January 2022 World Economic Outlook Update
1. Output Losses Relative to Pre-pandemic Trend, 2024
–12
–10
–8
–4
–6
–2
0
2
4
6
2. Employment Losses Relative to Pre-pandemic Trend, 2024
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
World
EMDEs
US
AEs ex. US
Figure 1.17.  Scarring from the Pandemic
(Percent deviation from pre-pandemic trend)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows medium-term losses, which are the differences between
forecasts of the indicated variable (for 2024) relative to the January 2020 WEO
Update. The sample of countries in panel 2 comprises those that have
comparable employment projections for both times depicted. The emerging
market and developing economy (EMDE) employment aggregate excludes China
and India owing to changes in employment deﬁnitions across vintages. AEs ex.
US = advanced economies excluding the United States; EMDEs Asia ex.
CHN = EMDEs in Asia excluding China; LAC = Latin American and Caribbean
economies; ME&CA = Middle Eastern and Central Asian economies; SSA = sub-
Saharan African economies.
EMDEs Asia
ex. CHN 
EMDEs
EMDEs
Europe
China
LAC
World
SSA
US
ME&CA
AEs ex. US
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
15
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
only 0.1 percentage point––reflecting confidence that 
inflation will decline as central banks tighten poli-
cies and energy prices decline. At the same time, the 
projected inflation reduction is, as mentioned, propor-
tionately greater for advanced economies than for other 
country groups.
For emerging market and developing economies, 
inflation is expected to rise from 5.9 percent in 2021 
to 9.9 percent in 2022, before declining to 8.1 per-
cent in 2023. Prices in the fourth quarter of 2023 
are projected at 6.1 percent higher than in the same 
quarter of 2022. Revisions for these economies (with 
annual inflation revised up by 0.4 percentage point 
and 0.8 percentage point in 2022 and 2023, respec-
tively, compared with the July forecast) display greater 
variation across economies than those for advanced 
economies. There is on average a relatively modest 
upward revision to the inflation forecast for emerging 
and developing Asia (partly because of a slowdown 
of activity in China and limited increases in prices of 
foods that make up a large part of diets) and a modest 
downward revision for Middle East and Central Asia 
economies. There are larger revisions to the inflation 
forecasts for Latin America and the Caribbean (up 
by 2.2 percentage points for 2023), Emerging and 
Developing Europe (up by 0.9 percentage point), 
and Sub-Saharan Africa (up by 2.0 percentage 
points for 2023).
Global Trade Slowdown, with Wider Balances
Global trade growth is slowing sharply: from 
10.1 percent in 2021 to a projected 4.3 percent in 
2022 and 2.5 percent in 2023. This is higher growth 
than in 2019, when rising trade barriers constrained 
global trade, and during the COVID-19 crisis in 
2020, but well below the historical average (4.6 per-
cent for 2000–21 and 5.4 percent for 1970–2021). 
The slowdown, which is 0.7 percentage point steeper 
than that projected for 2023 in the July WEO 
Update, mainly reflects the decline in global output 
growth. Supply chain constraints have been a further 
drag: the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Global 
Supply Chain Pressure Index has declined in recent 
months—largely because of a decrease in Chinese 
supply delivery times—but is still above its normal 
level, indicating continuing disruptions. Neverthe-
less, supply chains are complex, and pandemic-era 
disruptions were a product of multiple factors. If 
other factors continue to improve even as challenges 
in China remain, supply-side pressures may con-
tinue to ease. The dollar’s appreciation in 2022—by 
about 13 percent in nominal effective terms as of 
September compared with the 2021 average––is 
likely to have further slowed world trade growth, 
considering the dollar’s dominant role in trade 
invoicing and the implied pass-through in consumer 
and producer prices outside the US (Gopinath and 
others 2020).
Whereas global trade growth is declining, global 
trade balances have widened. After shrinking during 
2011–19, global current account balances—the sum of 
all economies’ current account surpluses and deficits in 
absolute terms—increased during the COVID-19 crisis 
and are projected to rise further in 2022 (Figure 1.19). 
The widening of balances has reflected the pandemic’s 
impact. It has also, in 2022, mirrored the increase in 
commodity prices associated with the war in Ukraine, 
which has raised balances for oil net exporters and 
reduced them for net importers (2022 External Sector 
Report). A widening in global current account balances 
is not necessarily a negative development, though 
excessive global imbalances can fuel trade tensions and 
protectionist measures or increase the risk of disruptive 
currency and capital flow movements.
Creditor and debtor stock positions are expected 
to remain elevated in 2022, although they have, 
on average, moderated slightly from their 2020 
peaks, because valuation changes have more than 
offset the concurrent widening of current account 
Advanced economies
Emerging market and middle-income economies
Low-income developing countries
Figure 1.18.  Inﬂation Likely to Decline Next Year
(Percent)
2023 inﬂation forecast
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
20
2022 inﬂation forecast
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure reports 45-degree line (solid) and lines (dashes) of best ﬁt for each 
group of economies with matching colors. 16 countries with 2022 inﬂation higher 
than 20 percent are not shown. 14 of those countries show 2023 inﬂation at the 
same or lower levels than that in 2022.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
16
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
balances. The 2022 decline in asset prices in the 
US—the economy with the world’s largest net 
liability position (external assets minus external 
liabilities)—could cause valuation losses for foreign 
holders of US assets. At the same time, however, US 
dollar appreciation could lead to valuation gains in 
emerging market and developing economies, which 
tend to have long positions in foreign currency, while 
increasing the burden of dollar-denominated public 
sector debts.
Risks to the Outlook: The Downside 
Still Dominates
Risks to the outlook continue to be on the down-
side. Overall, risks are elevated as the world grapples 
with the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, a slow-
down in economic activity as central banks ramp up 
efforts to quell inflation, and the lingering pandemic. 
The risks described in this section, if realized, are likely 
to depress growth further and keep inflation higher for 
longer. Some of these risks are currently top of mind 
for the world’s largest firms as they navigate a highly 
uncertain environment. While inflation is increasingly 
important, firms still see COVID-19 as the dominant 
risk (Figure 1.20). The continued high numbers of 
COVID-19 mentions in firms’ earnings calls may 
reflect the pandemic’s lingering effect on labor markets 
and supply chains. Further complicating the outlook, 
it is not at all straightforward how these risks influence 
one another. They may well interact to magnify some 
adverse effects. In what follows, the most prominent 
risks and uncertainties surrounding the outlook are 
discussed, followed by a model-based analysis that 
quantifies the balance of risks to the outlook (Box 1.3).
European creditors
United States
China
Euro area debtors
Japan
Others
Oil exporters
Discrepancy
Figure 1.19.  Current Account and International Investment 
Positions
(Percent of global GDP)
1. Global Current Account Balance
2. Global International Investment Position
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
2005
07
09
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: European creditors = Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, 
Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland; euro area debtors = 
Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain; oil exporters = Algeria, 
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, 
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela.
Inﬂation
Recession
Ukraine war
COVID-19
Figure 1.20.  Corporate Talk of Key Macroeconomic Risks
(Cumulative percent)
1. Advanced Economies
0
3
6
9
12
15
2021:Q1
21:Q2
21:Q3
21:Q4
22:Q1
22:Q2
2021:Q1
21:Q2
21:Q3
21:Q4
22:Q1
22:Q2
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0
3
6
9
12
15
Sources: NL Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each area in the ﬁgure shows the number of sentences in companies’ 
earnings calls that mention the respective risk as a percentage of the total number 
of risk mentions.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
17
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
•• Policy mistakes: under- or overtightening monetary 
policy—Major central banks must chart a difficult 
course. A deteriorating growth outlook with subdued 
consumer and investor sentiment sits somewhat awk-
wardly alongside still-tight labor markets. The major 
economies are also seeing mixed economic readings, 
such as contradictory signals in output and labor 
markets in the US and tourism-supported strong 
growth in Europe during the summer despite the 
war’s impact. While conditioning policy on incoming 
data, there is a risk that inflation expectations could 
de-anchor if the fight against inflation loses momen-
tum. So far, consumer inflation expectations seem to 
remain anchored in major economies (Adrian, Erceg, 
and Natalucci 2022). It is worth noting, however, 
that disagreement among households regarding 
the longer-term outlook for inflation is widening 
and, in some cases, beginning to shift, with a larger 
share of households expecting very high inflation 
(Figure 1.21). The risk of policy mistakes—under- or 
overtightening—is elevated in these conditions. Not 
tightening enough may prove a costly mistake: it risks 
causing inflation to become entrenched, prompting 
a more hawkish future stance on interest rates at a 
significant cost to output and employment. On the 
other hand, overtightening risks sinking many econ-
omies into prolonged recession. The outlook already 
projects a growing number of economies to be in 
contraction in 2022–23 (Figure 1.14). Uncertainty 
about the neutral rate of interest and potential trans-
atlantic monetary policy divergence makes navigating 
this narrow path complicated. Moreover, over- and 
undertightening do not necessarily have symmetric 
costs: a policy mistake that leads to spiraling inflation 
would be the much more detrimental of the two. In 
addition, uncertainty also clouds the natural level of 
unemployment: the pandemic significantly changed 
labor market dynamics in many advanced economies, 
with low employment compared with pre-pandemic 
trends coexisting with elevated labor market tightness. 
Given the uncertain outlook, the coming months 
are likely to test central banks’ mettle in rooting out 
inflation. In this fight, advanced economy central 
banks may be able to depend on a larger credibility 
buffer. While central banks in emerging market econ-
omies and lower-income countries have made signif-
icant progress in policy strategy and communications 
in recent years, gaps between these economies and 
advanced economies persist (Unsal, Papageorgiou, 
and Garbers 2022). Emerging market economies and 
lower-income countries may struggle more to defeat 
inflation. In all cases, however, durably reducing infla-
tion will depend crucially on monetary policymakers’ 
resolve to stay the course and avoid repeating the 
stop-go cycle of the 1970s.
•• Divergent policy paths and dollar strength—Divergences 
in economic policies may continue to contribute to 
US dollar strength, which could create cross-border 
tensions. The course of monetary policy tightening in 
the US and the euro area might continue to diverge 
if inflation persists for longer and a sharp monetary 
tightening proves difficult to implement in the euro 
area in the presence of fragmentation risks. Another 
dimension of macroeconomic policy divergence is 
that among China, Japan, the United Kingdom, and 
the US. In China, output growth has slowed with the 
COVID-19 outbreaks and troubles in the property 
sector, and with relatively benign inflation readings, 
the central bank decided to reduce lending rates in 
August. Japan’s policy rates could continue to remain 
low, given the low underlying core inflation and weak 
June 2021
June 2022
2021:Q2
2022:Q2
Figure 1.21.  Long-Term Inﬂation Expectations
(Percent; ﬁve years ahead)
1. United States
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12
Density
Density
 Five-year inﬂation expectations
 Five-year inﬂation expectations
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
Sources: Bank of England, Inﬂation Attitudes Survey; University of Michigan, 
Surveys of Consumers; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The vertical lines indicate the mean of each distribution.
2. United Kingdom
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
18
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
wage growth. In September, the Japanese authorities 
intervened to support the yen amid the currency’s 
rapid depreciation and a widening ­monetary policy 
divergence with the US. In the United Kingdom, the 
announcement in September of large debt-financed 
fiscal loosening, including tax cuts and measures to 
deal with the high energy prices, was associated with a 
rise in gilt yields (October 2022 Global Financial Sta-
bility Report) and a sharp currency depreciation that 
was later reversed. Overall, policy divergences, and 
any flight-to-safety effects should geopolitical tensions 
rise, may cause further US dollar strength. In 2022 
the dollar has already appreciated by about 15 per-
cent against the euro, over 10 percent against the 
­renminbi, 25 percent against the yen, and 20 percent 
against sterling. The associated currency movements 
may add to cross-border tensions regarding competi-
tiveness; stoke inflation in many economies, given the 
predominance of dollar pricing in international trade; 
and lead some countries to tighten policies further to 
prevent excessive currency depreciation, with negative 
effects on growth.
•• Inflationary forces persisting for longer—Inflation is 
projected to cool in 2023 and 2024, with the forces 
shaping the outlook pointing to faster disinflation 
in advanced economies than in emerging market 
and developing economies (Figure 1.18). However, 
several factors could delay the moderation of inflation 
rates. Further shocks to energy and food prices could 
keep headline inflation higher for longer. Energy 
prices are and will remain particularly sensitive to the 
course of the war in Ukraine and the potential flaring 
up of other geopolitical conflicts. Sustained high 
energy prices as well as the aforementioned currency 
depreciation may also pass through to core inflation 
and so warrant a more hawkish monetary policy 
response. This would deepen the drag on growth 
owing to higher costs of borrowing and depressed 
disposable incomes. And extreme weather events 
might undermine the global food supply, placing 
upward pressure on the prices of foods that make up 
a large part of diets, with dire consequences for the 
world’s poorest countries. Higher-for-longer inflation 
would also raise the risk of inflation de-anchoring or 
a wage-price spiral persisting when expectations are 
more backward-looking. So far, these risks appear 
contained, partly because of more aggressive mone-
tary tightening (see Chapter 2). Firms enjoying higher 
markups might choose to absorb the increase in the 
cost of intermediate goods (Box 1.2), but a prolonged 
increase in input costs could prompt firms to pass on 
higher costs to preserve margins. Although the risk 
of this seems low, firms are increasingly regarding 
inflation as a prominent risk (Figure 1.20). On the 
upside, the current surge in inflation is partly related 
to the stronger-than-anticipated demand recovery 
from the pandemic shock (Box 1.1). With continued 
tightness in labor markets, some advanced economies 
seem to be at the steeper end of the supply curve. 
This may support rapid disinflation, with lower 
output and employment costs. Also, a combination 
of a deteriorating growth outlook and efforts to ramp 
up crude oil production by the largest producers may 
soften energy-induced inflationary pressures.
•• Widespread debt distress in vulnerable emerging 
markets—The war in Ukraine has helped precipitate a 
surge in sovereign spreads for some emerging market 
and developing economies (Figure 1.3). This surge 
comes amid record debt due to the pandemic. Should 
inflation remain elevated, further policy tightening in 
advanced economies may add pressure to borrowing 
costs for emerging market and developing economies. 
Some larger emerging market economies are well 
positioned. But if sovereign spreads increase further, 
or even just remain at current levels for a prolonged 
period, debt sustainability may be at risk for many 
vulnerable emerging market and developing econ-
omies, particularly those hit hardest by energy and 
food price shocks. With a larger import bill, strained 
fiscal budgets, and limited fiscal space, any loss of 
access to short-term funding markets will have sig-
nificant economic and social consequences. The poor 
are particularly vulnerable, as fiscal policy support is 
critical to shielding them from the impact of the food 
inflation shock. A surge in capital outflows might 
also cause distress in emerging market and develop-
ing economies with large external financing needs. 
A widening debt crisis in these economies would 
weigh heavily on global growth and could precip-
itate a global recession. Further US dollar strength 
can only compound the likelihood of debt distress. 
The weakening of national currencies in emerging 
market and developing economies might trigger 
balance sheet vulnerabilities in economies with large 
dollar-denominated net liabilities, with immediate 
risks to financial stability.
•• Halting of gas supplies to Europe—The war in Ukraine 
is still sending aftershocks through Europe and 
global markets. The amount of Russian gas supplied 
to Europe has fallen to about 20 percent of last 
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
19
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
year’s level, compared with 40 percent at the time 
of the July 2022 WEO Update. The latest forecasts 
incorporate the expectation that the volume will 
decline further, to even lower levels, by mid-2024, 
in line with major European economies’ energy 
independence goals. Should Russia completely halt 
gas supplies to Europe in 2022, energy prices would 
likely increase further over the short term, placing 
even more pressure on households, and would be 
expected to cause headline inflation in the euro area 
to remain elevated for longer. The economic impact 
of the shock would—as analysis underlying the July 
2022 WEO Update (Flanagan and others 2022, Lan 
and others 2022) suggests––vary across the con-
tinent with the degree of dependence on Russian 
gas imports and the ability to address infrastructure 
bottlenecks to secure alternative gas shipments. The 
likelihood and magnitude of possible supply short-
falls is smaller today than assessed in July, because 
higher pipeline and LNG flows and gas demand 
compression have led to faster-than-expected storage 
accumulation in the EU in recent months. Countries 
in central and eastern Europe—particularly the Czech 
Republic, Hungary, and the Slovak Republic—might 
face disruptions, given their dependence on Russian 
gas and the potential difficulty of securing alterna-
tive gas supplies. Particularly cold temperatures or 
insufficient gas demand compression this fall could 
force energy rationing during the winter in Germany, 
Europe’s largest economy, with drastic effects for 
industry, weighing heavily on the euro area growth 
outlook and with potential for negative cross-border 
spillover effects. Of course, commodity prices might 
also decline—perhaps if the global downturn is more 
severe than expected—something that would have an 
adverse impact on exporting countries.
•• A resurgence of global health scares—While the latest 
coronavirus variants are less deadly than earlier 
ones and show far more manageable hospitalization 
rates, they are also highly contagious. As such, the 
COVID-19 pandemic is still taking a heavy toll on 
the workforce, resulting in prolonged absenteeism, 
reduced productivity, and falling output. Yet the 
evolution of more aggressive and lethal coronavi-
rus variants remains a risk for the global economy. 
Regions where exposure to new variants is highest 
and those, such as Africa, where vaccination rates 
are still low are likely to bear a higher burden in 
any pandemic resurgence (Figure 1.22). Similarly 
­concerning is the risk of new global health scares. 
For instance, monkeypox currently represents a 
public health emergency of international concern. 
While a scenario in which a new pandemic emerges 
has very low probability, the return to strict lock-
downs could reduce demand for contact-intensive 
services once more. Given squeezed household 
budgets, there is little likelihood of a partial offset 
through a rotation toward demand for goods. 
While this might lessen inflationary pressures, 
further outbreaks could instead magnify supply 
chain bottlenecks, which are finally starting to ease. 
The interplay between these two forces will shape 
the inflation-output trade-off that central banks 
now confront. Over the coming years, such risks, if 
realized, would only deepen the pandemic’s human 
capital scarring and bring productivity down.
•• Worsening of China’s real estate woes—Growth in 
China has weakened significantly since the start of 
2022 and has been subject to downward revision 
since the April 2022 lockdowns in Shanghai and 
elsewhere and because of an expected slowdown in 
global trade (Figure 1.23, panels 1 and 2). Down-
side risks to China’s growth recovery dominate the 
outlook, with signs of a significant slowdown in the 
real estate sector, historically an engine of growth for 
China’s economy (Figure 1.23, panel 3). The decline 
in real estate sales prevents developers from accessing 
a much-needed source of liquidity to finish ongo-
ing projects, putting pressure on their cash flows 
and raising the possibility of further debt defaults. 
Total doses administered per 100 people (right scale)
Share of people with at least one dose
Share of people who are fully vaccinated
Figure 1.22.  Africa Least Vaccinated against COVID-19
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)
Sources: Our World in Data; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Latest data available are for September 13, 2022.
0
25
50
75
100
0
50
100
150
200
250
Africa
Asia
Europe
North
America
Oceania
South
America
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
20
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Concerned with the delay in the delivery of residen-
tial units, thousands of buyers are calling for a mor-
atorium on mortgage payments that would lead to 
forbearance and exacerbate the risk of nonperform-
ing loans for banks, as well as the liquidity squeeze 
developers face. Uncertainty about the property 
sector could also have an impact on consumption 
and local government finances. A further intensifi-
cation of negative feedback loops between housing 
sales and developer stress risks a larger and more 
protracted real estate adjustment. This would be a 
large blow, given that the real estate sector makes 
up about one-fifth of GDP in China. Furthermore, 
the potential for banking sector losses may induce 
broader macro-financial spillovers that would weigh 
heavily on China’s medium-term growth.
•• Fragmentation of the world economy hampering 
international cooperation—The Russian invasion 
of Ukraine fractured relations between Russia 
and many other countries. New geopolitical 
tensions—in east Asia and elsewhere—are also 
becoming more likely. Such tensions risk disrupt-
ing trade and eroding the pillars of multilateral 
cooperation frameworks that took decades to build. 
While the recent Black Sea grain deal bodes well 
for increasing the supply of commodities to global 
markets and is a positive step for international 
diplomatic efforts, the risks of the world economy 
fragmenting further are real and could weigh on 
the outlook, especially over the medium term (the 
next three to five years). Backtracking on the Black 
Sea grain deal might lead to a food security crisis, 
most notably in low-income countries. Further 
fragmentation in global cooperation would create a 
significant risk for climate change policy coopera-
tion. Heightened tensions might also see the world 
fragmenting into different spheres of geopolitical 
influence, with adverse impacts on global trade and 
capital flows.
•• Globally consistent risk assessment of the WEO 
forecast—Confidence bands for the WEO forecast 
for annual global growth are obtained using the 
G20MOD module of the IMF’s Flexible System of 
Global Models. For some regions, the WEO forecast 
has asymmetric confidence bands, skewed toward 
lower growth than in the baseline. This skewing 
reflects the preponderance of negative growth 
surprises in the past. The resulting risk assessment, 
displayed in a fan chart, can also be used to calculate 
the probability of a global economic downturn. 
The estimated probability of one-year-ahead global 
growth below 2.0 percent—an outcome that has 
occurred on only five occasions since 1970 (in 1973, 
1981, 1982, 2009, and 2020)—now stands at about 
25 percent: more than double the normal probabil-
ity (Box 1.3). The probability of negative per capita 
real GDP growth in 2023 is more than 10 percent. 
Such a weak growth outcome could occur if, as 
Box 1.3 explains, a plausible combination of shocks 
were to materialize, including unexpected reductions 
in global oil supply, a further weakening in China’s 
real estate sector, persistent labor market disruption, 
and tighter global financial conditions.
Policy Actions: From Inflation to Growth
Although the economic environment is one of the 
most challenging in many years, difficult times need 
not last forever. Judicious policy choices can help 
guide the global economy out of inflation and into an 
Consensus Forecasts
WEO
Consensus Forecasts
WEO
Real estate ﬁrms: Dollar bond prices
Real estate transactions, seven-day average
CSI 300 Banks Index
Hang Seng Mainland Properties Index
1. 2022 Growth Forecast
(Percent)
2. 2023 Growth Forecast
(Percent)
3
4
5
6
7
3
4
5
6
7
Jan.
2021
July
21
Jan.
22
Sep.
22
Jan.
2021
July
21
Jan.
22
Sep.
22
3. Real Estate Indicators
(Index)
Jan.
2021
Apr.
21
July
21
Oct.
21
Jan.
22
Apr.
22
July
22
Sep.
22
0
50
100
150
200
250
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Consensus Economics; Wind Information (HK) 
Co. Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: For panels 1 and 2, Consensus Forecasts are monthly survey basis. For 
panel 3, all series are indexed to 100 on January 1, 2021, except real estate 
transactions, which are indexed to average 100 in 2021. WEO = World Economic 
Outlook.
Figure 1.23.  Slowdown in China
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
21
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
era of ­sustainable and inclusive growth. Such policies 
have impacts and interactions in the short, medium, 
and long term.
Policies with Immediate Impact
Fighting inflation: The priority must be to tackle 
inflation, normalize central bank balance sheets, and 
raise real policy rates above their neutral level fast 
enough and for long enough to keep inflation and 
inflation expectations under control. Fiscal policy 
also needs to support monetary policy in softening 
demand in economies with excess aggregate demand 
and overheating labor markets. Without price stabil-
ity, any gains from future growth are at risk of being 
eaten up by a renewed cost-of-living squeeze. Central 
banks need to act resolutely while communicating 
clearly the objectives and the steps to achieve them 
(October 2022 Global Financial Stability Report). Yet 
taming inflation will come at a cost: unemployment 
will rise and wages will decline as monetary policy 
tightens. The appropriate path of anti-inflation policies 
will be country-specific and depend crucially on the 
following issues:
•• The timing of the costs and benefits of disinflation: 
The costs of monetary contraction tend to come 
before the benefits. The last major US disinflation 
began in 1980 and brought an almost immediate 
recession. But inflation took about three years to 
fall to manageable levels. More systematic evidence 
points to similar conclusions. Monetary policy 
seems to have its peak impact on real variables after 
about one year, but on inflation after closer to three 
to four years (Coibion 2012; Cloyne and Hürtgen 
2016). This lag between the near-term costs of 
disinflation policies and their longer-term benefits 
poses credibility challenges for monetary policy-
makers, who may expect to receive calls to ease off 
monetary tightening amid job losses and continued 
inflation. And if the interest rate consistent with sta-
ble inflation (often termed the “natural rate of inter-
est”) is higher than previously believed, the costs of 
disinflation—and the pressures to slow the pace of 
tightening—will be correspondingly higher. Indeed, 
some evidence suggests this has already occurred 
in the US. Although real rates are low, historical 
relationships between output and inflation are not 
consistent with the observed increase in inflation 
alone; instead, it seems possible that the natural rate 
may have increased slightly, loosening the stance of 
policy further (Figure 1.24), although there is still 
a great deal of uncertainty about the natural rate 
at medium- and long-term horizons. In any case, 
central banks must stay the course to ensure that 
inflation durably declines. In this, qualitative for-
ward guidance on objectives and reaction functions 
will remain valuable. Yielding to pressure to slow the 
pace of tightening will only undermine credibility, 
allow inflation expectations to rise, and necessitate 
more aggressive and painful policy actions later. By 
reversing course, monetary policymakers will deliver 
only the pain of tightening, with none of the gain. 
Moreover, in some economies, slowing the pace of 
monetary tightening could exacerbate the risks asso-
ciated with policy divergences. Finally, supply-side 
efforts can support monetary policy in reducing 
inflation. Policies to prevent supply shortages will 
ease pressure on inflation as demand recovers and 
include upgrading transportation infrastructure, 
pandemic preparedness, and creating more reliable 
and resilient supply chains. In turn, long-lasting 
supply shocks may also necessitate policy responses.
•• International capital flows: Tighter financial condi-
tions and fear of global recession influence global 
capital flows, often with negative consequences for 
emerging market and developing economies. There 
has been a surge in the US dollar, which in real 
terms has risen to highs not seen since the early 
Natural rate of interest, Kalman
ﬁlter estimate 
Real interest rate
Figure 1.24.  Natural Rate of Interest, United States
(Percent)  
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
1960
70
80
90
2000
10
22:
Q2
Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Survey of Professional Forecasters 
(SPF); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The Kalman ﬁlter estimate is computed from the model of Holston, Laubach, 
and Williams (2017). Shaded range indicates 95 percent conﬁdence interval. Real 
interest rates are computed using SPF forecasts of inﬂation.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
22
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
2000s (­Figure 1.25). Higher US interest rates and the 
strong dollar will raise financing costs for emerg-
ing market and developing economies, which are 
already generally facing real rates higher than those in 
advanced economies. It will also make dollar-invoiced 
imported goods more expensive, boosting inflation. 
In this context, the policy response recommended 
by the IMF’s Integrated Policy Framework, both in 
a prudential manner as well as during the shock, 
depends on country-specific circumstances. For 
countries with deep foreign exchange markets and 
low foreign currency debt, relying on the policy rate 
and exchange rate flexibility is appropriate. On the 
other hand, if foreign exchange markets are shallow, 
the turn in the global financial cycle may be associ-
ated with “taper tantrums” as portfolio-constrained 
investors sell domestic currency assets. In such cases, 
it would be appropriate to conduct foreign exchange 
intervention or loosen inflow capital flow manage-
ment measures (CFMs), instead of moving mone-
tary and fiscal policy away from their appropriate 
settings. For countries with large foreign currency 
debts, outflows may generate systemic financial 
stability risks and a tail risk in growth outcomes. It 
may be appropriate in certain circumstances for such 
countries to use preemptive capital flow management 
or macroprudential measures (measures that are both 
CFMs and or macroprudential measures) to reduce 
their foreign exchange mismatches and to diminish 
the probability and severity of subsequent capital 
flow reversals. In crisis or near-crisis circumstances, 
outflow CFMs may be considered. Foreign exchange 
intervention and inflow CFMs may also be appropri-
ate in emerging market economies in which inflation 
expectations are at high risk of de-anchoring owing 
to sharp exchange rate depreciations.
•• Monetary and fiscal policy coordination: Following a 
broad loosening of public purse strings during the 
pandemic, tightening is expected in 2022 and 2023 
(Figure 1.26). However, in a number of coun-
tries, fiscal policy is expected to loosen, potentially 
boosting aggregate demand and offsetting monetary 
policy’s disinflationary effect. This is not to say that 
fiscal policy cannot cushion the disinflationary tran-
sition’s impact on the vulnerable (more on this topic 
in the next subsection). Although targeted redistrib-
utive policies may be appropriate, deficits should 
be reduced to help tackle inflation and address debt 
vulnerabilities. Fiscal consolidation can also send 
a powerful signal that policymakers are aligned in 
their fight against inflation. Countries will need to 
make difficult choices in the composition of spend-
ing, given the need to keep a tight fiscal stance. For 
example, the cost-of-living crisis may put pressure on 
governments to approve above-inflation public sector 
pay deals. Without fiscal contraction elsewhere, and 
with tight supply, unfunded government spending 
increases or tax cuts will only push inflation up fur-
ther and make monetary policymakers’ jobs harder.
Figure 1.25.  Broad-Based Dollar Appreciation
(Index, 2010 = 100)
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows real effective exchange rate of US dollar based on consumer 
prices.
1980
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
20 Jul.
22
80
100
120
140
160
United States
Other AEs
Euro area
China
Japan
Other EMDEs
Figure 1.26.  Change in Cyclically Adjusted Primary Balance
(Percentage points)
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
2019
20
21
22
23
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each line denotes change in cyclically adjusted primary balance in percent of 
GDP series from the previous period. “Other AEs” and “Other EMDEs” comprise 11 
and 15 economies, respectively. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging
market and developing economies.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
23
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Protecting the vulnerable during the adjustment: As 
the cost of living continues to rise, policymakers will 
need to protect the most vulnerable members of soci-
ety from the impact of higher prices. Poorer house-
holds often spend relatively more than others on food, 
heating, and fuel: categories that have seen particularly 
steep price increases. Moreover, households cannot 
easily adjust consumption to minimize spending on 
these products; everyone must eat and use heating, 
and transportation (whose price is often determined 
largely by fuel costs) is often essential to get to work. 
In countries with well-developed social safety nets, 
targeted cash transfers to those particularly exposed to 
higher energy and food prices (such as children and 
older people) and existing automatic stabilizers (for 
example, unemployment insurance) are the best ways 
to limit the impact on those least able to bear it. How-
ever, measures to limit the inflationary impact should 
offset any increase in new spending. In countries 
lacking well-developed safety nets, governments should 
look to extend any already active programs. In general, 
broad price caps or food and energy subsidies should 
be avoided, as they increase demand while diminish-
ing or removing supply incentives. This can result in 
rationing and an unbridled underground economy. 
Moreover, such programs are often expensive and 
regressive, funneling public cash to those who consume 
the most rather than to those with the greatest need 
(see the October 2022 Fiscal Monitor).
Warding off pandemic risks: COVID-19 continues to 
have long-lasting effects on the global economy. Even 
though many of the new variants are less deadly than 
early ones, they continue to have considerable eco-
nomic impact. Although strict lockdowns are increas-
ingly rare, the disease continues to cause economic 
disruption, as businesses may struggle to adapt to 
unpredictable absences when workers or their family 
members fall sick. As the virus persists and continues 
to evolve, ensuring equitable access to a comprehensive 
toolkit of vaccines, tests, and treatments worldwide 
is the best strategy not only to save lives, but also to 
reduce a key source of uncertainty holding back the 
global recovery. Regarding vaccinations, the primary 
focus should be on fully vaccinating the most clini-
cally vulnerable populations. Ongoing investments in 
research, disease surveillance, and health systems will 
also be needed to keep a broad set of tools updated as 
the virus evolves.
The impact of the pandemic is perhaps most keenly 
felt in China, where intermittent lockdowns in parts 
of the country have continued to affect economic 
activity. Temporary disruptions to domestic logistics 
and supply chains during the largest outbreaks, besides 
being a drag on private consumption, have hit the 
country’s manufacturers, adding to existing pressures 
on global supply chains. The recurring outbreaks stress 
the importance of paving the way for a safe exit from 
China’s zero-COVID strategy, including by adding to 
the country’s successful vaccination campaign, espe-
cially for the undervaccinated elderly.
Policies with Payoffs in the Medium Term
Improved frameworks for debt resolution: Some coun-
tries will find their fiscal sectors under considerable 
pressure, with rising interest rates, a coming global 
slowdown, and towering pandemic-era debts. Although 
those most exposed account for only a small share 
of global output and financial assets (Figure 1.27), 
spillover effects—most notably contagion, in which 
a crisis in one country induces investors to run from 
1. Weighted Average
Debt-to-GDP Ratio
2. Country Share of World GDP
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
1
2
3
4
5
Distressed
Stressed
Distressed
Stressed
3. Debt in Percent of EMDEs’
GDP   
4. Debt in Percent of EMDEs’
Total Debt
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Groups are classiﬁed based on sovereign spread data as of September 9,
2022. Distressed group indicates economies with spreads greater than 1,000
basis points; stressed group indicates economies with spreads of 700–1,000
basis points. EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
Distressed
Stressed
Distressed
Stressed
Figure 1.27.  Debt in Distress in Emerging Market and 
Developing Economies
(Percent)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
24
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
similar assets elsewhere—can be significant. While the 
best solution is always an orderly adjustment within a 
well-founded medium-term fiscal strategy, driven by 
domestic policy priorities, the likelihood is that more 
countries will enter debt distress. In such cases, coop-
erative global policies are essential to stop the spread 
of crises and can be achieved preferably by setting up 
appropriate mechanisms or institutions in advance. 
The IMF, as one such institution, stands ready to 
support countries with temporary balance-of-payments 
difficulties in accordance with IMF policies. But 
other complementary approaches should be developed 
further. In particular, the common debt resolution 
framework of the Group of Twenty (G20) can be 
improved to allow swift and fair resolution in cases of 
distressed debt, enabling countries to get out of default 
without extended economic pain. Recent progress in 
regard to Zambia is welcome, but more is needed. 
Coverage should be expanded to include a broader set 
of countries, and creditor committees need to meet 
and formulate agreements swiftly and transparently. 
Debt distress in emerging market and developing 
economies is a growing problem. It is imperative that 
a well-functioning G20 debt resolution mechanism be 
put in place as soon as possible.
Preparing for tighter international financial conditions: 
Tightening monetary policy may also put pressure 
on financial institutions. The best time to prepare for 
a tightening of financial conditions is now. As the 
economy slows, default rates rise and income from 
new loans decreases. Although higher rates may boost 
interest income, they are likely to have a negative effect 
overall on many institutions. As such, macropruden-
tial policy will need to become ever more vigilant, 
guarding against the failure of systemic institutions, 
using selected instruments to address pockets of 
elevated vulnerability (see the October 2022 Global 
Financial Stability Report). In particular, the housing 
market remains a potential source of macro-financial 
risk; authorities should assess the systemic effects of a 
correction in house prices through rigorous stress tests. 
In China, authorities should enable the restructuring 
of troubled housebuilders and prepare to tackle the 
housing market’s impact on the financial system more 
broadly. Tighter international financial conditions may 
also put pressure on currency exchange rates. Depend-
ing on country circumstances and the nature of shocks, 
policymakers should be ready to step in when flexible 
exchange rates alone are unable to absorb external 
shocks. For instance, crises may require policymakers 
to intervene in foreign exchange markets or intro-
duce capital flow management measures. However, 
such measures should be strictly temporary, with 
well-defined goals. And governments with high debt 
should preemptively reduce reliance on foreign cur-
rency borrowing. Prompt and reliable access to reserve 
currency liquidity—including through IMF precau-
tionary and disbursing arrangements—gives countries 
breathing room to implement adjustment policies in 
an orderly manner. Finally, competing pressures in the 
euro area make a well-designed European Central Bank 
facility, such as the Transmission Protection Instru-
ment, more of a necessity to support a smooth mon-
etary transmission. This will help policy interest rates 
better reflect macroeconomic conditions across the 
euro area. Such an instrument should complement the 
existing conditional Outright Monetary Transactions 
instrument and the European Stability Mechanism’s 
lending program. At the same time, it should not 
distort markets so much that prices no longer reflect 
fundamental risks.
Structural reforms: Policies that expand supply 
can boost economic activity while easing inflation, 
though with somewhat of a lag. In advanced econ-
omies, such policies include those that expand the 
workforce, such as childcare subsidies, earned income 
tax credits, reformed immigration systems, and better 
access to COVID-19 vaccinations and treatment. In 
emerging market and developing economies, better 
education, business climates, and digital infrastructure 
can also help.
Policies with Longer-Term Benefits
Climate policies: Climate change continues apace. 
Extreme temperatures are but one manifestation of 
the challenges such change presents. Without prompt 
remedial action, climate change will eventually have 
catastrophic impacts on health and economic outcomes 
the world over. Current global targets are not aligned 
with global temperature goals. Meeting these goals will 
require emission cuts of at least 25 percent by the end 
of the decade (Chapter 3). The ongoing energy crisis 
has also sharpened the energy security benefits coun-
tries can derive from transitioning to clean and reliable 
energy sources to steadily replace their reliance on fossil 
fuels with renewables and low-carbon energy sources. 
To accelerate this transition, governments should both 
set a minimum price for carbon and promote clean 
alternatives, including subsidies for renewables and 
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
25
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
investment in enabling infrastructure such as smart 
grids. In a world of already-high prices, shifting to 
new energy sources may be politically challenging and 
apparently risky. But policies to offset the cost of the 
transition, such as feebates and targeted compensa-
tion for those losing out, can help ease the transition. 
And although the green transition may entail risks, 
these are minimal compared with the risk of doing 
nothing. Indeed, new IMF analysis highlighted in 
Chapter 3 suggests that the cost of the transition to 
clean electricity need not be inflationary and can be 
achieved with impacts on GDP that are smaller than 
the annual variation in normal times. Delay will only 
cause those costs to rise. The passage of the Inflation 
Reduction Act in the US, which includes $369 billion 
for energy security and climate change policies, is wel-
come. The law aims to reduce US carbon emissions by 
about 40 percent by 2030, mostly through tax credits 
and incentives to increase investment in clean energy. 
Yet the omission of broad-based carbon pricing and 
sectoral feebates, as well as any elimination of subsidies 
for fossil fuel and carbon-intensive agriculture, still 
leaves room for improvement. Likewise, the sizable 
energy package announced by the UK government, 
aimed at assisting all families and businesses dealing 
with high energy prices, has scope for better targeting 
the vulnerable, which would lower the cost of the 
package and better preserve incentives to save energy.
Strengthening multilateral cooperation and avoiding 
fragmentation: The recent spike in global inflation 
has prompted a corresponding wave of short-term 
protectionism, most notably in regard to food. And 
although protectionist policies may be appealing 
in the short term, there are ultimately no winners. 
When countries ban exports, they deny themselves 
the income to buy other goods they might need from 
abroad. Moreover, export bans in one country often 
provoke retaliatory bans elsewhere, leaving all par-
ties worse off. A similar principle applies to medical 
products, which have been subject to trade restrictions 
at various times during the pandemic. Governments 
should unwind pre-pandemic trade restrictions and 
follow through on their commitment to World Trade 
Organization reform. This includes restoring a fully 
functioning dispute settlement system and enhancing 
rules in areas such as agricultural and industrial subsi-
dies. In addition, multilateral cooperation is essential 
to the advance of technologies to support climate 
change mitigation and boost green financing. Also, 
support for low-income countries through concessional 
funding is needed to catalyze growth-enhancing reform 
and help them meet their climate targets.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
26
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Inflation has repeatedly exceeded World Economic Out-
look (WEO) forecasts during 2021–22 across geographic 
regions by an abnormally high amount. The forecast 
errors were generally larger for 2022 than for 2021, but 
those for core inflation were less prominent for 2022. 
Larger-than-expected demand recovery in advanced econ-
omies and emerging market and developing economies 
partly explains core inflation forecast errors for 2021, 
with COVID-19 fiscal stimulus packages likely playing a 
supporting role in advanced economies.
Inflation has surprised consistently on the upside 
since the second quarter of 2021. This has led to 
successive upward revisions in WEO inflation forecasts 
(Figure 1.1.1) for both headline and core inflation and 
for both advanced and emerging market and devel-
oping economies. The October 2022 WEO forecast 
views inflation in advanced economies as peaking 
later than expected in the January WEO Update and 
April 2022 WEO. Headline inflation in emerging 
market and developing economies is now expected to 
peak higher, yet not later, than previously thought.
Inflation forecast errors are larger for 2022 than 
those for 2021.1 The increase for 2022 is especially 
large for economies in Europe (Figure 1.1.2). The 
errors realized for 2021 and 2022, which average 
1.7 percentage points for Europe and 3.2 percentage 
points globally, compare with a near-zero average for 
the decade that preceded the COVID-19 crisis. The 
root-mean-square error is 2.5 times larger for 2021 
and 5 times larger for 2022 than it was for 2010–19. 
The large 2022 inflation surprises for emerging Europe 
are due to exceptionally high realized inflation in Bal-
tic and other eastern European states as a result of the 
Russian invasion of Ukraine. Only China and the US 
saw smaller errors for 2022 than for 2021. China faces 
an economic slowdown, putting downward pressure 
on inflation. The US has seen a significant upward 
revision to the inflation forecast in the January 2022 
The authors of this box are Christoffer Koch and 
Diaa Noureldin.
1The forecast error in a given year refers to the difference 
between the actual realization and the forecast issued at the start 
of the year (January WEO Update). Since actual inflation is yet 
to be realized for 2022, “forecast error” here refers to the forecast 
revision for 2022 annual inflation made in the October 2022 
WEO relative to the January 2022 WEO Update. A positive 
“forecast error” for a particular country for 2022 thus indicates 
that 2022 inflation is projected (as of October 2022) to be 
higher than anticipated at the start of 2022.
WEO Update, as early signs of overheating were 
evident from the elevated core inflation readings since 
the second quarter of 2021 and from increasingly tight 
labor markets.2 Evidence also shows that forecasts of 
inflation’s persistence may have been understated. On 
average, an additional 1 percentage point inflation 
surprise for 2021 is associated with an additional 
2See Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (forthcoming) for a discussion of 
labor market tightness and its impact on inflation in the US after 
the pandemic. See also Duval and others (2022) for evidence for 
selected advanced economies.
Oct. 2022 WEO
Apr. 2022 WEO
Oct. 2021 WEO
Apr. 2021 WEO
Jul. 2022 WEO Update 
Jan. 2022 WEO Update 
Jul. 2021 WEO Update 
Jan. 2021 WEO Update 
1. Advanced Economies
2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2020
21
22
2020
21
22
23:
Q4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
23:
Q4
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The lines plot the four-quarter purchasing-power- 
parity-GDP-weighted inﬂation forecasts from the January 
2021 WEO Update to the October 2022 WEO. WEO = World 
Economic Outlook. 
Figure 1.1.1.  Headline Inﬂation Forecasts
(Percent)
Box 1.1. Dissecting Recent WEO Inflation Forecast Errors
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
27
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
subsequent forecast error of 0.22 percentage point 
for 2022. The relationship is statistically significant 
(t-statistic = 2.68). Since the forecast error for 2021 
was known when the forecasts for 2022 were made, it 
should not in principle be correlated with subsequent 
forecast errors.
Core inflation drove inflation forecast errors for 
2021, but less so for 2022. Core inflation forecast 
errors represented the bulk of errors for 2021, at 
53.6 percent for advanced economies and 71.9 per-
cent for emerging market and developing economies. 
In regard to 2022, the core inflation contribution is 
lower, at 46.5 percent for advanced economies and 
47.9 percent for emerging markets. The large contri-
bution of core inflation forecast errors for 2021 likely 
reflects wide demand-supply imbalances as the strong 
demand recovery from the COVID-19 shock hit 
persistent supply disruptions, a topic that is explored 
later in this box. On the other hand, the inflation 
errors for 2022 are relatively more concentrated in 
noncore inflation, suggesting a stronger role for energy 
and food supply-side shocks, in large part due to the 
war in Ukraine.
Can the stronger-than-anticipated demand recov-
ery partly explain core inflation forecast errors? A 
scatterplot of the respective forecast errors shows a 
positive association between output and core inflation 
surprises for 2021 (Figure 1.1.3, panel 1). The line 
of best fit (weighted by purchasing-power-parity 
GDP) traces out a Phillips curve relationship with a 
greater slope compared with that of the pre-pandemic 
2010–19
2021
2022
China
Dev. Asia ex. China
US
ME&CA
EMMIEs
LIDCs
SSA
AEs
LAC
World
Advanced Europe
Emerging Europe
World 2022
forecast errors 
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Mean forecast errors
Source: IMF staff calculations. 
Note: Mean inﬂation forecast errors from January 2021 WEO 
Update for 2021 inﬂation and January 2022 WEO Update for 
2022 inﬂation compared with respective mean forecast errors 
with respect to January WEO Updates from 2010–19. Within- 
group forecast errors are weighted by purchasing power 
parity. AEs = advanced economies; Dev. Asia ex. China = 
developing Asia excluding China; EMMIEs = emerging market 
and middle-income economies; LAC = Latin America and 
Caribbean economies; LIDCs = low-income developing 
countries; ME&CA = Middle Eastern and Central Asian 
economies; SSA = sub-Saharan African economies.
Figure 1.1.2.  WEO Annual Headline Forecast 
Errors with Respect to Preceding January WEO 
Updates
(Percentage points)
Linear ﬁt
Pre-pandemic Phillips curve estimate
Core inﬂation forecast error
Figure 1.1.3.  Core Inﬂation and Output 
Forecast Errors
(Percentage points)
Source: IMF staff calculations. 
Note: Outlier observations excluded if the absolute forecast 
errors exceed 10 percentage points. Russia and Ukraine are 
excluded in 2022. Regression is PPP-GDP weighted using 
weights for 2021 in panel 1 and weights for 2022 in panel 2. 
Bubble size indicates the size of the economy according to 
the PPP-GDP weights. PPP = purchasing power parity. 
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Core inﬂation forecast error
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
10
8
1. 2021
2. 2022
Output growth forecast error
–5 –4 –3 –2 –1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
–5 –4 –3 –2 –1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Output growth forecast error
Box 1.1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
28
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Phillips curve estimate.3 This suggests the global 
economy may have been at the steeper end of the 
aggregate supply curve in 2021, as the rapid demand 
recovery met continually disrupted supply. The 
July 2021 WEO Update and October 2021 WEO 
documented the strength of the demand recovery. 
Advanced economies showed a noticeably strong 
recovery in output (manufacturing and services). 
Also, supply strain was at its worst in the second half 
of 2021, as indicated by purchasing managers’ index 
supply delivery times. For 2022 core inflation forecast 
errors, the line of best fit is flatter and nonsignifi-
cantly different from the slope of the pre-pandemic 
Phillips curve (Figure 1.1.3, panel 2).
The strong association between inflation and 
output forecast errors for 2021 likely reflects, in part, 
the COVID-19 fiscal stimulus packages and tight 
labor markets, particularly in advanced economies. 
Ambitious fiscal stimulus packages in reaction to the 
pandemic shock likely boosted demand recovery in 
2021. With interest rates at the zero lower bound in 
most advanced economies, policymakers resorted to 
fiscal policy to cushion the impact of the pandemic 
shock and avert long-term scarring. Figure 1.1.4 
(panel 1) shows a wide range of magnitudes of fiscal 
packages announced in 2020, based on the Data-
base of Country Fiscal Measures in Response to the 
COVID-19 Pandemic (January 2021 Fiscal Monitor 
Update). A number of large economies (for example, 
Japan, the UK, and the US) committed to spending 
in excess of 15 percent of GDP in response to the 
pandemic. The overall scatterplot does not exhibit 
a strong positive association, confirming that other 
factors are also at play, yet advanced economies 
show a strong relationship between inflation fore-
cast errors and fiscal packages. For advanced econ-
omies, an additional 10 percent of GDP in fiscal 
support is associated with a 0.8 percentage point 
larger-than-expected core inflation rate (t-statistic = 
3.38). In real time, forecasters likely underestimated 
fiscal packages’ impact on inflation in those econo-
mies. Supply disruptions were not visible merely in 
the market for goods and in clogged global supply 
chains: the pandemic and subsequent rapid demand 
rebound also squeezed domestic labor markets. To 
highlight the relationship between labor markets and 
3The pre-pandemic estimate is based on a hybrid Phillips 
curve specification during 2000–19. See Chapter 2 of the 
October 2021 WEO for further details.
AEs
EMDEs
Linear ﬁt
Linear ﬁt
Linear ﬁt
Figure 1.1.4.  Impacts on Core Inﬂation
Forecast Errors
(Percent) 
1. Core Inﬂation Forecast Errors versus
    COVID-19 Fiscal Impulse, 2021  
Core inﬂation forecast error
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
AUS
CAN
GBR
USA
Fiscal impulse (percent of GDP)
2. Core Inﬂation Forecast Errors versus Labor
    Market Tightness, 2021 
Core inﬂation forecast error
–1
0
1
2
3
4
AUS
CAN
GBR
USA
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Vacancies/unemployment, 2021 versus 2020
3. Core Inﬂation Forecast Errors versus 
    Relative Goods Inﬂation, 2021
Core inﬂation forecast error
–1
0
1
2
3
AUS
CAN
GBR
USA
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, “ﬁscal impulse” refers to the announced 
COVID-19 ﬁscal support packages in 2020. The solid line is a 
linear ﬁt of a weighted regression for advanced economies, in 
which the weights are the 2021 PPP GDP. In panel 2, the linear 
ﬁt uses 2021 PPP GDP weights. In panel 3, regression is 
PPP-GDP weighted using weights for 2021. All three panels 
exclude outlier observations if the absolute forecast errors for 
core inﬂation or output growth exceed 10 percentage points. 
AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and 
developing economies; PPP = purchasing power parity. Data 
labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
Ratio of year-over-year core goods to services inﬂation in 2021
0
5
10
15
20
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Box 1.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
29
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
core inflation forecast errors, the ratio of vacancies 
to unemployment in 2021 relative to that in 2020 is 
computed. This ratio displays a positive relationship 
with inflation forecast errors (Figure 1.1.4, panel 2). 
A regression accounts for more than 50 percent of the 
error variations. Finally, Figure 1.1.4 (panel 3) high-
lights the role of reshuffling of sectoral demand from 
services to goods. It plots the ratio of core goods infla-
tion to services inflation in 2021, which was about 
2.5 in the US, against core inflation forecast errors 
in 2021. The positive correlation suggests a role for 
sectoral demand dislocations in driving unanticipated 
inflation aberrations. Overall, the patterns in regard 
to fiscal impulses, labor market tightness, and sectoral 
shifts are consistent with the notion that fiscal policy 
supported buoyant demand, when the economy’s 
supply side was still impaired, and so contributed 
meaningfully to inflation forecast misses.
Box 1.1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
30
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Is corporate market power behind the current wave 
of inflation? With consumer price growth surging in 
2021 and 2022 across numerous advanced economies, 
this question is at the forefront of policy and academic 
debates. One potential explanation is that firms take 
advantage of low competition to shield profits by 
passing rising input and labor costs on to households 
through higher prices. This box, however, presents new 
evidence suggesting that market power has not contrib-
uted substantially to inflation at the current conjuncture.
Profits rebounded in 2021 after taking a hit in 
2020. Some of the recovery may have resulted from 
firms’ charging higher prices. Decomposing GDP 
deflator growth into factor income growth shows that 
the private sector’s gross operating surplus, which 
includes profits, has been an important driver of 
higher output prices in several advanced economies, 
alongside rising unit labor costs (Figure 1.2.1). In 
the US, where the GDP deflator increased 7 percent 
between 2019 and 2021, roughly 40 percent of this 
increase can be attributed to rising gross operating sur-
plus, while rising employee compensation accounts for 
65 percent. In contrast, production taxes, the decom-
position’s final component, contributed negatively, 
reflecting fiscal support during COVID-19. Other 
advanced economies show similar patterns.
While market power has grown steadily over the 
past decades in several advanced economies (Díez, 
Leigh, and Tambunlertchai 2018; April 2019 World 
Economic Outlook, Chapter 2), the recent rise in profits 
and prices does not necessarily mean that market 
power has increased further during the pandemic. A 
variety of other channels could be driving rising prof-
its, such as higher demand or a (temporary) decline in 
firms’ capital expenditures.
To shed light on market power’s role in the recent 
inflationary wave, this box estimates markups for 
nine advanced economies (Australia, Canada, France, 
Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain, UK, US) during 
2000–21 based on Worldscope data on publicly 
traded nonfinancial firms.1 These markups—defined 
The authors of this box are Federico Díez, Longji Li, Myrto 
Oikonomou, and Carlo Pizzinelli.
1The financial sector is excluded, because markups estimated 
from a traditional production function may not be the best measure 
of market power for financial institutions (see Akcigit and others 
2021). Konczal and Lusiani (2022) find that 2021 growth in mark-
ups in the financial sector was substantially higher than that in other 
industries. In contrast to those from Worldscope, national accounts 
data, used in Figure 1.2.1, encompass the entirety of the economy.
by the price-to-marginal-cost ratio—are common 
indicators of market power. The analysis follows 
closely the methodology of De Loecker, Eeckhout, 
and Unger (2020) and Díez, Leigh, and Tambunlert-
chai (2018).2
Figure 1.2.2 shows that, as discussed in earlier stud-
ies (April 2019 World Economic Outlook, Chapter 2; 
Akcigit and others 2021), markups increased steadily 
across advanced economies in the past decades, 
suggesting long-term consolidation of firms’ market 
power.3 However, during the pandemic, markup 
2A key assumption of this method is that firms face an uncon-
strained short-term supply of intermediate goods and labor. The 
assumption of flexible inputs is reasonable even under some 
labor market rigidities and amid recent supply chain disruptions: 
the cost-of-goods-sold measure used for the estimation encom-
passes a diverse basket of labor and intermediate goods, resulting 
in a flexible composite of inputs.
3These results should be interpreted with caution because, 
while listed firms account for a sizable share of output (especially 
in the US), evidence shows that privately held firms have differ-
ent markup dynamics (Díez, Fan, and Villegas-Sánchez 2021).
Gross operating surplus
Net tax change
Compensation of employees
GDP deﬂator cumulative growth
Figure 1.2.1.  Decomposition of GDP Deﬂator 
Growth by Income Components
(Percent)
Sources: Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff calculations. 
Note: Black diamonds report the aggregate growth in the 
GDP deﬂator from the fourth quarter of 2019 to the fourth 
quarter of 2021. Each stacked bar computes the contribution 
of the respective income component by multiplying the 
component’s share of GDP in the fourth quarter of 2019 by 
the difference between the component’s nominal growth 
rate and the growth rate of aggregate real GDP.
Canada
United States
United
Kingdom
Euro area
–5
0
5
10
15
Box 1.2. Market Power and Inflation during COVID-19
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
31
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
growth slowed, halted, or even turned slightly negative 
in some countries. The figure also shows how consumer 
price inflation, which had grown moderately in the 
pre-pandemic period, accelerated during 2020–21. 
While markup and consumer price growth have his-
torically been positively correlated, growing steadily—
especially in services—the two have diverged markedly 
over the past two years.
Despite the slowdown in the growth of markups 
during COVID-19, the already-high markup levels 
at the pandemic’s onset may have affected the link 
between rising production costs (due to supply chain 
disruptions, commodity prices, and labor costs) 
and consumer prices. On the one hand, thanks to 
their market power, high-markup firms may have a 
greater ability to pass higher costs on to consumers 
through higher prices. On the other hand, high 
initial markups also imply a greater capacity to 
absorb cost increases without incurring losses (an 
issue also potentially related to market power in 
input markets).
The evidence suggests the latter mechanism was 
more prominent during the pandemic, as firms with 
higher pre-pandemic markups absorbed increas-
ing costs to a larger extent than low-markup firms. 
Figure 1.2.3 reports the estimated pass-through coeffi-
cients from a firm-level regression of percent changes 
Sales-weighted average markup (excluding ﬁnancial
sector)
Consumer price index
Figure 1.2.2.  Sales-Weighted Markups and 
CPI for Selected Advanced Economies 
(Index, 2000 = 100)
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
2000
10
21
2000
10
21
2000
10
21
2000
10
21
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
1. United States
2. Canada
100
110
120
130
140
150
3. EA4
4. United Kingdom
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Sources: National statistical ofﬁces; Worldscope; and IMF 
staff calculations. 
Note: Markups were computed following Díez, Leigh, and 
Tambunlertchai (2018). The solid blue lines report the sales- 
weighted average markup, with the red segment 
representing the years of the COVID-19 pandemic. To 
compute the sales-weighted average, raw values of 
markups and net sales at the ﬁrm level are censored below 
the 5th percentile and above the 95th percentile of the 
distribution for each country and year. The dashed green 
lines report the consumer price index (CPI). EA4 = France, 
Germany, Italy, Spain.
Figure 1.2.3.  Coefﬁcient of Production Costs 
Pass-Through to Prices
(Percent)
Pass-through coefﬁcient
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Bottom
20 percent
20th–
40th
40th–
60th
60th–
80th
Top 20
percent
Pre–COVID-19 markup percentile
Sources: Worldscope; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars represent the coefﬁcients of pass-through 
from costs of goods sold (COGS) per employee to ﬁrms’ 
markups during 2019–21 for different quintiles of the 
distribution of pre–COVID-19 markups. The coefﬁcients are 
computed through a ﬁrm-level regression of the percent 
change in markups on the percent change in COGS per 
employee, in which the COGS-per-employee variable is 
interacted with a categorical variable for the quintiles of the 
distribution of pre-pandemic markups (using the 2016–19 
average). This interaction allows the regression coefﬁcient to 
vary for each quintile of the distribution. The pass-through 
coefﬁcient is then computed as 1 plus the regression 
coefﬁcient for the respective quintile.
Full pass-through
Box 1.2 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
32
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
in markups on percent changes in variable costs per 
employee between 2019 and 2021 for US firms. 
Firms in the top 20 percent of the pre–COVID-19 
markup distribution passed 60 percent of their cost 
increases through to prices, absorbing the remaining 
40 percent through markup reductions. In contrast, 
firms in the bottom 40 percent of the pre–COVID-19 
distribution fully passed cost increases on to prices. A 
similar result also emerges for other advanced econ-
omies. Overall, this finding supports the hypothesis 
that markups are not a major driver of inflationary 
pressures right now.
Box 1.2 (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
33
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
This box provides a quantitative assessment of the 
risks around the World Economic Outlook’s (WEO’s) cur-
rent baseline projection through confidence bands and a 
downside scenario. Using the approach described in the 
following section for deriving confidence bands, the risk 
of global growth next year falling below 2 percent—a 
low-growth outcome that has occurred only five other 
times since 1970—is currently estimated to be about 
25 percent. The downside scenario illustrates how a 
plausible combination of shocks, coming from various 
parts of the world economy and amplified by a large 
tightening in global financial conditions, could push 
global growth down to as low as 1 percent.
Confidence Bands
The IMF’s G20 model, presented in Andrle and 
others (2015), is used here to quantify the uncertainty 
around the baseline projection through confidence 
bands, drawing on historical data as well as explicit 
judgment about the likely recurrence of (variations of) 
historical episodes.1 The approach should be thought 
of as complementary to the growth-at-risk framework 
presented in the Global Financial Stability Report, 
which links the probability distribution of growth 
projections to financial conditions.
Confidence bands around central projections are a 
well-known device for conveying forecast uncertainty, 
and they often reflect both statistical properties of 
the data and expert judgment. The benefit of using a 
structural, global model such as the G20 model for 
this exercise is the ability to analyze many individual 
countries jointly, consistently, and for multiple macro-
economic variables.
The model is first used to interpret the historical 
cross-country data on output, inflation for some 
countries, and oil prices and to estimate the implied 
economic shocks—to aggregate demand and supply 
and oil supply. The economic shocks that are esti-
mated this way are correlated across countries and 
through time, which helps address possible limitations 
in the propagation mechanisms in the model. Drawing 
all global and country-specific economic shocks for 
a given year jointly captures periods in which shocks 
are synchronized, such as 2020, and periods in which 
there is greater variation across countries, such as 
The authors of this box are by Michal Andrle, Jared Bebee, 
Allan Dizioli, Rafael Portillo, and Aneta Radzikowski.
1An early version of the approach is described in Andrle and 
Hunt (2020).
during the recovery from the global financial crisis. 
The resulting distribution of macroeconomic variables 
is shaped by the distribution of economic shocks, the 
properties of the model, and the initial conditions for 
the projection, including the effective lower bound on 
monetary policy rates (which is less relevant for the 
current outlook than it was in previous years).
Underlying the construction of the bands is the idea 
that, while history does not repeat itself, it rhymes, 
and so future shocks may partially resemble those in 
the past. The historical parallels can also be intro-
duced explicitly through expert judgment. If there is 
a historical episode that shares some features with the 
current period, then shocks from that episode could be 
sampled more often when constructing the confidence 
bands. If no judgment is imposed, then historical 
shocks are sampled uniformly.
Figure 1.3.1 shows the distribution for global 
growth that results from this approach, with and 
without judgment, and under the assumption that 
the current WEO baseline projection is the mode 
of the distribution.2 Each shade of blue represents a 
5 percentage point interval, and so the entire band 
captures 90 percent of the distribution. Panel 1 shows 
the distribution when shocks are sampled uniformly; 
panel 2 shows the distribution when shocks from the 
year 1982 are considered to be 10 times more likely 
than those from other years. The year 1982 stands 
out as relevant because it was a time when the world 
economy was experiencing a slowdown in activity, 
reflecting contractionary monetary policy in advanced 
economies to address high inflation, most notably in 
the US.3 But there are limits to the historical parallel: 
while the current inflationary environment is reminis-
cent of the 1970s or early 1980s, the COVID shock is 
unprecedented, and policy frameworks today are very 
different. Nonetheless, drawing on events such as the 
1982 episode can help illustrate the balance of risks to 
the current outlook.
2Shocks to demand and supply and global oil shocks were esti-
mated using the entire WEO sample starting in 1960; shocks to 
demand were estimated for all G20 countries, whereas shocks to 
supply were estimated only for the US. Future work will expand 
the estimation to include supply shocks for all G20 countries, 
which will allow for a richer assessment of uncertainty around 
inflation projections.
3While there are other episodes in the 1970s and 1980s that 
share similarities with the current period, 1982 stands out for its 
impact on global growth
Box 1.3. Risk Assessment around the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
34
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Without judgment, very low-growth outcomes 
are already somewhat likely because global growth is 
unusually low under the baseline (the mode of the 
distribution). With the judgment added, however, the 
distribution skews further down, increasing the proba-
bility of historically low outcomes such as 2 percent or 
even 1 percent global growth.
Downside Scenario
The G20 model is also used to quantify several 
specific risks to the outlook. The shocks come from 
various parts of the world economy, underscoring 
the many sources of uncertainty currently prevailing. 
Their joint effect would be amplified by a large tight-
ening in global financial conditions. If the downside 
scenario materializes, the level of global activity will 
be 1.5 percentage points lower in 2023 and 1.6 per-
centage points lower in 2024, relative to the cur-
rent baseline.
The downside scenario consists of the fol-
lowing layers:
•• Higher oil prices. Oil prices are pushed up 30 per-
cent, on average, for 2023 relative to the current 
baseline because of a combination of (1) ongoing 
efforts to reduce Russia’s oil export revenues and 
(2) retaliation from Russia in the form of a 25 per-
cent decrease in overall oil exports. Oil prices start 
to decline in 2024 but stay 15 percent higher than 
baseline. The shock fades in 2025 as global supply 
and demand for oil adjust.
•• China’s real estate sector. Issues in the real 
estate sector lead to further decreases in real 
estate investment over the next two years. The 
level of total fixed investment falls by as much 
as 9 percent by 2024, relative to the base-
line projection.
•• Lower potential output from persistent dis-
ruptions in labor markets. Labor markets show 
clear signs of overheating, especially in several 
advanced economies, despite activity remaining 
below pre-COVID trends. Two labor market 
developments help account for the disconnect: 
lower labor force participation and shifts in the 
Beveridge curve that point to worsened efficiency 
in matching workers and jobs. In the downside 
scenario, these two features are more persistent 
than expected, leading to lower equilibrium 
employment than in the baseline and higher 
equilibrium unemployment. Underlying potential 
output is lower as a result, implying less slack and 
more inflation and requiring a larger monetary 
policy response than currently envisaged. The 
layer differentiates across countries depending on 
how they fare in the two labor indicators relative 
to pre-COVID levels: lower labor force partic-
ipation is more important for some advanced 
economies and emerging markets, while shifts in 
the Beveridge curve are more visible in advanced 
economies such as the US and some European 
countries (data on vacancies is limited for most 
emerging markets).
WEO baseline projection
Figure 1.3.1.  Distribution of World GDP 
Growth Forecast
(Percent)
2. Forecast Uncertainty with Judgment
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each shade of blue represents a 5 percentage point 
interval. Shocks are sampled uniformly in panel 1, while 
shocks from 1982 are considered to be 10 times more likely 
than in other years in panel 2. WEO = World Economic 
Outlook.
2021
22
23
24
25
1. Forecast Uncertainty without Judgment 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2021
22
23
24
25
Box 1.3 (continued)
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
35
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
•• Tighter global financial conditions. The com-
bination of the first three shocks leads to a large 
tightening in global financial conditions. Emerging 
market currencies experience a sizable depreciation 
with respect to the US dollar: 10 percent in emerging 
markets outside Asia and 5 percent in Asian emerg-
ing markets, including China, on average in 2023. 
Relatedly, emerging markets (this time excluding 
China) see an average increase in sovereign premi-
ums of more than 200 basis points in 2023 and an 
additional increase in corporate premiums of about 
80 basis points. Advanced economies experience an 
increase in corporate premiums of about 100 basis 
points and are also negatively affected by the large 
depreciation of emerging market currencies.
The simulations assume monetary policy responds 
endogenously to movements in inflation. Fiscal policy 
responds through automatic stabilizers, but no addi-
tional fiscal measures are assumed.
Figure 1.3.2 (panels 1 and 2) presents the effects 
from all four layers on the level of GDP and headline 
inflation, respectively, for 2023 and 2024. Results 
are presented as percent deviations from baseline and 
grouped into three regions (advanced economies, 
emerging markets excluding China, and China) and 
the world. Each region-year is shown as a separate 
bar, with the contribution from each shock shown in 
stacked form.
As Figure 1.3.2 shows, each of these risks has 
sizable negative effects on global activity, especially in 
2023, with the magnitude of the effects across regions 
depending on the shock.
•• All three regions are affected by higher oil prices, 
which reduce the level of global GDP by about 
0.5 percentage point in 2023, relative to baseline. 
The effect on the level of global output in 2024 is 
smaller from this layer as the shock dissipates.
•• Issues in China’s real estate sector reduce global 
output by 0.3 percentage point in 2023. The effects 
amplify over time as China’s investment continues 
to decline relative to baseline in 2024.
•• Advanced economies are especially affected by the 
disruptions in labor markets, through both lower 
potential and the tightening in monetary policy 
required to bring down inflation. Emerging markets 
excluding China are also affected, while the effect 
on China is smaller and operating through interna-
tional spillovers. Global output is lower by 0.3 per-
centage point from this layer in 2023; the effect 
persists into 2024 and beyond, consistent with the 
protracted effect on potential output.
•• Tighter financial conditions take a large toll on 
global activity (0.5 percentage point in 2023). 
The effect amplifies over time as global investment 
WEO baseline projection
WEO downside scenario
China
Lower potential output
Financial conditions
Higher oil prices
Total
China
Lower potential output
Financial conditions
Higher oil prices
Total
Figure 1.3.2.  Impact of Downside Scenario 
on GDP and Inﬂation
1. Impact on GDP Level
(Percent deviation from baseline)
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
AEs 
EMs ex. CHN
China
World
AEs 
EMs ex. CHN
China
World
2023
2024
2. Impact on Headline Inﬂation
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
6
4
5
AEs 
EMs ex. CHN
China
World
AEs 
EMs ex. CHN
China
World
2023
2024
3. Baseline Growth Projection, Conﬁdence Bands
and Downside Scenario
(Percent)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each shade of blue in panel 3 represents a 
5 percentage point interval. Shocks from 1982 are 
considered to be 10 times more likely than those in other 
years. AEs = advanced economies; EMs ex. CHN = emerging 
markets excluding China; WEO = World Economic Outlook.
2021
22
23
24
25
Box 1.3 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
36
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
gradually responds to the shock. The impact is most 
notable in emerging markets, but spillovers to other 
regions are large.
•• The impact from the last three layers continues to 
build over time, but there is no further deteriora-
tion in global activity in 2024 relative to baseline. 
The decline in oil prices envisaged in the scenario 
provides some offset, by reducing the impact of the 
other layers on global purchasing power. As a result, 
while the level of activity remains well below base-
line, there is no impact on global growth in 2024.
While the effects on GDP are uniformly negative, 
the effects on inflation vary depending on the shock 
(see Figure 1.3.2, panel 2):
•• Higher oil prices contribute 1.1–1.3 percentage 
points to headline inflation across regions in 2023, 
before turning disinflationary in 2024.
•• The lower potential output layer is also inflationary. 
The effects are concentrated in advanced econo-
mies, as well as emerging markets excluding China, 
and are also quite persistent.
•• Tighter financial conditions and the slowdown in 
China are instead disinflationary.
•• When all the layers are added together, global 
­inflation is about 1.3 percentage points higher 
than baseline in 2023 and 1 percentage point 
lower in 2024.
Figure 1.3.2 (panel 3) superposes the resulting 
global growth in the downside scenario on the 
confidence bands presented above (with judgment). 
The downside scenario would imply global growth of 
1.1 percent in 2023, which is in the 15th percentile of 
the distribution.
Box 1.3 (continued)
37
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Special Feature 
Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers
Commodity prices rose 19.1 percent between February 
and August 2022. Energy—especially natural gas, up 
129.2 percent—led the increase, as Russia cut gas supplies 
to Europe. Base metal prices declined by 19.3 percent, 
and precious metal prices fell by 6.0 percent, while those 
of agricultural commodities fell by 5.4 percent. This spe-
cial feature analyzes developments in food prices in detail.
Energy Prices Stay Elevated
Crude oil prices, up by 3.5 percent between ­February 
and August 2022, surged to $120 a barrel in early March 
following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 1). Prices reflected fears of oil export disruptions 
at a time of tight supply-demand balances as well as a 
muted response by the Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries and other producers following prior 
divestments in the fossil fuel sector (see the April 2022 
World Economic Outlook [WEO]).
Strategic oil reserve releases by members of the 
International Energy Agency and slower demand amid 
COVID-19 lockdowns in China caused oil prices to 
fall below $100 in April. However, announced bans 
on Russian oil imports and expectations of broader 
sanctions—including in the area of maritime insurance 
and trade finance—coupled with outages elsewhere led 
prices to surge to $120 in early June. Since then, rising 
interest rates and recession fears have weighed on prices 
as the International Energy Agency revised global 2022 
oil demand growth down from 3.3 million barrels a 
day (mb/d) to 2.0 mb/d in September. As European 
and US firms reduced Russian oil purchases, Russian 
oil was rerouted to China and India at a discount to 
Brent (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 4). Refined-product prices 
reached multiyear highs as European refineries adjusted 
inputs and hit capacity constraints.
Futures markets suggest that oil prices will rise by 
41.4 percent in 2022, to average $98.2 a ­barrel, but will 
fall in the coming years, to $76.3 in 2025 (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 2). Short- and medium-term risks to the oil futures 
price outlook are roughly balanced (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 3). Upside risks from additional supply disruptions 
as a result of sanctions and war as well as higher demand 
 The contributors of this Special Feature are Christian Bogmans, 
Andrea Pescatori (Team Lead) and Ervin Prifti, with support from 
Yousef Nazer and research assistance from Rachel Brasier, Wenchuan 
Dong, and Tianchu Qi.
All commodities
Food
Energy
Base metals
April 2021 WEO
April 2022 WEO
October 2021 WEO
October 2022 WEO
Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval
EUR
CHN
IND
Other
N/A
Figure 1.SF.1.  Commodity Market Developments
1. Commodity Price Indices with Forecast
(Index; 2016 = 100)
2. Brent Futures Curves1
(US dollars a barrel)
40
80
120
160
2020
21
22
23
24
25
26
Expiration date
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
Q4
0
100
200
300
400
0
60
120
180
240
2017
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
3. Brent Price Medium-Term Prospects2
(US dollars a barrel, four-year futures)
4. Russian Oil Exports3
(Million barrels per day)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; IMF Primary Commodity Price System; Kpler; 
Reﬁnitiv Datastream; and IMF staff calculation.
Note: “N/A” WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1WEO futures prices are baseline assumptions for each WEO report and are 
derived from futures prices. October 2022 WEO prices are based on August 17, 
2022, closing.
2Derived from prices of futures options on August 17, 2022.
3Kpler seaborn export as of September 19, 2022. “N/A” in legend means that oil is 
exported to unknown destination. 
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
Crude
Reﬁned
0
1
2
3
4
5
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
38
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
owing to gas-to-oil switching are offsetting downside risks 
from a slowing global economy, possible additional oil 
supplies from Iran, and higher-than-expected oil produc-
tion growth in the US. Sanctions and Russia’s potential 
retaliation have raised uncertainty, and oil price projec-
tions may be subject to large revisions.
Supply concerns in Europe have been driving natural 
gas prices. Russia reduced pipeline gas exports to Europe 
by about 80 percent in September 2022 relative to the 
previous year, citing maintenance problems or some 
countries refusing to pay for gas in rubles. Dutch Title 
Transfer Facility gas futures rose by 159 percent from 
February to August 2022, to record highs (Figure 1.
SF.2). This has led European countries to increase reli-
ance on global liquefied natural gas supplies (see Albrizio 
and others 2022) and to discuss a price cap on Russian 
gas. Prices are expected to stay high until the end of 
2023. Coal prices rose 61.4 percent over the reference 
period and remain historically high, reflecting gas-to-coal 
switching, an embargo on Russian imports by EU and 
Group of Seven countries, and production disruptions.
Metal Prices Retreat after Rallying
The base metal price index surged, on account of 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, before retreating amid 
slowing global economic growth to a net 19.3 percent 
decline from February to August (Figure 1.SF.1, 
panel 1). The price of aluminum is down by 25.0 per-
cent, that of copper down by 19.6 percent, and that 
of iron ore down by 21.9 percent. New COVID-19 
lockdowns in China, supply chain issues, and mone-
tary policy tightening in the US and elsewhere have 
depressed both demand for metals and expectations 
about future demand. The IMF’s energy transition 
metal index covering metals critical for electric vehicles 
and renewable energy fell 21.0 percent; precious 
metals fared better, with the IMF index slipping just 
6.0 percent.
Base metal prices are expected to fall 5.5 percent, 
on average, in 2022, compared with a 9.9 percent 
increase projected in the April WEO, and to decrease 
by a further 12.0 percent in 2023. Precious metal 
prices are expected to decline more moderately, by 
0.9 percent in 2022 and an additional 0.6 percent in 
2023. Risks to this outlook are balanced as inves-
tors weigh potential supply reductions by European 
smelters amid higher energy costs against weakening 
global demand.
Agricultural Prices Correct from Peak Following Russia’s 
Invasion of Ukraine
Food commodity prices surged after Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine but corrected to prewar levels in 
June and July, halting a two-year rally (see following 
sections). Improved supply conditions and a gradual 
end to Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian grain exports 
drove the decline, along with macroeconomic factors—
including rising interest rates and global recession 
concerns. Looking ahead, risks of renewed export 
restrictions (such as Indonesia’s April 2022 ban on 
palm oil exports), droughts in part of China and the 
US, and pass-through from higher fertilizer prices––
which reflect the reduced availability of fertilizers 
produced in Belarus and Russia––tilt the balance of 
risks to the upside.
Drivers of Global Food Prices and Transmission to Food 
Price Inflation
Global food commodity prices entered an expan-
sionary phase in 2020, increasing by 54 percent, from 
trough to peak, with the prices of foods that make 
up large parts of diets increasing by 107 percent 
(Figure 1.SF.3). Although food prices are not new to 
cyclical fluctuations, this price rally stands out histor-
ically (Table 1.SF.1).
Pipeline gas deliveries to EU
Dutch TTF gas price (right scale)
NE Asia LNG price (right scale)
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Jan.
2021
Mar.
21
May
21
July
21
Sep.
21
Nov.
21
Jan.
22
Mar.
22
May
22
July
22
Sep.
22
Sources: Argus Media; European Network of Transmission System Operators for 
Gas; Gas Transmission System Operator of Ukraine; Reﬁnitiv Datastream; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Last observation is September 16, 2022. EU = European Union; LNG = 
liqueﬁed natural gas; NE = Northeast; TTF = Title Transfer Facility.
Figure 1.SF.2.  Russian Gas Exports and Prices
(Million cubic meters a day; US dollars per million British thermal units)
39
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Special Feature 
Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers
The price surge has contributed to domestic infla-
tion, making monetary policy more difficult, especially 
in low-income countries, where food accounts for 
half of total consumption, and has raised concerns 
about food security and social unrest (Bellemare 2015; 
Bogmans, Pescatori, and Prifti 2021; FAO and others, 
2021). Moreover, food-importing countries have seen 
deteriorations in their balance of payments and fiscal 
balances, which typically occur when social protection 
increases in response to higher food prices (Ng and 
Aksoy 2008). The following sections examine trends 
in cereal prices and their drivers, providing evidence 
on the pass-through from international food prices 
to domestic food price inflation. The analysis focuses 
on cereals (wheat, corn, rice, and a few smaller crops) 
that are common in diets and hard to substitute; 
together, these cereals account for two-thirds of global 
food production.
Factors behind Food Price Movements
Food and energy prices have often moved in tan-
dem, magnifying their macroeconomic effects. Food 
and oil prices have been in the same phase (boom or 
bust) about 66 percent of the time since 1970; this 
concordance increases to 75 percent for the period 
since 2004. There are at least three reasons behind the 
comovement: (1) oil is used directly as fuel for farm 
equipment and transportation, and gas affects farm-
ing indirectly, being the main input of nitrogen-based 
fertilizers and pesticides; (2) global economic activity 
is a common demand factor (even though it is more 
relevant for energy); and (3) some agricultural products 
are used as biofuels.
After the introduction of biofuel mandates in 
the European Union and US in the mid-2000s, the 
correlation between oil and cereal prices increased 
strongly (Table 1.SF.2). This was particularly true for 
corn, which was favored in biofuel policies relative to 
other cereals. The correlation also rose for vegetable oil. 
The higher correlation is not confined to commodities 
used as biofuels, in part because of price spillovers. 
A more prominent role of common shocks and the 
increased financialization of commodity markets in the 
mid-2000s may have also contributed. Finally, the US 
dollar value and interest rates are also common factors 
driving food commodity prices (Gilbert 2010; Baffes 
and Haniotis 2016).
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1970
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
2022
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1970
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
2022
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1970
75
80
85
90
95
2000
05
10
15
2022
Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, Consumer Price Index and Primary Commodity 
Price Series databases; World Bank; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Shaded areas indicate periods of expansion. All series are deﬂated by the US 
consumer price index. Last observation is June 2022.
Figure 1.SF.3.  Selected Commodity Price Indices
(Percent)
1. Oil Price Index (log)
3. Food Price Index (log)
2. Cereal Price Index (log)
Table 1.SF.1. Oil, Cereal, and Food Price Boom Phases
Duration
Amplitude
Sharpness
Oil
Latest
Average
25
29
322%
165%
12.9%
5.8%
Cereal
Latest
Average
32
32
107%
  78%
3.3%
2.4%
Food
Latest
Average
24
22
  54%
  45%
2.3%
2.1%
Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; World Bank; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Boom phases are identified using the Harding and Pagan (2002) algorithm. 
Duration is in months. Sharpness is amplitude divided by duration per cycle.
Table 1.SF.2. Oil-Cereal Price Correlation
1970–2004
2005–June 2022
Cereal
–0.9%
17.4%
Corn
–2.3%
23.1%
Vegetable oil
–4.6%
44.5%
Sources: World Bank; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Five-year rolling correlations of monthly log differences of oil prices 
with cereal, corn, and vegetable oil prices. All prices are deflated by the US 
consumer price index.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
40
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Econometric Analysis
Four drivers of cereal prices are studied here in detail: 
shocks to fertilizer and oil prices, cereal production, and 
US interest rates. Control variables include global GDP 
growth and the US dollar real effective exchange rate 
(see Online Annex 1.SF.1 for technical details).
Supply shocks dominate fluctuations in cereal prices. 
A typical (negative) global harvest shock induces a 
16 percent rise in prices in the same quarter, with 
the increase peaking at 23 percent after one quarter 
(Figure 1.SF.4). Energy prices have a smaller effect 
especially those related to oil, acting with lags. A neg-
ative oil supply shock that raises oil prices by 10 per-
cent leads cereal prices to rise by about 2 percent after 
three to four quarters (suggesting a modest effect from 
biofuels, since the cost share of oil in cereal production 
varies from about 10 to 15 percent). Prices of fertiliz-
ers, in contrast, have a delayed but important effect. A 
10 percent rise in fertilizer prices (due to a natural gas 
supply shock) has no immediate effects but leads to a 
7 percent rise in cereal prices after one quarter. Though 
persistent, the effect becomes less precisely estimated 
at longer horizons. Finally, a 100-basis point US 
monetary policy shock reduces cereal prices by about 
13 percent with a one-quarter lag.
Domestic Food Price Inflation Rising Following Higher 
Global Food Prices
Taxes, subsidies, price controls, weak market inte-
gration, and local distribution costs often limit the 
transmission of international (producer) food price 
variations across borders to domestic retail food prices 
(Figure 1.SF.5). In fact, even though the recent rise in 
domestic food price inflation is broad-based, variation 
across regions is substantial, with recent inflation levels 
as low as 5.3 percent in south and east Asia and as 
high as 12.6 percent in central Asia and Europe.
It is therefore relevant to know the following: 
(1) What is the timing and the magnitude of the 
pass-through from international to domestic food 
prices? and (2) Do certain country characteristics, such 
as income level and trade openness, make countries 
more susceptible to such pass-through?
Pass-Through from Global Food Prices to Domestic Food 
Price Inflation
Panel data and local-projections methods are used 
here to trace the impact of food commodity prices 
(instrumented by harvest shocks) on domestic food price 
inflation. Several control variables are included, such as 
oil prices (to proxy for road transportation costs), the 
Baltic Dry Index (to proxy for shipping costs), headline 
–20
–10
0
10
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 1.SF.4.  Response of Cereal Prices to Major Drivers
(Cumulative percent)
Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, Consumer Price Index and Primary Commodity 
Price Series; World Bank; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Quarters on the x-axis. Panels show cumulative impulse response of cereal 
prices to (panel 1) 10 percent fertilizer price shock; (panel 2) 10 percent oil price 
shock; (panel 3) 100 basis point shock to three-month Treasury bills; and (panel 4) 
one-standard-deviation harvest shock. Shaded areas are 90 percent conﬁdence 
intervals. See Online Annex 1.SF.1 for data descriptions and methodology.
–20
–10
0
10
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
–40
–20
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
–40
–20
0
20
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
1. Fertilizer Price Shock
2. Oil Price Shock
3. Three-Month Treasury
Bill Shock
4. Harvest Shock
Average pass-through, all countries
Low-income countries
High-trade-openness countries
Low-trade-openness countries
High-income countries
Figure 1.SF.5.  Response of Food CPI to International Food
Price Shock
(Percent)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Months
Sources: Haver Analytics; World Bank; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Response of domestic food consumer price index (CPI) to a 1 percentage 
point shock to international food prices. Shaded areas are 90 percent conﬁdence 
bands.
41
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Special Feature 
Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers
consumer price inflation (to capture monetary factors), 
and exchange rates (in local currency units per dollar).
After an international food price shock, consumer 
food price inflation rises linearly and peaks after 
10 months, then starts declining but persists at a 
higher level. In total, food consumer price inflation 
increases about 0.3 percentage point in response to 
a 1 percentage point change in international food 
prices after about 10–12 months (Figure 1.SF.5). The 
pass-through, which is limited by the cost share of 
food commodities in food consumer prices, is about 
30 percent for the average country.
Some Countries Are More Vulnerable to Global Food 
Price Shocks
The pass-through is larger for emerging market 
economies than for advanced economies, in part 
because food commodities have a higher cost share in 
the former group. It is also larger for countries that 
score higher on trade openness, as greater cross-border 
arbitrage opportunities raise domestic prices’ respon-
siveness to global food price shocks. This greater 
responsiveness holds for both net food importers and 
net food exporters and can explain why food export-
ers are tempted to introduce food export restrictions 
when commodity prices rise (Laborde Debucquet and 
Mamun 2022). For a one-standard-deviation rise in 
GDP per capita, the pass-through declines by 6 percent-
age points, while it increases by 7 percentage points for 
a one-standard-deviation rise in trade openness above 
the global mean (Figure 1.SF.5). High degrees of trade 
openness can thus explain the relatively high levels of 
average food price inflation in central Asia compared 
with those in countries in south and east Asia.
Conclusions and Outlook for Food Prices
International food prices are estimated to have 
added 5 percentage points to food price inflation for 
the average country in 2021 and are forecast to add an 
estimated 6 percentage points in 2022 and 2 percent-
age points in 2023 (Figure 1.SF.6). A combination of 
supply-side factors (the 2020–22 La Niña episode and 
food trade restrictions), cereal-specific demand (China’s 
2021 restocking), low interest rates, and more recently, 
the war in Ukraine and the Russian blockade of wheat 
exports from Ukraine created a perfect storm for 
global food commodity markets that kept prices on an 
upward trajectory between April 2020 and May 2022.
The outlook for domestic food price inflation 
remains uncertain, as global food prices could surprise 
again on the upside, given the high uncertainty about 
the impact of the war in Ukraine and weather events 
and the delayed effect of high fertilizer prices. Current 
estimates already suggest a negative shock for global 
cereal production equivalent to about a 0.6 standard 
deviation in cereal growth for 2022 (OECD-FAO, 
2022)—­contributing to a 23 percent rise in cereal prices 
this year and outweighing the effects of higher interest 
rates on food price inflation. Finally, differences in the 
timing and magnitude of the price pass-through make 
low-income and high-food-openness countries more 
susceptible to a resumption of the global food price rally.
Recent events underscore the importance of 
well-functioning international food markets and of 
appropriate (domestic) policies to address inevitable 
price swings, including targeted food aid to vulner-
able consumers as well as incentives for the buildup 
of global food stocks over the medium term. Open 
food trade raises consumer variety, promotes deeper 
and more stable markets, and constitutes a hedge 
against the volatility of domestic production. Poli-
cies that promote self-sufficiency weaken the world 
food trading system and raise environmental costs 
through land conversion or more intensive farming 
practices. Especially for small countries (because of 
within-country spatial correlation of weather patterns), 
densely populated countries, and countries particularly 
vulnerable to climate change, international trade will 
remain indispensable.
Aug. 2022
May 22
Jan. 22
May 21
Feb. 21
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2020
21
22
23
24
Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Projected domestic food inﬂation based on recent commodity price forecasts 
on various dates. 
Figure 1.SF.6.  Conditional Forecast Domestic Food Price
Inﬂation
(Percent)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
42
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
2021
Projections
2021
Projections
Projections
Projections
2022
2023
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Europe
5.9
2.1
0.6
4.9
15.3
10.9
3.0
1.6
1.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Europe 
5.5
3.1
0.5
2.6
8.4
6.2
3.3
1.3
1.4
6.9
6.1
6.4
Euro Area4,5
5.2
3.1
0.5
2.6
8.3
5.7
2.5
1.0
1.4
7.7
6.8
7.0
Germany
2.6
1.5
–0.3
3.2
8.5
7.2
7.4
4.2
5.3
3.6
2.9
3.4
France
6.8
2.5
0.7
2.1
5.8
4.6
0.4
–1.3
–1.5
7.9
7.5
7.6
Italy
6.7
3.2
–0.2
1.9
8.7
5.2
2.4
–0.2
0.3
9.5
8.8
9.4
Spain
5.1
4.3
1.2
3.1
8.8
4.9
0.9
–0.2
–0.2
14.8
12.7
12.3
The Netherlands
4.9
4.5
0.8
2.8
12.0
8.0
9.0
7.5
7.7
4.2
3.5
3.9
Belgium
6.2
2.4
0.4
3.2
9.5
4.9
–0.4
–2.2
–0.9
6.3
5.4
5.6
Ireland
13.6
9.0
4.0
2.4
8.4
6.5
14.2
12.2
9.8
6.3
4.7
4.8
Austria
4.6
4.7
1.0
2.8
7.7
5.1
–0.5
–2.6
–2.1
6.2
4.5
4.6
Portugal 
4.9
6.2
0.7
0.9
7.9
4.7
–1.2
–1.1
–0.4
6.6
6.1
6.5
Greece
8.3
5.2
1.8
0.6
9.2
3.2
–6.5
–6.7
–6.3
15.0
12.6
12.2
Finland
3.0
2.1
0.5
2.1
6.5
3.5
0.9
–0.8
–0.2
7.6
7.0
7.4
Slovak Republic
3.0
1.8
1.5
2.8
11.9
10.1
–2.0
–3.7
–2.9
6.8
6.2
6.2
Lithuania
5.0
1.8
1.1
4.6
17.6
8.4
1.4
–1.6
–2.1
7.1
7.3
7.0
Slovenia
8.2
5.7
1.7
1.9
8.9
5.1
3.8
–0.1
0.4
4.8
4.3
4.3
Luxembourg
6.9
1.6
1.1
3.5
8.4
3.7
4.8
4.3
4.4
5.7
5.0
5.0
Latvia
4.5
2.5
1.6
3.2
16.5
8.0
–2.9
–3.3
–3.0
7.6
7.4
7.2
Estonia
8.0
1.0
1.8
4.5
21.0
9.5
–1.6
–0.2
0.1
6.2
6.6
6.8
Cyprus 
5.6
3.5
2.5
2.2
8.0
3.8
–7.2
–8.5
–7.2
7.5
6.7
6.5
Malta
10.3
6.2
3.3
0.7
5.9
4.6
–4.9
–3.1
–2.2
3.5
3.2
3.3
United Kingdom6
7.4
3.6
0.3
2.6
9.1
9.0
–2.6
–4.8
–4.5
4.5
3.8
4.8
Switzerland
4.2
2.2
0.8
0.6
3.1
2.4
9.4
6.2
6.4
3.0
2.2
2.4
Sweden
5.1
2.6
–0.1
2.7
7.2
8.4
5.4
3.8
3.5
8.8
7.6
7.4
Czech Republic
3.5
1.9
1.5
3.8
16.3
8.6
–0.9
–4.3
–2.2
2.8
2.5
2.3
Norway
3.9
3.6
2.6
3.5
4.7
3.8
15.0
19.4
14.5
4.4
3.9
3.8
Denmark
4.9
2.6
0.6
1.9
7.2
3.8
8.8
8.2
7.4
5.1
5.2
5.3
Iceland
4.4
5.1
2.9
4.5
8.4
6.7
–1.6
–2.0
–0.3
6.0
4.0
4.0
Andorra
8.9
6.6
2.0
1.7
5.3
2.8
15.9
16.7
17.3
2.9
2.0
1.8
San Marino
5.4
3.1
0.8
2.1
6.9
4.5
4.0
1.4
0.8
6.1
5.9
5.7
Emerging and Developing Europe7
6.8
0.0
0.6
9.5
27.8
19.4
1.7
2.9
2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Russia
4.7
–3.4
–2.3
6.7
13.8
5.0
6.9
12.2
11.1
4.8
4.0
4.3
Türkiye
11.4
5.0
3.0
19.6
73.1
51.2
–1.7
–5.7
–3.9
12.0
10.8
10.5
Poland
5.9
3.8
0.5
5.1
13.8
14.3
–0.7
–4.0
–3.3
3.4
2.8
3.2
Romania
5.9
4.8
3.1
5.0
13.3
11.0
–7.0
–8.4
–8.0
5.6
5.5
5.5
Ukraine6
3.4
–35.0
. . .
9.4
20.6
. . .
–1.6
. . .
. . .
9.8
. . .
. . .
Hungary
7.1
5.7
1.8
5.1
13.9
13.3
–3.2
–6.7
–3.0
4.1
3.4
3.8
Belarus
2.3
–7.0
0.2
9.5
16.5
13.1
2.7
–1.5
–1.1
3.9
4.5
4.3
Bulgaria5
4.2
3.9
3.0
2.8
12.4
5.2
–0.4
–0.9
–1.4
5.3
5.1
4.7
Serbia
7.4
3.5
2.7
4.1
11.5
8.3
–4.4
–8.4
–7.0
10.1
9.9
9.7
Croatia
10.2
5.9
3.5
2.6
9.8
5.5
3.4
2.2
2.0
8.1
6.9
6.6
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. 
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices, except in the case of Slovenia. 
6See country-specific notes for Ukraine and the United Kingdom in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
43
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Asia
6.5
4.0
4.3
2.0
4.0
3.4
2.2
1.4
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Advanced Asia
3.7
2.2
2.3
1.2
3.6
2.6
4.9
3.5
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.9
Japan
1.7
1.7
1.6
–0.2
2.0
1.4
2.9
1.4
2.2
2.8
2.6
2.4
Korea 
4.1
2.6
2.0
2.5
5.5
3.8
4.9
3.2
3.5
3.7
3.0
3.4
Taiwan Province of China
6.6
3.3
2.8
2.0
3.1
2.2
14.8
14.8
12.7
4.0
3.6
3.6
Australia
4.9
3.8
1.9
2.8
6.5
4.8
3.1
2.1
0.7
5.1
3.6
3.7
Singapore
7.6
3.0
2.3
2.3
5.5
3.0
18.1
12.8
12.5
2.7
2.1
2.1
Hong Kong SAR
6.3
–0.8
3.9
1.6
1.9
2.4
11.3
8.6
5.9
5.2
4.5
4.0
New Zealand
5.6
2.3
1.9
3.9
6.3
3.9
–6.0
–7.7
–6.0
3.8
3.4
3.9
Macao SAR 
18.0
–22.4
56.7
0.0
2.5
2.4
13.8
–2.4
22.8
3.0
3.0
2.7
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.2
4.4
4.9
2.2
4.1
3.6
1.0
0.7
0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
China
8.1
3.2
4.4
0.9
2.2
2.2
1.8
1.8
1.5
4.0
4.2
4.1
India4
8.7
6.8
6.1
5.5
6.9
5.1
–1.2
–3.5
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
ASEAN-5
3.4
5.3
4.9
1.9
4.7
4.4
–0.3
0.5
0.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Indonesia
3.7
5.3
5.0
1.6
4.6
5.5
0.3
2.2
1.1
6.5
5.5
5.3
Thailand
1.5
2.8
3.7
1.2
6.3
2.8
–2.2
–0.5
1.9
1.5
1.0
1.0
Vietnam
2.6
7.0
6.2
1.8
3.8
3.9
–2.0
0.3
1.0
2.7
2.4
2.3
Philippines
5.7
6.5
5.0
3.9
5.3
4.3
–1.8
–4.4
–3.3
7.8
5.7
5.4
Malaysia
3.1
5.4
4.4
2.5
3.2
2.8
3.8
1.6
2.2
4.7
4.5
4.3
Other Emerging and Developing Asia5
3.0
3.7
4.4
5.1
12.4
11.4
–2.9
–4.4
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Emerging Asia6
7.4
4.4
4.9
2.1
3.7
3.3
1.1
0.8
0.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, 
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 economies, China, and India.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
44
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
North America
5.5
1.8
1.0
4.7
7.9
3.8
–3.2
–3.5
–2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
United States 
5.7
1.6
1.0
4.7
8.1
3.5
–3.7
–3.9
–3.1
5.4
3.7
4.6
Mexico
4.8
2.1
1.2
5.7
8.0
6.3
–0.4
–1.2
–1.2
4.1
3.4
3.7
Canada
4.5
3.3
1.5
3.4
6.9
4.2
0.0
0.5
–0.2
7.4
5.3
5.9
Puerto Rico4
2.7
4.8
0.4
2.4
4.4
3.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
7.9
6.0
7.9
South America5
7.3
3.6
1.6
12.1
17.4
14.3
–2.0
–1.9
–1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Brazil
4.6
2.8
1.0
8.3
9.4
4.7
–1.7
–1.5
–1.6
13.2
9.8
9.5
Argentina
10.4
4.0
2.0
48.4
72.4
76.1
1.4
–0.3
0.6
8.7
6.9
6.9
Colombia
10.7
7.6
2.2
3.5
9.7
7.1
–5.7
–5.1
–4.4
13.8
11.3
11.1
Chile
11.7
2.0
–1.0
4.5
11.6
8.7
–6.7
–6.7
–4.4
8.9
7.9
8.3
Peru
13.6
2.7
2.6
4.0
7.5
4.4
–2.5
–3.0
–2.1
10.9
7.6
7.5
Ecuador
4.2
2.9
2.7
0.1
3.2
2.4
2.9
2.4
2.1
4.2
4.0
3.8
Venezuela
0.5
6.0
6.5
1,588.5
210.0
195.0
–2.1
4.0
6.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Bolivia
6.1
3.8
3.2
0.7
3.2
3.6
2.0
–1.4
–2.1
7.0
4.5
4.0
Paraguay
4.2
0.2
4.3
4.8
9.5
4.5
0.8
–3.8
–0.1
7.7
7.2
6.4
Uruguay
4.4
5.3
3.6
7.7
9.1
7.8
–1.8
–1.2
–1.9
9.4
7.9
7.9
Central America6
11.0
4.7
3.6
4.5
7.4
5.4
–1.9
–3.2
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Caribbean7
5.1
12.4
7.3
8.4
12.3
9.6
–3.5
4.8
4.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Latin America and the Caribbean8
6.9
3.5
1.7
9.8
14.1
11.4
–1.6
–1.7
–1.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9
5.2
7.2
5.4
1.6
5.9
3.6
–16.9
–16.7
–13.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. Aggregates exclude 
Venezuela.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicara-
gua, and Panama.
7The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent 
and the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and 
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines as well as Anguilla 
and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
45
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and 
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Middle East and Central Asia
4.5
5.0
3.6
12.9
13.8
13.1
2.3
6.5
5.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
4.5
4.9
3.5
11.3
12.8
11.4
4.2
9.5
7.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Saudi Arabia
3.2
7.6
3.7
3.1
2.7
2.2
5.3
16.0
12.3
6.7
. . .
. . .
Iran 
4.7
3.0
2.0
40.1
40.0
40.0
0.7
1.6
1.5
9.2
9.4
9.6
United Arab Emirates
3.8
5.1
4.2
0.2
5.2
3.6
11.4
14.7
12.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kazakhstan
4.1
2.5
4.4
8.0
14.0
11.3
–2.9
3.0
1.8
4.9
4.9
4.8
Algeria
3.5
4.7
2.6
7.2
9.7
8.7
–2.8
6.2
0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iraq
7.7
9.3
4.0
6.0
6.5
4.5
7.8
16.3
13.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
1.6
3.4
2.4
2.3
4.5
3.3
14.7
21.2
22.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kuwait
1.3
8.7
2.6
3.4
4.3
2.4
16.3
29.1
23.0
1.3
. . .
. . .
Azerbaijan
5.6
3.7
2.5
6.7
12.2
10.8
15.2
31.7
31.4
6.0
5.9
5.8
Oman
3.0
4.4
4.1
1.5
3.1
1.9
–6.1
6.2
3.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Turkmenistan
4.6
1.2
2.3
15.0
17.5
10.5
0.6
2.5
2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Importers5,6
4.6
5.1
3.7
15.5
15.2
15.7
–3.9
–4.8
–4.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Egypt
3.3
6.6
4.4
4.5
8.5
12.0
–4.4
–3.6
–3.4
7.3
7.3
7.3
Pakistan7
5.7
6.0
3.5
8.9
12.1
19.9
–0.8
–4.6
–2.5
6.3
6.2
6.4
Morocco
7.9
0.8
3.1
1.4
6.2
4.1
–2.3
–4.3
–4.1
11.9
11.1
10.7
Uzbekistan
7.4
5.2
4.7
10.8
11.2
10.8
–7.0
–3.3
–4.2
9.5
10.0
9.5
Sudan
0.5
–0.3
2.6
359.1
154.9
76.9
–7.4
–6.4
–7.5
28.3
30.6
30.6
Tunisia
3.3
2.2
1.6
5.7
8.1
8.5
–6.1
–9.1
–8.0
16.2
. . .
. . .
Jordan
2.2
2.4
2.7
1.3
3.8
3.0
–8.8
–6.7
–4.8
24.4
. . .
. . .
Georgia
10.4
9.0
4.0
9.6
11.6
6.0
–10.1
–7.2
–6.8
20.6
18.7
19.5
Armenia
5.7
7.0
3.5
7.2
8.5
7.0
–3.7
–5.5
–5.1
15.3
15.2
15.1
Tajikistan
9.2
5.5
4.0
9.0
8.3
8.1
8.4
3.8
0.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kyrgyz Republic
3.7
3.8
3.2
11.9
13.5
12.4
–8.7
–12.5
–9.6
9.0
9.0
9.0
West Bank and Gaza
7.1
4.0
3.5
1.2
4.9
3.4
–8.2
–10.7
–8.9
26.4
25.7
25.0
Mauritania
2.4
4.0
4.8
3.8
7.1
7.8
–9.4
–11.6
–9.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Caucasus and Central Asia 
5.6
3.8
4.0
9.2
12.9
10.5
–1.0
4.8
3.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, 
and Pakistan6
4.3
5.1
3.6
13.4
13.9
13.4
2.6
6.6
5.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle East and North Africa
4.1
5.0
3.6
14.2
14.2
12.4
2.9
7.4
5.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Israel8
8.6
6.1
3.0
1.5
4.5
3.6
4.2
2.5
3.7
5.0
3.9
3.8
Maghreb9
7.8
0.9
4.4
4.7
8.0
6.8
–1.1
1.6
0.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mashreq10
2.7
5.9
4.2
8.3
11.6
12.1
–5.4
–4.5
–4.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, and Yemen. 
5Includes Djibouti, Lebanon, and Somalia. See the country-specific note for Lebanon in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Excludes Afghanistan and Syria because of the uncertain political situation. See the country-specific notes in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7See the country-specific note for Pakistan in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is shown for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.
9The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia. 
10The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and West Bank and Gaza. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
46
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Consumer Prices1
Current Account Balance2
Unemployment3 
Projections
Projections
Projections
Projections
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
2021
2022
2023
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.7
3.6
3.7
11.1
14.4
11.9
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Oil Exporters4
2.9
3.2
3.0
17.0
18.2
15.5
1.0
2.3
0.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Nigeria
3.6
3.2
3.0
17.0
18.9
17.3
–0.4
–0.2
–0.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Angola
0.8
2.9
3.4
25.8
21.7
11.8
11.2
11.3
5.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Gabon
1.5
2.7
3.7
1.1
3.5
3.2
–5.7
–1.4
–2.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Chad
–1.1
3.3
3.4
–0.8
4.9
3.1
–4.5
0.8
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Equatorial Guinea
–3.2
5.8
–3.1
–0.1
5.1
5.7
–3.4
–1.6
–2.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Middle-Income Countries5
5.3
3.1
2.8
5.6
9.2
6.8
0.5
–1.5
–2.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
South Africa
4.9
2.1
1.1
4.6
6.7
5.1
3.7
1.2
–1.0
34.3
34.6
35.6
Ghana
5.4
3.6
2.8
10.0
27.2
20.9
–3.2
–5.2
–4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Côte d’Ivoire 
7.0
5.5
6.5
4.2
5.5
4.0
–3.8
–5.2
–5.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Cameroon
3.6
3.8
4.6
2.3
4.6
2.8
–4.0
–2.3
–2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Zambia
4.6
2.9
4.0
22.0
12.5
9.5
7.6
–1.8
–3.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
Senegal
6.1
4.7
8.1
2.2
7.5
3.1
–13.2
–13.0
–9.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Low-Income Countries6
5.9
4.5
5.3
11.2
16.4
13.7
–5.0
–6.4
–6.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ethiopia
6.3
3.8
5.3
26.8
33.6
28.6
–3.2
–4.3
–4.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Kenya
7.5
5.3
5.1
6.1
7.4
6.6
–5.2
–5.9
–5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tanzania
4.9
4.5
5.2
3.7
4.0
5.3
–3.3
–4.4
–3.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
Uganda
6.7
4.4
5.9
2.2
6.4
6.4
–8.3
–8.0
–10.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Democratic Republic of the Congo
6.2
6.1
6.7
9.0
8.4
9.8
–0.9
0.0
0.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Burkina Faso
6.9
3.6
4.8
3.9
14.2
1.5
0.2
–3.5
–3.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
Mali
3.1
2.5
5.3
3.8
8.0
3.0
–10.0
–7.9
–7.1
. . .
. . .
. . .
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP. 
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ. 
4Includes Republic of Congo and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles.
6Includes Benin, Burundi, Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, São Tomé 
and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
47
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output 
(Annual percent change; in constant 2017 international dollars at purchasing power parity)
Average
Projections 
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
World
2.5
2.1
2.1
1.9
2.5
2.4
1.7
–4.1
5.4
2.4
1.6
Advanced Economies
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.3
2.0
1.8
1.3
–4.9
5.1
2.2
0.9
United States
0.9
1.6
2.0
0.9
1.6
2.4
1.8
–4.2
5.4
1.4
0.7
Euro Area1
0.5
1.2
1.7
1.6
2.4
1.6
1.3
–6.5
5.2
2.9
0.3
Germany
1.4
1.8
0.6
1.4
2.3
0.7
0.8
–3.8
2.6
1.4
–0.4
France
0.6
0.4
0.6
0.7
2.2
1.5
1.5
–8.2
6.5
2.2
0.4
Italy
–0.9
–0.1
0.9
1.5
1.8
1.1
0.7
–8.8
7.4
3.2
–0.1
Spain
–0.4
1.7
3.9
2.9
2.8
1.9
1.3
–11.3
5.0
3.9
0.8
Japan
0.7
0.5
1.7
0.8
1.8
0.8
–0.1
–4.3
1.9
2.0
2.1
United Kingdom2
0.5
2.2
1.8
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.1
–9.7
7.0
3.2
–0.1
Canada
0.9
1.8
–0.1
0.0
1.8
1.4
0.4
–6.4
3.9
1.9
0.0
Other Advanced Economies3
2.6
2.2
1.5
1.8
2.5
2.1
1.2
–2.3
5.4
2.4
1.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.2
2.8
2.9
3.3
3.3
2.3
–3.2
5.9
2.7
2.6
Emerging and Developing Asia
7.3
5.8
5.9
5.8
5.7
5.6
4.4
–1.5
6.5
3.7
4.3
China
9.7
6.7
6.5
6.2
6.4
6.3
5.6
2.1
8.0
3.2
4.5
India2
6.2
6.2
6.8
7.1
5.7
5.4
2.7
–7.5
7.6
5.8
5.1
ASEAN-54
4.0
3.4
3.7
3.9
4.3
4.3
3.7
–4.5
2.5
4.3
3.9
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.1
1.5
0.5
1.6
3.9
3.3
2.3
–1.6
6.8
7.3
0.3
Russia
4.2
–1.1
–2.2
0.0
1.8
2.9
2.2
–2.3
5.2
–3.3
–2.2
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.7
0.1
–0.8
–1.9
0.3
0.2
–1.1
–8.2
6.0
2.6
0.9
Brazil
3.0
–0.4
–4.4
–4.1
0.5
1.0
0.4
–4.6
4.2
2.2
0.4
Mexico
0.8
1.6
2.1
1.5
1.0
1.1
–1.2
–8.9
3.8
1.2
0.3
Middle East and Central Asia
2.3
1.1
0.7
2.0
0.0
0.5
–0.3
–4.7
6.0
3.0
1.8
Saudi Arabia
1.3
2.5
1.7
–0.6
–3.3
0.1
–2.0
–6.3
1.9
5.5
1.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
2.7
2.3
0.5
–1.2
0.2
0.7
0.5
–4.3
2.0
1.0
1.1
Nigeria
4.5
3.5
0.0
–4.2
–1.8
–0.7
–0.4
–4.3
1.1
0.6
0.5
South Africa
1.9
–0.1
–0.2
–0.8
–0.3
0.0
–1.1
–7.7
4.0
0.6
–0.4
Memorandum
European Union
0.9
1.5
2.1
1.9
2.8
2.0
1.8
–5.8
5.4
3.0
0.5
Middle East and North Africa
1.8
0.7
0.5
2.3
–0.7
0.0
–0.9
–5.1
2.4
3.0
1.8
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
5.0
3.3
3.0
3.2
3.6
3.6
2.5
–3.2
6.1
3.1
2.9
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.6
3.8
2.3
1.5
2.5
2.7
2.6
–1.2
2.5
2.5
2.6
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods. 
1Data calculated as the sum of data for individual euro area countries.
2See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
4ASEAN-5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
48
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
References
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kılıç 
Çelik, Ksenia Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski Ribeiro. 
2017. “Gone with the Headwinds: Global Productivity.” IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 17/04, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Adrian, Tobias, Christopher Erceg, and Fabio Natalucci. 2022. 
“Soaring Inflation Puts Central Banks on a Difficult Journey.” 
IMF Blog, August 1, 2022.
Akcigit, Ufuk, Wenjie Chen, Federico J. Díez, Romain Duval, 
Philipp Engler, Jiayue Fan, Chiara Maggi, and others. 2021. 
“Rising Corporate Market Power: Emerging Policy Issues.” 
IMF Staff Discussion Note 21/01, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Albrizio, Silvia, John Bluedorn, Christoffer Koch, Andrea Pes-
catori, and Martin Stuermer. 2022. “Market Size and Supply 
Disruptions: Sharing the Pain from a Potential Russian Gas 
Shut-Off to the European Union.” IMF Working Paper 
22/143, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Andrle, Michal, Patrick Blagrave, Pedro Espaillat, Keiko Honjo, 
Benjamin Hunt, Mika Kortelainen, René Lalonde, and 
­others. 2015. “The Flexible System of Global Models—
FSGM.” IMF Working Paper 15/64, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Andrle, Michael, and Benjamin Hunt. 2020. “Model-Based 
Globally-Consistent Risk Assessment.” IMF Working Paper 
20/064, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Baffes, John, and Tassos Haniotis. 2016. “What Explains Agri-
cultural Price Movements?” Journal of Agricultural Economics 
67 (3): 706–21.
Ball, Laurence, 2009. “Hysteresis in Unemployment: Old and 
New Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 14818, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Ball, Laurence, 2014. “Long-Term Damage from the Great 
Recession in OECD Countries.” NBER Working Paper 
No. 20185, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
­Cambridge, MA.
Ball, Laurence M., Daniel Leigh, and Prachi Mishra. Forthcom-
ing. “Understanding U.S. Inflation during the COVID-19 
Era.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Barrett, Philip, Sonali Das, Giacomo Magistretti, Evgenia 
Pugacheva, and Philippe Wingender. 2021. “After-Effects of 
the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Eco-
nomic Damage.” IMF Working Paper 21/203, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian. 2014. “Do Oil Price 
Increases Cause Higher Food Prices?” Economic Policy 29 
(80): 691–747.
Belke, Ansgar, Ingo G. Bordon, and Ulrich Volz. 2013. “Effects 
of Global Liquidity on Commodity and Food Prices.” World 
Development 44: 31–43.
Bellemare, Marc F. 2015. “Rising Food Prices, Food Price 
Volatility, and Social Unrest.” American Journal of Agricultural 
Economics 97 (1): 1–21. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​ajae/​aau038.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers. 
2015. “Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their 
Monetary Policy Implications.” NBER Working Paper 21726, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bogmans, Christian, Andrea Pescatori, and Ervin Prifti. 2021. 
“Income versus Prices: How Does the Business Cycle Affect 
Food (In)-Security?” IMF Working Paper 21/238, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bukeviciute, Lina, Adriaan Dierx, and Fabienne Ilzkovitz. 2009. 
“The Functioning of the Food Supply Chain and Its Effect 
on Food Prices in the European Union.” Occasional Papers 
47, Office for Infrastructures and Logistics of the European 
Communities, European Commission, Brussels.
Cloyne, James, and Patrick Hürtgen. 2016. “The Macroeco-
nomic Effects of Monetary Policy: A New Measure for the 
United Kingdom.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 
8 (4): 75–102.
Coibion, Olivier. 2012. “Are the Effects of Monetary Policy 
Shocks Big or Small?” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
nomics 4 (2): 1–32.
De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger. 2020. “The 
Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2): 561–644.
Di Bella, Gabriel, Mark Flanagan, Karim Foda, Svitlana 
Maslova, Alex Pienkowski, Martin Stuermer, and Frederik 
Toscani. 2022. “Natural Gas in Europe: The Potential Impact 
of Disruptions to Supply.” IMF Working Paper 22/145, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Díez, Federico J., Daniel Leigh, and Suchanan Tambunlertchai. 
2018. “Global Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Impli-
cations.” IMF Working Paper 18/137, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Díez, Federico J., Jiayue Fan, and Carolina Villegas-Sánchez. 
2021. “Global Declining Competition?” Journal of Interna-
tional Economics 132: 103492.
Dimova, Ralitza. 2015. “The Welfare Impact of Rising Food 
Prices.” IZA World of Labor 2015: 135.
Duval, Romain, Yi Ji, Longji Li, Myrto Oikonomou, Carlo Piz-
zinelli, Ippei Shibata, Alessandra Sozzi, and Marina M. Tava-
res. 2022. “Labor Market Tightness in Advanced Economies.” 
IMF Staff Discussion Note 2022/01, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Etienne, Xiaoli L., Scott H. Irwin, and Philip Garcia. 2014. 
“Bubbles in Food Commodity Markets: Four Decades of 
Evidence.” Journal of International Money and Finance 42: 
129–55. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jimonfin​.2013​.08​.008.
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD), United Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Food Programme (WFP), 
CHAPTER 1 
Global Prospects and Policies
49
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
and World Health Organization (WHO). 2021. “The State of 
Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2021: Transform-
ing Food Systems for Food Security, Improved Nutrition and 
Affordable Healthy Diets for All.” Rome, FAO.
Ferrucci, Gianluigi, Rebeca Jiménez-Rodríguez, and Luca 
Onorante. 2012. “Food Price Pass-Through in the Euro 
Area: Non-Linearities and the Role of the Common Agri-
cultural Policy.” International Journal of Central Banking 8 
(1): 179–217.
Flanagan, Mark, Alfred Kammer, Andrea Pescatori, and Martin 
Stuermer. “How a Russian Natural Gas Cutoff Could Weigh 
on Europe’s Economies.” IMFBlogs, July 19, 2022. https://​
blogs​.imf​.org/​2022/​07/​19/​how​-a​-russian​-natural​-gas​-cutoff​
-could​-weigh​-on​-europes​-economies.
Furceri, Davide, Prakash Loungani, John Simon, and Susan M. 
Wachter. 2016. “Global Food Prices and Domestic Inflation: 
Some Cross-Country Evidence.” Oxford Economic Papers 68 
(3): 665–87. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1093/​oep/​gpw016.
Gilbert, Christopher L. 2010. “How to Understand High 
Food Prices.” Journal of Agricultural Economics 61 (2): 
398–425. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1111/​j​.1477​-9552​.2010​.00248​.x.
Giordani, Paolo E., Nadia Rocha, and Michele Ruta. 2016. 
“Food Prices and the Multiplier Effect of Trade Policy.” Jour-
nal of International Economics 101: 102–22. https://​doi​.org/​
10​.1016/​j​.jinteco​.2016​.04​.001.
Gnutzmann, Hinnerk, and Piotr Spiewanowski. 2016. “Fertilizer 
Fuels Food Prices: Identification through the Oil-Gas Spread.” 
Unpublished, Leibniz Universität Hannover and Polish Acad-
emy of Sciences. http://​dx​.doi​.org/​10​.2139/​ssrn​.2808381.
Gopinath, Gita, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. Díez, 
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller. 
2020. “Dominant Currency Paradigm.” American Economic 
Review 110 (3): 677–719.
Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan. 2002. “Dissecting the Cycle: 
A Methodological Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Econom-
ics 49 (2): 365–81.
Harris, Donald J. 1970. “Income, Prices, and the Balance of 
Payments in Underdeveloped Economies: A Short-Run 
Model.” Oxford Economic Papers 22 (2): 156–72. https://​www​
.jstor​.org/​stable/​2662255.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 
2017 “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International 
Trends and Determinants.” Journal of International Economics 
108 (Supp. 1): S59–75. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jinteco​
.2017​.01​.004.
Konczal, Mike, and Niko Lusiani. 2022. “Prices, Profits, and 
Power: An Analysis of 2021 Firm-Level Markups.” Brief, 
Roosevelt Institute, New York. https://​rooseveltinstitute​.org/​
publications/​prices​-profits​-and​-power.
Laborde Debucquet, David, and Abdullah Mamun. 2022. 
“Documentation for Food and Fertilizers Export Restriction 
Tracker: Tracking Export Policy Responses Affecting Global 
Food Markets during Crisis.” Food and Fertilizer Trade Policy 
Tracker Working Paper 2, International Food Policy Research 
Institute, Washington, DC.
Ng, Francis, and M. Ataman Aksoy. 2008. “Food Price Increases 
and Net Food Importing Countries: Lessons from the Recent 
Past.” Agricultural Economics 39 (S1): 443–52.
Novta, Natalija, and Evgenia Pugacheva. 2021. “The Mac-
roeconomic Costs of Conflict.” Journal of Macroeconomics 
68: 103286.
Novta, Natalija, and Evgenia Pugacheva. 2022. “Macroeconomic 
Costs of Conflict: Impact on GDP and Refugee Flows.” 
VoxEU, July 29, 2022. https://​cepr​.org/​voxeu/​columns/​
macroeconomic​-costs​-conflict​-impact​-gdp​-and​-refugee​-flows.
Osborn, T. J., Jones, P. D., Lister, D. H., Morice, C. P., Simp-
son, I. R., Winn, J. P., et al. (2021). Land surface air 
temperature variations across the globe updated to 2019: 
the CRUTEM5 dataset. Journal of Geophysical Research: 
Atmospheres, 126, e2019JD032352. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1029/​
2019JD032352.
Unsal, D. Filiz, Chris Papageorgiou, and Hendre Garbers. 2022. 
“Monetary Policy Frameworks: An Index and New Evidence.” 
IMF Working Paper 22/22, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Yellen, Janet L. 2016. “Macroeconomic Research after the 
Crisis.” Speech delivered at the 60th Annual Federal Reserve 
Bank of Boston Economic Conference, “The Elusive ‘Great’ 
Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle 
Dynamics.” Boston, October 14.
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
51
Inflation rose markedly in many economies during 
2021, reflecting a mix of supply- and demand-side 
drivers amid recovery from the COVID-19 shock. 
Although nominal wage growth has so far gener-
ally stayed below inflation, some observers have 
warned that prices and wages could start feeding off 
each other, with wage and price inflation continu-
ally ratcheting up in a sustained wage-price spiral. 
This chapter unpacks events of the recent past and 
sheds light on future prospects using a mix of empir-
ical and model-based analyses. Historical episodes 
in advanced economies exhibiting wage, price, and 
labor market dynamics similar to those of the current 
circumstances—in particular, economies in which real 
wages (nominal wages deflated by consumer prices) 
have been flat or falling—did not tend to show a 
subsequent wage-price spiral. Model-based analysis 
suggests that different shocks underpinned wage and 
price developments through 2020–21: production 
capacity shocks predominantly drove wages, while pri-
vate saving and pent-up demand figured prominently 
for prices. Empirical analysis suggests that while labor 
market conditions remain relevant drivers of wage 
growth, the importance of inflation expectations has 
recently increased. A forward-looking analysis points to 
the critical role of the expectations process in shaping 
prospects. It demonstrates how front-loaded monetary 
policy tightening, including through its clear commu-
nication, can lower the risk that inflation will become 
de-anchored from its target. Given that inflationary 
shocks are originating outside the labor market, falling 
real wages are helping to slow inflation, and monetary 
policy is tightening more aggressively, the chances of 
persistent wage-price spirals emerging appear limited.
The authors of this chapter are Silvia Albrizio, Jorge Alvarez, 
Alexandre Balduino Sollaci, John Bluedorn (lead), Allan Dizioli, 
Niels-Jakob Hansen, and Philippe Wingender, with support from 
Youyou Huang and Evgenia Pugacheva. The chapter benefited 
from comments by Jason Furman and internal seminar participants 
and reviewers.
Introduction
With the recovery picking up steam after the 
acute COVID-19 shock, inflation in 2021 started 
hitting levels that had not been seen in almost 
40 years in many economies.1 A wide array of 
factors has underpinned the sharp rises in prices, 
including pandemic-related supply chain disrup-
tions, commodity price shocks, expansive mone-
tary policy and fiscal support, a surge in pent-up 
consumer demand, and changes in consumer 
preferences for goods versus services (Figure 2.1, 
panels 1 and 3).
At the same time, economic recovery brought a 
resurgence in demand for labor in many sectors. 
Labor supply was slow to respond, with some workers 
hesitant to reengage because of ongoing health con-
cerns and difficulties finding child and family care, 
among other factors.2 This demand–supply imbal-
ance led to tighter labor markets and increased wage 
pressures, with average nominal wages (per worker) 
rising and the unemployment rate falling beginning 
in the second half of 2020 across economy groups 
(Figure 2.1, panels 2 and 5 for advanced economies 
and panels 4 and 7 for emerging market and develop-
ing economies).3
Growth in nominal wages mostly brought the 
average level in 2021 back to the pre-pandemic trend, 
although there were differences across economies. 
Importantly, nominal wage growth in 2021 did not 
1Price inflation is defined with respect to the consumer price 
index throughout, unless indicated otherwise.
2See Bluedorn and others (2021) for a discussion of how the 
COVID-19 shock generated a “she-cession,” reflecting in part the 
disproportionate impact of these factors on women’s employment. 
See also ILO (2022) for a more recent assessment of the shock’s 
effects on employment and participation and the differentials 
between men’s and women’s outcomes.
3To achieve the broadest sample coverage possible in the empirical 
analysis, wages (nominal or real) are defined on a per employed 
worker basis throughout, unless indicated otherwise. For a smaller 
sample, the chapter includes some discussion highlighting how 
hourly wages differ.
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
2
CHAPTER
52
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
fully keep up with price inflation.4 This means that 
the path of real wages (nominal wages deflated by 
consumer prices) was fairly flat or falling (Figure 2.1, 
panels 6 and 8). Against a backdrop of high or even 
rising price inflation, these nominal and real wage 
patterns have continued into the first quarter of 2022 
for economies for which data are available.
4The distinction between wages per worker and wages per hour 
became relevant during the pandemic’s acute phase, as hours worked 
were sharply adjusted for many workers (particularly in advanced 
economies). Annex Figure 2.1.1 shows the dynamics of wages per 
hour: spiking in the second quarter of 2020 on average across econ-
omy groups, but quickly returning to trend. Similarly to the patterns 
for wages per worker, wages per hour fell short of price inflation by 
the end of 2021.
At a sectoral level, nominal wages in both industry 
and services have tended to converge to their common 
pre-pandemic trends across economy groups (see Online 
Annex 2.2 for details on the sectoral perspective). In 
advanced economies, real wages across sectors largely 
matched their pre-pandemic trend, before deteriorating in 
the latter half of 2021 as inflation rose, while in emerg-
ing market and developing economies, they have stayed 
mostly below their pre-pandemic trend. Consistent with 
the picture of wages by sector, sectoral employment shifts 
so far have appeared to contribute little to overall wage 
changes for the average economy—common changes in 
wages across sectors themselves account for the lion’s share 
of the average overall wage change.
Some observers argue that recent wage and price 
dynamics could change, so that rising inflation 
Figure 2.1.  Recent Wage, Price, and Unemployment Dynamics
(Index, 2019:Q4 = 100, unless noted otherwise)
Consumer price inﬂation has accelerated markedly since the second quarter of 2020. While the nominal wage largely returned to its pre-pandemic trend, real wages 
have dipped below their pre-pandemic trend. Unemployment rates have continued to decrease as the economy recovers from the COVID-19 shock.
1. Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2. Unemployment Rate
(Percent)
94
97
100
103
106
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
2017:
Q1
3
5
7
9
2017:
Q1
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
3. Consumer Prices
2017:
Q1
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
84
92
100
108
116
4. Unemployment Rate
(Percent)
2017:
Q1
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
3
6
9
12
15
5. Nominal Wage
90
95
100
105
110
2017:
Q1
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
6. Real Wage
91
94
97
100
103
106
2017:
Q1
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
7. Nominal Wage
64
82
100
118
136
2017:
Q1
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
8. Real Wage
82
91
100
109
118
2017:
Q1
18:
Q1
19:
Q1
20:
Q1
21:
Q1
21:
Q4
Sources: Haver Analytics; International Labour Organization; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF 
staff calculations.
Note: Blue lines represent the median across economies; dashed lines indicate the pre–COVID-19 trend; shaded areas represent the interquartile range across 
economies. Wages (nominal and real) are calculated on a per worker basis. See Online Annex 2.1 for details on the sample coverage.
53
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
expectations and tighter labor markets push workers 
to persistently demand wage increases to catch up to 
or exceed recent inflation. Such a “wage-price spiral” is 
defined here as an episode of several quarters character-
ized by accelerating wages and prices (that is, in which 
both wage and price inflation rates rise simultaneously).5
This chapter aims to better understand the current 
circumstances and prospects for wage and price infla-
tion. To this end, crucial questions addressed include 
the following:
•• How do wage, employment, and price dynamics 
in the recovery from the COVID-19 shock com-
pare with pre-pandemic dynamics? Did historical 
episodes mirroring 2021 patterns in wages, employ-
ment, and prices in advanced economies subse-
quently evolve into wage-price spirals?
•• How well do inflation expectations and labor mar-
ket conditions explain recent nominal wage growth 
in advanced and emerging market and developing 
economies? What were the deeper, underlying drivers 
of wages, prices, and employment during 2020–21?
•• Could wage and price pressures in the wake of 
COVID-19 lead to high and persistent wage and 
price inflation? Have wage and price pressures from 
past inflationary shocks due to increasing global 
supply pressures lasted long? Historically, has mone-
tary tightening been effective in reducing wage and 
price pressures? Looking ahead, how could changes 
in the formation of wage and price expectations 
affect prospects, and how should policymakers take 
them into account?
Drawing both on empirical and model-based analyses, 
the chapter’s main findings are as follows:
•• Both wage and price inflation picked up in a broad-based 
manner through 2021, while real wages have tended to be 
flat or falling across economies on average. At a sectoral 
level, nominal wages in both industry and services 
tended to converge to their common pre-pandemic 
trends across economy groups. Consequently, sectoral 
employment shifts appear to explain little of overall 
wage changes through the end of 2021.
•• On average, wage-price spirals did not follow histor-
ical episodes that were similar to the circumstances 
currently seen in advanced economies. Although 
the COVID-19 shock is unusual and the ­current 
5See Boissay and others (2022) for a similar definition and 
discussion on the debate about the possible emergence of wage-price 
spirals in advanced economies. Further discussion of the concept is 
in this chapter’s section titled “Historical Episodes Similar to Today.”
conjuncture unlike much recent experience, 
similar historical episodes of inflation in advanced 
economies—in which real wages were flat or 
falling—did not tend to entail a wage-price spiral. 
In fact, inflation tended to fall in the aftermath 
while nominal wages gradually caught up.
•• Changes in inflation expectations and labor market 
slack explain wage dynamics in the second half of 2021 
relatively well. In the immediate aftermath of the 
COVID-19 shock, wage growth across economies 
was poorly explained by its earlier empirical relation-
ship with expectations and unemployment. How-
ever, by the end of 2021, wage growth was broadly 
in line with the increases in inflation expectations 
and labor market tightening observed across econ-
omy groups on average.
•• Reflecting the pandemic shock’s unusual nature, a 
­complex mix of supply and demand shocks underpinned 
the 2020–21 behavior of wages and prices. Analysis 
using a rich multi-sector, multi-economy structural 
model points to differences in the shocks underly-
ing historical changes in wages and prices. Over the 
two years since the pandemic’s onset, wages have 
been driven predominantly by production capacity 
and labor supply shocks (from social distancing and 
lockdowns), while prices have been more affected by 
private saving and the release of pent-up demand. 
How and when (or if) these deeper shocks unwind 
will matter for how wage and price inflation develop.
•• When wage and price expectations are more 
backward-looking, monetary policy actions need to be 
more front-loaded to minimize the risks of inflation 
de-anchoring. Using a newly developed model of 
expectations and wage and price setting, scenario anal-
ysis suggests that the observed decline in real wages 
has acted as a drag so far, reducing price pressures and 
thereby helping inhibit development of a wage-price 
spiral dynamic. However, the more backward-looking 
(adaptive) expectations are, the greater the chances 
that inflation could de-anchor to a higher-than-target 
level. The monetary policy response in this inflation-
ary environment should depend on the nature of wage 
and price expectations: the more backward-looking 
they are, the quicker and stronger the tightening 
needed to avert inflation de-anchoring and prevent 
large declines in the real wage.
Some important caveats to the analysis presented here 
should be stated up front. First, the empirical analysis 
is constrained by the availability of data, both across 
54
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
economies and over time. Hence, the exact sample cover-
age differs across exercises. Second, although the empir-
ical methods used are standard, their findings should be 
interpreted as associational rather than causal. Third, the 
empirical analysis and study of historical episodes essen-
tially summarize past patterns in the data, which may 
not be fully representative of the current circumstances. 
Moreover, if the COVID-19 shock caused a large struc-
tural break in the economy’s behavior (such as a sharp 
shift in expectations formation or wage-setting processes), 
historical analyses may not be as informative about future 
prospects. The model-based analysis of expectations 
provides some insurance against structural breaks, since it 
allows for the possibility of a limited form of regime shifts 
in its examination of adaptive learning.
The chapter begins by identifying and examining his-
torical episodes exhibiting wage, price, and employment 
patterns similar to those in the current circumstances, 
highlighting how the episodes subsequently developed. 
The chapter continues by studying how well recent 
wage dynamics can be explained by changes in inflation 
expectations and labor market slack and the composi-
tion of shocks driving these developments. In the pen-
ultimate section, the chapter highlights how inflationary 
shocks and monetary tightening affect wage (both nomi-
nal and real) dynamics. The final section considers how 
the processes for forming expectations regarding wages 
and prices may interact with the shock and monetary 
policy’s responses to affect the economy’s future path.
Historical Episodes Similar to Today
As explained in the introduction, rising inflation, 
positive nominal wage growth, declining real wages, 
and declining unemployment characterized the mac-
roeconomic situation in 2021 in many economies. 
Although unusual, such conditions are not unprece-
dented. A sample of advanced economies covering the 
past 40 years (and for a few the past 60 years) reveals 
22 other episodes exhibiting similar conditions.6 
6The 22 episodes are identified within a sample of 30 advanced 
economies for which data on inflation, wages, prices, and unemploy-
ment are available at a quarterly frequency going back to 1960 at the 
earliest. For most economies in the sample, the quarterly data begin 
on a regular basis only in the 1980s. The selection criteria are that at 
least three out of the previous four quarters had (1) rising inflation, 
(2) positive nominal wage growth, (3) declining real wages, and 
(4) declining or flat unemployment. If the criteria hold for several 
quarters within three years, only the first episode in which the cri-
teria held is selected. See Online Annex 2.3 and Alvarez and others 
(forthcoming) for further details and discussion about these episodes.
The current coincidence of rising inflation and nomi-
nal wage growth has led to concerns that a wage-price 
spiral—in which both wages and prices accelerate 
for a prolonged period—could emerge.7 This section 
examines whether wage-price spirals have occurred in 
similar past episodes.
Similar Past Episodes Do Not Show a Wage-Price 
Spiral Taking Hold
Similar past episodes were not followed by a 
wage-price spiral, in which both inflation and nomi-
nal wage growth keep rising over a prolonged period 
(Figure 2.2, panels 1 and 3). Nominal wage growth 
did tend to increase somewhat after these episodes, but 
inflation edged down on average. In combination, this 
led to an increase in real wages (Figure 2.2, panel 4). 
The unemployment rate generally stabilized after the 
episodes (Figure 2.2, panel 2).
Although the average subsequent path suggests 
little cause for alarm, there is heterogeneity across 
historical episodes. A notable example is the United 
States in the second quarter of 1979, when inflation 
was on a sharp upward path immediately following 
the episode, rising rapidly for four quarters before 
starting to decline. The unemployment rate also 
rose more than during the other identified episodes. 
Underlying these changes was an aggressive monetary 
tightening that began around the time of the infla-
tion peak: the so-called Volcker disinflation. Nominal 
wage growth—which had not shown signs of con-
tinuing its upward path—was relatively flat during 
this period, leading to a decline in real wages early 
on. But as inflation came down, the deterioration in 
real wages decreased.
A similar policy response is observed in many of the 
other episodes as well. In fact, monetary policy tight-
ening followed most of the past episodes, which helped 
to keep inflation contained.8 Thus, the evidence from 
similar historical episodes suggests that an appropriate 
7The earlier literature on wage-price spirals has considered 
a wide array of definitions, ranging from a simple feedback 
between wages (as a cost of production) and prices, to a coin-
cident acceleration of wages and prices, to a situation in which 
wage inflation persistently exceeds price inflation. As noted in 
the introduction, this chapter defines a wage-price spiral as an 
episode of several quarters characterized by accelerating wages 
and prices (that is, in which wage and price inflation are rising 
simultaneously).
8Out of the 22 episodes illustrated in Figure 2.2, 13 were followed 
by monetary policy tightening (Annex Table 2.3.2).
55
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
monetary policy response can contain the risks of a 
subsequent wage-price spiral in the current circum-
stances to very low levels.
Wage-Price Spiral Episodes Did Not Typically Last Long
Turning to past episodes of wage-price spirals 
(regardless of the behavior of real wages or unem-
ployment), further sustained wage-price acceleration 
did not typically follow the initial dynamics.9 
Following such episodes, inflation and nominal 
wage growth on average tended to stabilize in the 
subsequent quarters, leaving real wage growth 
broadly unchanged (Figure 2.3, blue lines). At the 
same time, the unemployment rate tended to edge 
down slightly.
However, in some rare examples, more extreme 
outcomes followed such episodes. For example, 
during the US episode starting in the third quarter 
of 1973, price inflation surged for five additional 
quarters—spurred by the first Organization of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries oil embargo of 
the 1970s—before starting to come down in 1975 
(Figure 2.3, red lines). On the other hand, nomi-
nal wage growth did not increase, leading real wage 
growth to decline. Another relevant example is that 
from Belgium during 1973, in which both nominal 
wage growth and price inflation surged markedly 
before coming down (see Online Annex 2.3). In that 
case, wage growth was high and exceeded price infla-
tion for a while, partly owing to the wide prevalence 
of wage indexation.10
Farther back in time, another notable example 
occurred in 1946–48 in the United States, just after 
World War II concluded. Over those years, price 
controls due to the war were lifted and pent-up 
demand was released. As the economy shifted from 
wartime, price inflation and nominal wage growth 
picked up during 1946, both reaching about 20 per-
cent year over year by the first quarter of 1947.11 
Thereafter, though, inflation and wage growth 
started to come down gradually while remaining at 
high levels for about a year. Toward the latter half 
of 1948 and into early 1949, inflation came down 
sharply, as supply chains had readjusted and pent-up 
9A wage-price spiral episode is identified if, for at least three 
of the preceding four quarters, (1) wages were accelerating 
(wage growth was rising) and (2) prices were accelerating (price 
inflation was rising). Note that these are less restrictive criteria 
than those used to identify historical episodes similar to today’s 
circumstances.
10See also Battistini and others (2022) and Baba and Lee 
(2022) for further discussion and analysis of the historical effects 
of oil price and energy shocks on price inflation and wages and 
the effects’ relationship to an economy’s structural characteristics.
11Wages are proxied by average hourly earnings in manufactur-
ing, as an economy-wide wage measure is not available that far 
back in time.
Median
10th–90th percentile range
US, 1979:Q2 = 0
COVID-19, 2021:Q4 = 0
Figure 2.2.  Changes in Wages, Prices, and Unemployment 
after Similar Past Episodes
(Percentage point differences relative to ﬁrst quarter in which criteria are 
fulﬁlled)
After past episodes with similar macroeconomic conditions to today’s, consumer 
price inﬂation typically declined, while nominal and real wage growth increased.
1. Consumer Price Inﬂation
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Quarters after episode
2. Unemployment Rate
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Quarters after episode
3. Nominal Wage Growth
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Quarters after episode
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
–3
0
3
6
9
11
4. Real Wage Growth
Quarters after episode
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
Sources: International Labour Organization; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows developments following episodes in which at least three of 
the preceding four quarters have (1) accelerating prices/rising price inﬂation, 
(2) positive nominal wage growth, (3) falling or constant real wages, and 
(4) a declining or ﬂat unemployment rate. Twenty-two such episodes are identiﬁed 
within a sample of 30 advanced economies, the earliest going back to 1960. The 
COVID-19 episode represents an average of economies in the sample for the 
period starting in 2021:Q4. See Online Annex 2.3 for details.
56
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
demand became exhausted (with a mild recession 
in 1949).12
Overall, the historical evidence suggests that 
episodes characterized by about a year of accelerat-
ing prices and wages have not generally lasted, with 
12See Online Annex 2.3 for further details on this case. Rouse, 
Zhang, and Tedeschi (2021) also describe this and other past 
inflationary episodes in the United States with some features similar 
to those in today’s recovery from the pandemic. Caplan (1956) 
provides a close-in-time and in-depth discussion of the situation in 
the late 1940s.
nominal wage growth and price inflation tending to 
stabilize on average. It is important to remark that 
this means that inflation and wage growth remained 
elevated for several quarters on average after these 
past episodes.13
Wage Drivers during the COVID-19 Shock 
and Recovery
This section studies wage, price, and employment 
drivers in the context of the pandemic and subse-
quent recovery. It first examines recent wage dynamics 
empirically through the lens of the wage Phillips curve, 
which relates wage growth to inflation expectations 
and labor market slack. The section then attempts to 
further unpack wage and price changes over the past 
two years, using a rich structural model to identify the 
complex mix of underlying supply and demand shocks 
driving wages and prices.
An Empirical Decomposition of Recent Dynamics Using 
the Wage Phillips Curve
Although the COVID-19 shock and recovery 
bear many unusual features, a recurring question is 
whether previous economic relationships can still 
explain recent dynamics. For wages, this means 
examining whether empirical estimates using the 
workhorse wage Phillips curve—relating wage 
growth to measures of inflation expectations, labor 
market slack, and productivity growth—do well at 
capturing the variation in wage developments.14 The 
chapter first employs this framework to study the 
pre–COVID-19 wage-setting process. It then uses 
13The relevance of this finding hinges critically on the sample 
coverage. As in Figure 2.2, quarterly time coverage for the critical 
variables starts only in the 1980s or later for most economies. For 
robustness, the exercise was thus repeated using a narrower wage 
concept (hourly earnings for the manufacturing sector only) allowing 
for time coverage back to the early 1970s for more economies. This 
did not overturn the broad results shown in Figure 2.3, although 
a few additional extreme outcomes were identified. See Online 
Annex 2.3 for additional information.
14The specification used is based on Chapter 2 of the October 
2017 World Economic Outlook, inspired by Galí’s (2011) work 
micro-founding the wage Phillips curve as the outcome of a 
wage-setting process. The baseline specification using the unem-
ployment rate and its change as measures of labor market slack 
permits wider coverage of advanced and emerging market economies 
in the sample. Given recent inflation dynamics, the relationship 
between wage growth and inflation expectations is a key focus of this 
chapter’s study. Online Annex 2.4 includes details on the baseline 
specification.
Median
10th–90th percentile range
US, 1973:Q3 = 0
Figure 2.3.  Changes in Wages, Prices, and Unemployment 
after Past Episodes with Accelerating Prices and Wages
(Percentage point differences relative to ﬁrst quarter in which criteria are 
fulﬁlled)
A period of stable wage growth and inﬂation typically followed past episodes with 
accelerating wages and prices.
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
1. Consumer Price Inﬂation
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Quarters after episode
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Quarters after episode
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
2. Unemployment Rate
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Quarters after episode
–3
0
3
6
9
11
Quarters after episode
3. Nominal Wage Growth
–4
–2
0
2
–6
4
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
–6
4. Real Wage Growth
Sources: International Labour Organization; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; US Bureau of Economic Analysis; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the developments following episodes in which at least 
three of the preceding four quarters have (1) accelerating prices/rising price 
inﬂation and (2) accelerating nominal wages/rising nominal wage growth. 
Seventy-nine such episodes are identiﬁed within a sample of 30 advanced 
economies, the earliest going back to 1960. The bands indicate the 10th–90th 
percentile of the outcomes in the identiﬁed episodes. See Online Annex 2.3 for 
details.
57
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
the framework to decompose wage growth changes 
since the pandemic across economy groups, to see 
how well it performs.
Wage Growth Tends to Rise with 
Inflation Expectations and Fall with 
Labor Market Slack
Consistent with earlier empirical and theoretical 
literature, the analysis suggests that rises in inflation 
expectations15 and productivity growth are associated 
with increases in nominal wage growth, while increases 
in labor market slack (captured by the unemployment 
rate and its change) are correlated with a slowdown in 
wage growth (Figure 2.4, panel 1). These relationships 
are statistically significant in both the advanced and 
emerging market economy groups.
The positive relationship with inflation 
expectations—a focus of the conjuncture—is con-
sistent with a forward-looking wage-setting process 
in which workers demand higher wages as prices are 
expected to rise.16 These nominal wage pressures add 
to those stemming from increases in the real returns 
on labor—as captured by productivity growth—and 
survive even if lagged inflation is controlled for. Wage 
growth appears to be highly sensitive to inflation 
expectations in advanced economies: a 1 percentage 
point increase in inflation expectations is associ-
ated with a close to 1 percentage point increase in 
wage growth (compared with 0.6 percentage point 
in emerging market economies). This relationship, 
however, weakened in the period after the global 
financial crisis, when inflation was remarkably low 
and stable.17
The negative relationship with unemployment is 
consistent with high (or widening) slack in the labor 
market, which reduces wage pressures as workers 
struggle to find jobs and accept lower wages. This 
last correlation is robust to using other measures 
of labor market slack, such as unemployment gaps, 
which allow for time-varying natural unemployment 
15This section focuses on one-year-ahead inflation expectations. 
See Online Annex 2.1 for details on the measure used.
16Additional robustness checks, including lagged inflation as a 
regressor, are shown in Online Annex 2.4.
17See Online Annex 2.4 for a discussion of how coefficients have 
declined in advanced economies. Part of this observed flattening in 
the wage Phillips curve may reflect improvements in monetary policy 
credibility, as discussed by Hazell and others (2022) for the price 
Phillips curve.
Advanced economies
Emerging market economies
Inﬂation expectations
Unemployment
Unemployment change
Other
Total change in wage growth
Inﬂation expectations
Unemployment
Unemployment change
Other
Total change in wage growth
Figure 2.4.  A Look at Nominal Wage Growth through the Lens 
of the Wage Phillips Curve
(Percentage points)
Wage dynamics during COVID-19 did not follow the wage Phillips curve 
relationship closely, but more recent nominal wage growth is consistent with 
rising inﬂation expectations and labor market tightening.
1. Wage Phillips Curve Coefﬁcients
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Inﬂation
expectations
Unemployment
Unemployment
change
Productivity
2. Decomposition of Nominal Wage Growth, Advanced Economies
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
2017:Q1
18:Q1
19:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
21:Q4
3. Decomposition of Nominal Wage Growth, Emerging Market
Economies
2017:Q1
18:Q1
19:Q1
20:Q1
21:Q1
21:Q4
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 reports the estimated effects (coefﬁcients) from 1 percentage point 
rises in the indicated variables from a wage Phillips curve regression. The sample 
covering 2000:Q1–19:Q4 consists of 31 advanced and 15 emerging market 
economies. Whiskers indicate 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. See Online 
Annex 2.1 for further details on the sample and estimation. For panels 2 and 3, 
bars show contributions of each component relative to the contributions observed 
in 2019:Q4. Contributions are calculated using pooled wage Phillips curve 
coefﬁcients for the indicated economy group. Line depicts average overall nominal 
wage growth per worker observed relative to 2019:Q4. Only economies with 
continuously available data from 2017:Q1–21:Q4 are used for the contributions and 
aggregated using GDP purchasing-power-parity weights. “Other” category contains 
the contributions of productivity growth, the residual, and time ﬁxed effects.
58
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
rates and unemployment-to-vacancy ratios.18 Point 
estimates suggest that emerging market wages can 
be more sensitive than those in advanced econo-
mies to changes in labor market and productivity 
conditions, although variation in past experiences is 
substantial.
Part of the heterogeneity in experiences could be 
due to differences across economies and over time 
in structural factors that may affect wage-setting 
processes. In economies with more stringent employ-
ment protections, wage growth appears to be on 
average more sensitive to changes in labor market 
slack (unemployment) and inflation expectations 
(Figure 2.5, panel 1). This would be consistent with 
labor prices (wages) adjusting faster to changing con-
ditions when restrictions on labor quantities (firing 
or hiring of workers) are present. In economies in 
which firms exhibit greater market power in product 
markets—as proxied by the average price markup—
wages appear slightly more responsive to unemploy-
ment changes (Figure 2.5, panel 2). Such a finding is 
consistent with evidence from the literature showing 
that higher-markup firms are more likely to use their 
margins to absorb cost changes and preserve their 
market shares.19
Relatedly, using long cross-sectional time 
series for Europe that help identify the effects of 
within-economy structural changes, Baba and Lee 
(2022) find that the pass-through of inflation shocks 
(captured by oil price changes) to wages can increase 
when union density and the degree of centralized 
18There has recently been much discussion about how 
alternative slack measures—such as unemployment rate gaps 
(unemployment rate minus natural rate of unemployment) and 
the ratio of the number of unemployed people to the num-
ber of job vacancies in an economy—could perform better. In 
robustness checks for the larger sample, using the unemployment 
gap does not make any marked differences in the relationships 
discussed. To study the unemployment-to-vacancy ratio, a further 
robustness check using the US (for which data are available on a 
sufficiently long basis) was also conducted, with broadly similar 
results, although the unemployment-to-vacancy ratio performed 
better in explaining recent wage growth. This is similar to the 
evidence from Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (forthcoming), who find 
that the price Phillips curve using the unemployment-to-vacancy 
ratio explains inflation since the COVID-19 shock better in the 
US than alternative measures, without sacrificing its explanatory 
power before the pandemic. See Online Annex 2.4 for fur-
ther details.
19See Box 2.1 for some discussion of this mechanism and 
Box 1.2 for a discussion of the relationship between market power 
and inflation.
bargaining are high.20 Although disentangling specific 
structural factors that cause differences in wage 
setting is empirically challenging, these results and 
others from the literature suggest that regulatory, 
institutional, and structural features affect wages’ 
responsiveness to changes in inflation expecta-
tions and slack.
20Battistini and others (2022) also analyze the effects of energy 
shocks, comparing the second-round effects in the 1970s with those 
from today using model simulations calibrated to the relevant eco-
nomic features. They find only limited second-round effects in the 
present circumstances, unlike what was observed in the 1970s. This 
difference likely reflects changes in economic structure, particularly 
in labor market bargaining and wage-setting processes. See also 
Boissay and others (2022) for additional discussion.
Low
High
Low
High
1. Stringency of Employment Protection Regulation
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2. Firm Markups
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Unemployment
Inﬂation expectations
Unemployment
Inﬂation expectations
Figure 2.5.  The Role of Structural Characteristics in Wage 
Dynamics
(Percentage points)
Regulatory and structural features can shape how unemployment and inﬂation 
expectations affect nominal wages.
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows average marginal effects of unemployment and inﬂation 
expectations on nominal wage growth, conditional on the level of the structural 
characteristic. High (low) refers to the average value of each structural indicator, 
given that it is above (below) the cross-economy median. “Stringency of 
employment protection regulation” refers to a composite indicator on the 
stringency of regulations related to individual dismissal of workers on regular 
contracts. The indicator of “ﬁrm markups” (a measure of ﬁrms’ market power in 
output markets) is the sales-weighted average of sectoral markups. See Online 
Annex 2.4 for details.
59
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
Wage Changes Were Highly Unusual in the 
Acute Pandemic Phase but Recently Appear 
Broadly in Line with Developments in Inflation 
Expectations and Slack
How wages respond to changing conditions in labor 
markets and inflation also depends on the sources of 
shocks and their mechanics. The COVID-19 shock’s 
unprecedented nature and asymmetric sectoral effects 
meant that, overall, average wages did not move in line 
with the relationships predicted by the wage Phillips 
curve. A decomposition of average wage growth in 
advanced and emerging market economies using the 
wage Phillips curve unveils several notable features 
(Figure 2.4, panels 2 and 3).
First, both the acute shock and the recovery were 
unique, exhibiting abrupt swings that deviated from 
those explained by inflation expectations and unem-
ployment changes according to the estimated wage 
Phillips curve.21 Only part of these deviations was 
due to movements in hours worked, as employers 
and employees adjusted along the intensive margin 
of employment.22 Importantly, the deviations were 
quantitatively and qualitatively different from those 
observed in the years preceding the pandemic and 
during the global financial crisis.23 They also differed 
across economies. At the beginning of the pandemic, 
the drop in wage growth was less prominent than 
predicted by inflation and unemployment movements 
in advanced economies (particularly in the US), while 
the opposite was true in emerging markets.24
Second, in both advanced and emerging market 
economies, the recovery of wage growth since the crisis 
peak has been largely in line with the observed drops 
in unemployment and increase in inflation expecta-
tions. In fact, by the end of 2021, wage growth in 
advanced economies did not seem to be abnormally 
above that predicted by falling unemployment and 
rising inflation expectations alone, with a shrinking 
21The large increase in temporary layoffs observed in some econo-
mies, which were particularly concentrated among lower-paid work-
ers, could partly explain these wage growth swings (Duval and others 
2022). This reason is also cited for some of the strange behavior of 
the price Phillips curve in the United States (Ball and others 2021).
22See Online Annex 2.4 for a decomposition including hours 
worked using a more limited sample of economies.
23See Online Annex 2.4 for a similar decomposition over the 
period spanning the global financial crisis.
24Worker composition shifts during this period, particularly in 
the US, where greater employment losses among low-wage workers 
pushed average wages upward at the start of the pandemic, could 
partly explain the differences.
contribution of the residual and other components in 
both advanced and emerging market economies. On 
average, the rise in inflation expectations appears to 
account for more of the very latest movements in wage 
growth.25 Chapter 1 provides evidence on how the 
average and distribution of inflation expectations have 
evolved in 2022 for selected economies.
Relative Contributions of Supply and Demand Shocks to 
Wages and Prices
The large, unexplained movements in wage growth 
observed during the COVID-19 shock and recovery 
likely reflect the shock’s unprecedented and complex 
nature, as well as the large policy responses. To help 
unpack the breakdown of the wage Phillips curve 
during the pandemic’s acute phase, this subsection 
deploys a rich multi-economy, multisector general 
equilibrium model featuring nominal rigidities and 
credit constraints. Based on recent work by Baqaee 
and Farhi (2022a, 2022b) and Gourinchas and others 
(2021), the model facilitates the study of how different 
demand and supply shocks propagate and contribute 
to wage, price, and employment changes.
In total, seven types of shocks are considered, 
all of which have been cited as being important 
for understanding the COVID-19 shock and its 
effects. On the supply side, the model includes three 
types of shocks:
•• Production capacity (or labor supply) shocks, arising 
from lockdowns and social distancing, which had 
a particularly large impact on labor supply: These 
shocks are calibrated according to changes in the 
number of hours worked by sector over time.
•• International trade cost shocks, as measured by the 
shipping costs by product for US imports: Freight 
and insurance costs showed marked increases 
starting in 2020.
•• Commodity price changes for energy and food: Energy 
and food prices went up by 85 percent and 20 per-
cent year over year, respectively, in 2021.
25The prominence of tighter labor markets for higher wage growth 
in the latest period appears greater when unemployment-to-vacancy 
indicators—particularly for the case of the United States—are con-
sidered, as these indicators point to tighter labor markets than before 
the pandemic. Alternative labor market slack measures co-moved 
closely during the pandemic, but the degree of tightening relative 
to the fourth quarter of 2019 varies for some economies (including 
the US) depending on the measure used. See Online Annex 2.4 
for details.
60
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
The analysis also incorporates four types of 
demand shocks:
•• Changes in private saving behavior: These shocks are 
calibrated by adjusting households’ discount rate to 
track saving rates over time.
•• Consumption composition changes: The pandemic led 
to a large reallocation of consumption away from 
services toward goods, driven by both availability 
and preferences. Consumer taste shocks are derived 
using changes in expenditure shares for different 
types of goods and services over time.
•• Fiscal policy support, which was substantial in many 
advanced economies in 2020: This shock is derived 
from changes in government consumption and 
changes in spending on unemployment insurance.
•• Monetary policy support, which was also extensive: 
This shock is obtained by calibrating the domes-
tic interest rate to that observed for central bank 
policy rates.
A historical decomposition of key economic 
variables—including wages and prices—for the 
United States, euro area, and Mexico (an emerging 
market economy) are presented for 2020 and 2021 
(Figure 2.6).26
Wage Changes since 2019 Have Been More Related 
to Supply-Side Shocks from the Pandemic, While 
Demand-Side Shocks Have Contributed More to 
Price Changes
Although all shocks contribute to the variation in 
an economy, two main contributors emerge from the 
results. First, reductions in production capacity (dark 
red bars in Figure 2.6) were the predominant contrib-
utors to nominal wage changes during 2020 and 2021. 
Second, changes in households’ saving behavior (dark 
blue bars) were one of the most important drivers 
of price changes over the same years. These findings 
suggest that the future paths for these variables could 
depend heavily on whether and how these shocks 
unwind, as well as on whether new shocks arise.
26The impacts of individual shocks do not necessarily add up to 
the total impact in combination because of interactions in general 
equilibrium. It is also important to note that the total model-based 
impacts by variable are broadly aligned, but not exactly equal to 
actual outturns. The economies studied were selected based on a 
combination of their economic size, availability of data required 
for the model calibration (which is a constraint for many emerging 
market and developing economies), and diversity of policy sup-
port responses.
Total
Private saving
Production capacity
Consumption composition
Commodity prices
Fiscal support
Trade costs
Monetary support
Figure 2.6.  Drivers of Changes in Wages, Prices, and 
Employment during the COVID-19 Pandemic and Recovery
(Cumulative percent change, relative to pre–COVID-19 trend)
1. United States
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
2020 2021
2020 2021
2020 2021
2020 2021
Nominal wage
Inﬂation
Real wage
Employment
Reductions in production capacity and changes in households’ saving behavior 
were the predominant contributors to wage and price changes during the 
pandemic.
2. Euro Area
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
2020 2021
2020 2021
2020 2021
2020 2021
Nominal wage
Inﬂation
Real wage
Employment
3. Mexico
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Nominal wage
Inﬂation
Real wage
Employment
2021
2020
2020
2020
2020
2021
2021
2021
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Nominal and real wages are deﬁned on a per hour basis for the results 
exhibited in this ﬁgure. Estimated impacts are calculated using a multi-sector, 
multi-economy general equilibrium model based on Baqaee and Farhi (2020).
See Online Annex 2.5 for further details. The impacts of individual shocks do not 
necessarily add up to the total impact in combination as a result of interactions in 
general equilibrium. Total impacts are model-based and broadly aligned with 
outturns.
61
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
In 2020, the main determinant of wages and 
employment across all three economies was the drop 
in production capacity that took place early in the 
pandemic (dark red bars). Lockdowns and the rise in 
social distancing due to the pandemic translated into 
decreases in production capacity and a lower labor 
supply. These decreases led to a decline in employment 
and an increase in hourly wages.
The second key driver in 2020, particularly for 
prices, was the rise in private saving (dark blue 
bars)—a contractionary force for aggregate demand—
due to the myriad uncertainties surrounding the pan-
demic and its consequences. This negative demand 
shock had the usual disinflationary impact on nom-
inal wages and consumer prices, particularly in the 
United States. Finally, the expansive fiscal and mon-
etary policy responses in the United States and the 
euro area limited early damages to employment from 
the pandemic and helped support nominal wages.27 
In contrast, fiscal policy support in Mexico shrank in 
2020, pulling wages and prices down to some extent 
(yellow bars). Monetary policy expansion in Mexico 
was effective at sustaining employment, along with 
pushing nominal wages and prices up (light green 
bars). For all three economies, the combination of 
a sharp increase in nominal wages and muted price 
responses led to strong increases in real wages.
In 2021, the main driver overall was the rebound 
in aggregate demand running ahead of production 
capacity—a supply-demand imbalance. The posi-
tive impact on consumer prices as private savings 
began to be drawn down—a reversal of the negative 
impact of higher savings in 2020—shows this most 
clearly. Production capacity recovered somewhat last 
year, especially in the euro area and Mexico, but 
the recovery was not enough to fully boost employ-
ment as the cumulative impact was still negative. 
Continued monetary accommodation in the United 
States also pushed wages and prices up further. For 
the euro area and Mexico, the inflationary effects of 
monetary support were reduced. Fiscal policy sup-
port across economies decreased in 2021 compared 
with 2020, relieving some of the earlier upward 
27Note that there are important aspects of the design and compo-
sition of fiscal support policies that the model abstracts away from. 
See Chapter 3 of the April 2021 World Economic Outlook and the 
October 2022 Fiscal Monitor for a discussion on how the appropriate 
mix of job retention support and other measures may make fiscal 
policy support more effective.
pressure on prices.28 The mix of nominal wage and 
price changes led real wages to decline across the 
board last year, especially in Mexico.
The other major contributor to wages and prices 
in 2021 was the steep rise in commodity prices (dark 
green bars). The euro area and Mexico felt the impacts 
of those energy and food shocks on economy-wide 
prices more strongly than the United States, but com-
modity price rises were a drag on employment across 
the board. Commodity prices have risen even further 
in 2022 (particularly with the shock of the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine) and are pushing inflation up even 
more. Wage and price prospects will depend in part on 
how long these and other shocks persist.
Inflation De-anchoring: Expectations and 
Policy Responses
Beyond the potential for more persistent and 
additional inflationary demand and supply shocks, the 
risks for inflation de-anchoring or the emergence of a 
wage-price spiral will also depend on how businesses 
and workers form their expectations for wages and 
prices. This section delves into this issue. It first studies 
empirically the dynamic responses of wages, prices, 
and expectations about them to an inflationary shock 
(driven by global supply pressures) and monetary 
policy tightening.
Building on the insights from the empirical exercise, 
the section then demonstrates how the dynamic effects 
of inflationary shocks and the effectiveness of mone-
tary policy responses depend critically on how wage 
and price expectations are formed. Taking account of 
current monetary policy plans, it considers a couple of 
forward-looking scenarios under different assumptions 
about the formation of wage and price expectations. 
The findings suggest that more backward-looking 
expectations will require stronger monetary pol-
icy responses to reduce the risks of de-anchoring, 
but they also indicate that the risks of a wage-price 
spiral are low.
28Fiscal support likely had further, indirect inflationary effects 
through its effects on private saving and labor supply as a result of 
income transfers, but these channels are difficult to quantify pre-
cisely in the Baqaee and Farhi (2020) model used here. See Online 
Annex 2.5 for further details. See Ramey (2016) for a summary 
of the considerable empirical literature on the dynamic effects of 
fiscal support.
62
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
Inflationary Shocks and Monetary Tightening
The empirical analysis estimates the dynamic effects 
of inflationary shocks and monetary tightening on 
wages and prices using local projections. Inflation-
ary shocks are proxied by the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York’s Global Supply Chain Pressure Index, 
which captures the state of international supply chain 
pressures and disruptions (which are highly relevant 
to the current circumstances).29 The index can be 
regarded as reflecting supply-side variation, since the 
manufacturing data and transportation costs used in 
its construction have been purged of demand factors. 
Finally, to account for differences in economies’ expo-
sures to global supply chain developments, the index is 
interacted with trade openness by economy.30
For a one-standard-deviation increase in global 
supply chain pressures, the inflation response outstrips 
that of nominal wage growth (Figure 2.7, panels 1 and 
6). Both realized and short-term expected inflation 
increase persistently, taking three years (beyond the 
horizon shown) before reverting to their long-term 
means. In parallel, nominal wage growth increases 
slightly in the very near term and then deteriorates 
as the shock’s depressive effects on activity take hold. 
Together, these dynamics engender a fall in real wage 
growth (Figure 2.7, panel 5). Most important, there 
are no signs that such inflationary shocks kick off a 
wage-price spiral.31
29The estimation sample excludes the United States and includes a 
set of small open advanced economies in the euro area to help avoid 
the reverse causality and simultaneity concerns that would arise with 
the inclusion of large economies, which could have sizable direct effects 
on the global economy (given the inflationary shock considered). 
Moreover, recent evidence suggests that changes in the index have had 
a meaningful impact on inflation in euro area producer prices and 
consumer goods prices (Akinci and others 2022). The sample comprises 
16 economies: Austria, Belgium, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, The Netherlands, Portugal, 
the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, and Spain. To avoid confusion with the 
large number of shocks occurring with the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
estimation sample ends in the fourth quarter of 2019. See Benigno and 
others (2022a, 2022b) for details on the construction of the index.
30Trade openness is defined here as the sum of an economy’s 
imports and exports as a share of GDP. To address concerns about 
simultaneity, the estimation uses the lagged value of the supply chain 
pressure index. See Online Annex 2.6 for further details on the 
empirical specification and set of controls included.
31Behind the scenes, the long-term interest rate on government 
bonds and the unemployment rate increase in response to such 
a shock. These increases could reflect the effects of endogenous 
monetary tightening in response to the adverse supply shock. See 
Online Annex 2.6 for further details on the dynamic responses of 
the long-term interest rate and the unemployment rate, along with a 
more detailed discussion of the specification and robustness.
In contrast, monetary tightening brings inflation 
down, with similar depressive effects on nominal 
wage growth. To estimate the effects of monetary 
policy tightening, the analysis uses the series of 
identified European Central Bank monetary shocks 
from Jarociński and Karadi (2020).32 The impact of 
a one-standard-deviation monetary tightening on 
realized and expected inflation is shorter lived than the 
effect of an inflationary supply chain shock (Figure 2.7, 
panels 3 and 4). At the same time, nominal and real 
wage growth decline, further helping mitigate any 
inflationary pressures (Figure 2.7, panels 7 and 8). In 
the background, the unemployment rate rises alongside 
increases in the long-term rates on government debt.33
This empirical evidence suggests that supply-chain-­
related inflationary shocks tend to have temporary effects 
on inflation and wage growth and do not give rise to a 
wage-price spiral. However, supply chain pressures do 
appear to have a more prolonged effect on expected 
inflation than monetary tightening. The differences in 
dynamic effects may suggest that monetary policymakers 
should respond aggressively to such shocks, particularly in 
contexts like the current conjuncture, in which inflation 
is high and rising and wage growth is sensitive to inflation 
expectations (as shown earlier).
If inflation expectations become less anchored to 
the monetary policy target rate, the effects on wages 
and prices could change and increase the risks of a 
persistent wage-price spiral emerging. When inflation 
expectations are more anchored, they are comparatively 
less sensitive to an inflationary shock from higher 
global supply chain pressures, implicitly decreasing 
the risk of future de-anchoring (Figure 2.8, red line 
compared with blue line).34
32See Online Annex 2.6 for a detailed description of the analysis. 
Note that the effect of monetary policy shocks could be seen as 
lower-bound estimates since the effective lower bound may reduce 
the variation in some of the overnight indexed swap rates used in the 
construction of the shock.
33See Online Annex 2.6 for further details.
34The Global Supply Chain Pressure Index is interacted with a 
dummy equal to one if the lagged economy’s strength of inflation 
anchoring, proxied by the Bems and others’ (2021) index, is above 
the cross-economy and cross-time median of the indicator. See Online 
Annex 2.6 for details on the construction of the indicator. This result 
is also in line with that of Carrière-Swallow and others (2022), who 
find that increases in the Baltic Dry Index lead to larger inflationary 
effects among economies with weaker monetary policy frameworks. 
To better anchor expectations, the recent literature has emphasized the 
role played by central banks’ communication strategies and guidance, 
in addition to more traditional policy actions, such as interest rate 
changes (Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber 2022).
63
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
The Role of Expectations and Monetary Policy Responses 
in Wage and Price Inflation
Central banks often discuss the importance of mon-
itoring price expectations to assess the proper stance 
of monetary policy, aiming to ensure that expectations 
do not drift away from central bank targets. As the 
world economy recovers from a global pandemic and 
inflation reaches levels not seen in decades in many 
economies, there are concerns about a break from 
recent-past trends, with expectations changing sharply. 
This subsection zooms in on how differences in the 
expectations formation process can affect an economy’s 
dynamics, with particular focus on the behavior of 
nominal wages and prices.
The analysis estimates a small, standard dynamic 
stochastic equilibrium model conditional on different 
expectation formation processes, thereby isolating their 
role in shaping the economy’s response to shocks and 
policy actions. The model incorporates price and wage 
Phillips curves (which relate price and wage inflation, 
respectively, to expectations, the gap between real 
wages and productivity, and slack in the economy), 
an investment-savings curve (relating output to the 
nominal interest rate and inflation expectations), and a 
monetary policy reaction function.35
35See Online Annex 2.7 for more details about the model and its 
structure. See also Alvarez and Dizioli (forthcoming).
Figure 2.7.  Cumulative Effects of Supply Chain Pressures and Monetary Tightening on Wages and Prices
(Percentage points; dynamic response)
Increases in supply chain pressures tend to raise inﬂation and depress wage growth, with more persistent effects on inﬂation expectations. Monetary tightening is 
effective at bringing both inﬂation and inﬂation expectations down, but the actions required to offset inﬂationary shocks from supply chain pressures could be large.
Supply Chain Pressure
1. Inﬂation
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2. Inﬂation Expectations
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
3. Inﬂation
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
Monetary Policy Shock
4. Inﬂation Expectations
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
5. Real Wage Growth
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
6. Nominal Wage Growth
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
7. Real Wage Growth
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
8. Nominal Wage Growth
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
–1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Haver Analytics; Jarociński and Karadi (2020); Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Lines show the estimated impulse responses of the indicated variable to the indicated shock, with the shaded area representing the 90 percent conﬁdence 
interval. The horizontal axes show time in quarters, where t = 0 is the initial impact quarter of the shock. The estimation sample includes euro area economies during 
1999:Q4–2019:Q4. Panels 1, 2, 5, and 6 are the responses to a supply chain pressure shock, deﬁned as a one-standard-deviation increase in the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York’s Global Supply Chain Pressure Index. To account for economies’ different degrees of exposure, the index is weighted by an economy’s trade 
openness. Panels 3, 4, 7, and 8 are the responses to a one-standard-deviation monetary policy shock, as identiﬁed in Jarociński and Karadi (2020). “Inﬂation 
expectations” are 12-month-ahead expected inﬂation. See Online Annex 2.1 for details on the sample and Online Annex 2.6 for further details on the estimation.
64
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
With acknowledgment of the uncertainties surround-
ing expectations at the current juncture, three kinds of 
expectations formation processes are considered:
1.	 Rational expectations: Standard in much economic 
modeling because of the tractability of rational 
expectations, businesses and households understand 
the economy’s complete structure, including the 
distribution of potential shocks. This means that 
businesses and households make accurate forecasts 
on average about future outcomes so that their 
expectations about the future are correct in the 
absence of further shocks.
2.	 Fully adaptive expectations: At the other extreme, 
businesses and households have fully adaptive 
expectations, which means they look at the value of 
a variable only in the recent past and assume that it 
will stay at that value in the future. Therefore, they 
project future variables to be exactly equal to their 
latest realization.
3.	 Adaptive learning: Partway between rational expec-
tations and fully adaptive expectations, adaptive 
learning assumes that businesses and households 
form expectations using small statistical models for 
key variables such as wages and prices. They update 
these expectations regularly as new data become 
available, learning from their mistakes and adjusting 
their expectations process.36
How Wage and Price Expectations Form Matters 
More the Farther Away Inflation and Inflation 
Expectations Are from Target
Estimating the model for the United States, a 
scenario in which there are no new shocks to inflation 
and interest rates are exogenously set according to the 
Federal Reserve’s dot plot as of June 2022, a soft land-
ing appears feasible if expectations for wages and prices 
are rational (Figure 2.9, dashed lines).37 In this case, 
the current inflationary shock is assumed to dissipate 
smoothly over the subsequent 12 quarters, allowing 
the output gap to converge smoothly to zero and core 
inflation to come down to the Federal Reserve’s target 
of 2 percent.
In contrast, if wage and price expectations are fully 
adaptive, there is a fast near-term acceleration in wage 
and price inflation because businesses and households 
expect them to be identical to their most recent realiza-
tions, which have been higher than usual (Figure 2.9, 
red lines). Moreover, the economy is still facing large 
cost-push shocks that exacerbate price pressures and 
mostly offset the near-term disinflationary effects of 
falling real wages (since wage growth does not keep 
up fully with price inflation). As shocks dissipate and 
the real wage gap becomes even more negative, price 
inflation quickly declines after five quarters. How-
ever, although inflation comes down and there are no 
further future shocks assumed, price inflation remains 
1.5 percentage points over target even 12 quarters later. 
To bring inflation down more quickly under this type 
of expectations formation, monetary policy would 
need to tighten much more sharply than is currently 
anticipated.
36See Online Annex 2.7 for further discussion of the alternative 
expectations formation processes, including the specific functional 
forms assumed for the adaptive learning process.
37The findings do not change in a meaningful way if monetary 
policy instead follows the estimated monetary policy reaction func-
tion, pointing to a high degree of consistency between the reaction 
function and announced policy. See Online Annex 2.7.
Less anchored
More anchored
Figure 2.8.  Cumulative Effects of Supply Chain Pressures on 
Inﬂation Expectations
(Percentage points; dynamic response)
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
More anchored inﬂation expectations respond less to supply chain pressures.
Sources: Bems and others (2021); Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Haver 
Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff 
calculations.
Note: Lines show the estimated impulse responses of inﬂation expectations 
(12 months ahead) to a one-standard-deviation rise in the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York’s Global Supply Chain Pressure Index (weighted by an economy’s trade 
openness), conditional on the strength of inﬂation anchoring (deﬁned by Bems and 
others [2021] over a ﬁve-year-ahead horizon). The red (blue) line is the response 
for economies with inﬂation anchoring above (below) the cross-economy median. 
Lighter-shaded areas represent the 90 percent conﬁdence interval; darker-shaded 
areas are the 68 percent conﬁdence intervals. The horizontal axis shows time in 
quarters, where t = 0 is the initial impact quarter of the shock. The estimation 
sample includes euro area economies during 1999:Q4–2019:Q4. See Online 
Annex 2.1 for details on the sample and Online Annex 2.6 for further details on the 
estimation.
65
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
Under adaptive learning, which is the most realistic 
of the three expectations processes since the process is 
estimated to fit recent data on wage and price dynam-
ics, the paths of inflation, wage growth, and the output 
gap lie between those for rational and fully adaptive 
expectations (Figure 2.9, blue lines). There is somewhat 
greater inertia than with rational expectations, but 
nowhere near the level seen in the fully adaptive case.38 
Even so, while the output gap mostly closes, inflation 
is still about half a percentage point above target after 
12 quarters.
The results from simulations of the model estimated 
for the case of Brazil—an emerging market economy—
exhibit broad patterns across the three expectations 
processes that are similar to those for the United States 
(see Online Annex 2.7). However, they show an even 
greater sensitivity to inflationary shocks and higher 
risks of de-anchoring in general. The greater sensitivity 
could entail a stronger reaction from the central bank 
to anchor expectations.
In all cases, the dynamics of real wages are critical 
to the evolution of wage and price inflation since they 
can affect price pressures. For simplicity, wages are 
the only determinant of marginal costs in the model 
employed here. Because of this, the model can also 
illustrate the likelihood of a wage-price spiral dynamic 
taking hold. This modeling choice not only allows the 
assessment of the likelihood of wage-price spirals in 
the simulated scenarios but also shows that wages can 
be an important anchor to inflation when cost-push 
shocks hit an economy. When inflationary cost-push 
shocks occur, the negative real wage gap characterizing 
the current circumstances helps anchor inflation, even 
in the case of fully adaptive expectations.39 When the 
real costs of labor fall, they help bring inflation down. 
Moreover, the larger the increase in inflation, the more 
negative the real wage gap becomes and the more 
powerful this anchoring mechanism is. Using a differ-
ent methodology and focusing on the United States, 
Box 2.1 empirically examines the feedback from wages 
38The model is estimated over a period in which the monetary 
policy framework had high credibility, and hence the adaptive 
learning process begins centered on the inflation target, similar to 
the anchoring that occurs with rational expectations. Consequently, 
a very large shift in how expectations are formed would be needed to 
push the adaptive learning scenario to approximate the fully adaptive 
case. The greater economic inertia seen in the adaptive learning case 
is a function of the greater inertia in expectations.
39A negative real wage gap means that the real wage (the ratio of 
the wage to the price level) has not kept up with labor productivity.
Adaptive learning baseline
Fully adaptive expectations
Rational expectations
Figure 2.9.  Near-Term Scenarios with Set Interest Rate Path 
under Different Expectations
(Percent)
With cost-push shocks originating outside the labor market, real wage dynamics 
help to stabilize inﬂation even when wage and price expectations are 
backward-looking (adaptive). If policy actions are not sufﬁciently responsive, 
inﬂation and inﬂation expectations can de-anchor from target the more adaptive 
the expectations.
1. Inﬂation
1
3
5
7
9
11
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2. Inﬂation Expectation
1
3
5
7
9
11
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
3. Nominal Wage Growth
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
4. Real Wage Gap
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
5. Output Gap
–1
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
6. Interest Rate
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The responses illustrate scenarios calibrated to the United States, assuming 
that the inﬂationary shocks as of early 2022 dissipate as estimated based on 
previous experience. Inﬂation is core inﬂation. The horizontal axes show time in 
quarters since 2021:Q4. See Online Annex 2.7 for further details on the structure 
and estimation of the underlying small dynamic stochastic general equilibrium 
model.
66
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
to prices by sector and finds only limited pass-through 
from wage-cost shocks to prices.
As alluded to earlier, more backward-looking 
expectations will typically require a faster and stron-
ger monetary tightening in response to an inflation-
ary shock. But how much faster? For the case of the 
United States, with a positive output gap and per-
sistent cost-push shocks, if expectations are formed 
through adaptive learning, a central bank that min-
imizes a standard welfare function would choose to 
initially tighten policy more and start easing earlier 
than the path implied by the Federal Reserve’s dot plot 
as of June 2022 (Figure 2.10).40 Even so, it would take 
several quarters for inflation to come down, although 
the inflation gains would accumulate over time. Mon-
etary policy affects inflation dynamics through three 
channels: (1) higher interest rates lower the output gap 
and real wages through the wage and price Phillips 
curves; (2) as expectations are partially adaptive, lower 
inflation realizations contribute to lower expected 
inflation; and (3) through recognizing mistakes in their 
forecasts, businesses and households learn over time 
and place less importance on past outcomes when it 
comes to their expectations.
Conclusions
Many economies have seen sharp rises in price 
inflation since 2021 as adverse supply shocks buffet the 
global economy and labor markets appear tight in the 
wake of the acute COVID-19 shock. These inflation 
rises have raised concerns among some observers that 
prices and wages could start feeding off each other 
and accelerate, leading to a wage-price spiral dynamic. 
Using a mix of empirical and model-based analyses, 
this chapter has examined recent developments, trying 
to shed light on the prospects for wages and the 
chances that a wage-price spiral could emerge.
Although wage and price inflation picked up in a 
broad-based manner through 2021, real wages tended 
to be flat or falling across economies on average. This is 
an important aspect of the current conjuncture, since 
falling real wages can be disinflationary by lowering 
40The determination of an optimal monetary policy response 
depends on the following assumptions: (1) the central bank min-
imizes a welfare function that equally weighs output and inflation 
deviations (a quadratic loss function) and (2) the central bank knows 
the expectations formation process and has full information on 
future cost-push shocks. See Online Annex 2.7 for more details on 
the exercise.
Adaptive learning baseline
Optimal policy
Figure 2.10.  Optimal Policy Scenario under Adaptive 
Learning Expectations
(Percent) 
Front-loading monetary policy tightening is optimal to lessen the buildup of
inﬂation expectations, helping to achieve target more quickly and smoothly. 
1. Inﬂation
2. Inﬂation Expectation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
3. Nominal Wage Growth
4. Real Wage Gap
4.6
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.4
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
5. Output Gap
6. Interest Rate
–1
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The responses illustrate scenarios calibrated to the United States, assuming 
that the inﬂationary shocks as of early 2022 dissipate as estimated based on 
previous experience. Inﬂation is core inﬂation. The horizontal axes show time in 
quarters since 2021:Q4. Optimal policy is determined using an objective function 
that equally weights output and inﬂation deviations from potential and target, 
respectively, with some weight given also to policy rate smoothing. See Online 
Annex 2.7 for further details on the structure and estimation of the underlying 
small dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model.
67
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
firms’ real costs. An analysis of historical episodes with 
features similar to today’s suggests that these episodes 
did not tend to be followed by a wage-price spiral. In 
fact, inflation tended to fall gradually afterward on 
average, and nominal wages gradually caught up over 
several quarters. However, in some cases, inflation 
remained elevated for a while.
Wage dynamics during 2020 and into early 2021 
are poorly explained by inflation expectations and 
labor market slack, likely reflecting the highly unusual 
constellation of shocks arising with the COVID-19 
pandemic. Model-based analysis of 2020–21 wages 
and prices suggests disparate underlying shocks: wages 
were driven predominantly by production capacity 
and labor supply shocks, while private saving was 
important for price changes. That said, in the second 
half of 2021, wage growth appears to be relatively 
well explained by inflation expectations and labor 
market slack on average, potentially pointing to a 
gradual shift toward more normal economic dynamics. 
Of course, this shift is highly contingent on whether 
the earlier shocks continue unwinding and whether 
new shocks arise.
Finally, the analysis suggests a critical role for the 
expectations formation process in shaping wage and 
price prospects. When wage and price expectations are 
more backward-looking, monetary policy actions need 
to be more front-loaded to minimize the risks of infla-
tion de-anchoring. As monetary policy tightens more 
aggressively and the decline in real wages helps reduce 
price pressures, according to the scenario analysis, the 
risk of a persistent wage-price spiral emerging in the cur-
rent episode is contained on average, assuming no more 
persistent inflationary shocks or structural changes in 
wage- and price-setting processes (such as sharply higher 
pass-through from prices to wages or vice versa).
68
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
The empirical literature offers limited evidence on 
the pass-through of wages to consumer prices. At the 
macroeconomic level, the link between labor cost 
and price inflation has weakened over the past three 
decades.1 Meanwhile, analysis at a more disaggregated 
level has not reached much of a consensus on the 
pass-through of labor costs to retail prices.2
Using a novel estimation approach, this box finds 
that the recent pickup in nominal wage growth has 
added only modestly to consumer price inflation, 
mostly through its effects on prices of certain services. 
The analysis studies the pass-through of labor costs 
to consumer prices (as measured by the personal con-
sumption expenditure, or PCE, price index) by look-
ing at disaggregated sectoral data. The main empirical 
challenge is that consumer prices, which reflect the 
final product of multiple production processes, cannot 
be readily matched to the costs of labor inputs, which 
are recorded at the industry level. To overcome this 
measurement problem, input-output matrices are 
used to construct the cumulative costs of labor inputs 
(traced through the supply chain of intermediate 
goods and services) for 73 subcomponents of the PCE 
index. Using the local projection method in Heise, 
Karahan, and Şahin (2020), with sectoral productivity 
growth and time and industry fixed effects controlled 
for, the impulse response of prices to wage changes 
shows a pass-through of about 10 percent to services 
after five quarters, but no measurable pass-through to 
goods prices (Figure 2.1.1). The lack of pass-through 
in goods compared with that in services could be due 
to firms absorbing more labor cost changes, on the 
back of higher market power and import penetra-
tion. The estimated pass-through appears materially 
unchanged from the mid-2000s up to the pandemic.
There is some tentative evidence that the 
pass-through from wages to service prices is stron-
ger during periods or in sectors in which labor costs 
increased more quickly. Pre-2020 data suggest that 
contemporaneous pass-through in the services sector 
The authors of this box are Moya Chin and Li Lin.
1See Bobeica, Ciccarelli, and Vansteenkiste (2021) for evidence 
on this.
2For further background on the debate, see Rissman (1995) 
and Heise, Karahan, and Şahin (2021), among others.
picks up to 20 percent (and is statistically significant 
at the 99 percent confidence level) when wage growth 
is at or above the 75th percentile (that is, 3.9 percent), 
while pass-through is about zero in periods with lower 
wage growth. In addition, the cross section from the 
sectoral data suggests that the point estimate of the 
pass-through from wages to service prices has been 
increasing since the first quarter of 2021 but is not 
statistically significant.
Sources: US Bureau of Economic Analysis; US Bureau of 
Labor Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Lines show the dynamic pass-through from a 1 
percentage point change in current wage growth (at t = 0, 
measured by the four-quarter change in wages) to inﬂation 
(measured by the four-quarter change in the indicated 
sectoral prices). Shaded areas show the 90 percent 
conﬁdence interval.
Figure 2.1.1.  Pass-Through from Wages to 
Prices
(Percent)
1. Goods
Quarters
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
2. Services
Quarters
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
Box 2.1. Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States
69
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
CHAPTER 2 
WAGE DYNAMICS POST–COVID-19 AND WAGE-PRICE SPIRAL RISKS
References
Akinci, Ozge, Gianluca Benigno, Ruth Cesar Heymann, Julian 
di Giovanni, Jan J. J. Groen, Lawrence Lin, and Adam I. 
Noble. 2022. “The Global Supply Side of Inflationary Pres-
sures.” Liberty Street Economics (blog), January 28, 2022.
Alvarez, Jorge, John Bluedorn, Niels-Jakob Hansen, Youyou 
Huang, Evgenia Pugacheva, and Alexandre Sollaci. Forth-
coming. “Wage-Price Spirals: What Is the Historical Evi-
dence?” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Alvarez, Jorge, and Allan Dizioli. Forthcoming. “How Costly 
Will Reining in Inflation Be? It Depends on How Rational 
We Are.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Baba, Chikako, and Jaewoo Lee. 2022. “Second-Round Effects 
of Oil Price Shocks—Implications for Europe’s Inflation Out-
look.” IMF Working Paper 22/173, International Monetary 
Fund, Washington, DC.
Ball, Laurence M., Daniel Leigh, and Prachi Mishra. Forthcom-
ing. “Understanding U.S. Inflation during the COVID-19 
Era.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Ball, Laurence M., Daniel Leigh, Prachi Mishra, and 
­Antonio Spilimbergo. 2021. “Measuring U.S. Core 
Inflation: The Stress Test of COVID-19.” NBER Working 
Paper 29609, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2022. “Networks, Barriers, 
and Trade.” NBER Working Paper 26108, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020. “Supply and 
Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an 
Application to the COVID-19 Crisis.” American Economic 
Review 112 (5): 1397–436.
Battistini, Niccolò, Helen Grapow, Elke Hahn, and Michel 
Soudan. 2022. “Wage Share Dynamics and Second-Round 
Effects on Inflation after Energy Price Surges in the 1970s 
and Today.” ECB Economic Bulletin 5.
Bems, Rudolfs, Francesca Caselli, Francesco Grigoli, and ­Bertrand 
Gruss. 2021. “Expectations’ Anchoring and Inflation Per-
sistence.” Journal of International Economics 132: 103516.
Benigno, Gianluca, Julian di Giovanni, Jan J. J. Groen, and 
Adam I. Noble. 2022a. “The GSCPI: A New Barometer 
of Global Supply Chain Pressures.” Liberty Street Economics 
(blog), January 4, 2022.
Benigno, Gianluca, Julian di Giovanni, Jan J. J. Groen, and 
Adam I. Noble. 2022b. “Global Supply Chain Pressure 
Index: March 2022 Update.” Liberty Street Economics 
(blog), March 3, 2022.
Bluedorn, John, Francesca Caselli, Niels-Jakob Hansen, Ippei 
Shibata, and Marina M. Tavares. 2021. “Gender and 
Employment in the COVID-19 Recession: Evidence on 
‘She-cessions.’” IMF Working Paper 21/95, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bobeica, Elena, Matteo Ciccarelli, and Isabel Vansteenkiste. 
2021. “The Changing Link between Labor Cost and Price 
Inflation in the United States.” Working Paper Series 2583, 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany.
Boissay, Frederic, Fiorella De Fiore, Deniz Igan, Albert 
Pierres-Tejada, and Daniel Rees. 2022. “Are Major Advanced 
Economies on the Verge of a Wage-Price Spiral?” BIS Bulletin 
53, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Caplan, Benjamin. 1956. “A Case Study: The 1948–1949 Reces-
sion.” In Policies to Combat Depression, edited by Universities-­
National Bureau Committee for Economic Research, 27–58. 
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carrière-Swallow, Yan, Pragyan Deb, Davide Furceri, Daniel 
Jiménez, and Jonathan D. Ostry. 2022. “Shipping Costs and 
Inflation.” IMF Working Paper 22/61, International Mone-
tary Fund, Washington, DC.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber. 
2022. “Monetary Policy Communications and Their Effects 
on Household Inflation Expectations.” Journal of Political 
Economy 130 (6): 1537–84.
Duval, Romain, Yi Ji, Longji Li, Myrto Oikonomou, Carlo 
Pizzinelli, Ippei Shibata, Alessandra Sozzi, and Marina M. 
Tavares. 2022. “Labor Market Tightness in Advanced Econ-
omies.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 2022/001, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Galí, Jordi. 2011. “The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve.” 
Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (3): 436–61.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, S․ebnem Kalemli-Özcan, ­Veronika 
Penciakova, and Nick Sander. 2021. “Fiscal Policy in the 
Age of COVID: Does It ‘Get in All of the Cracks?’” NBER 
Working Paper 29293, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hazell, Jonathon, Juan Herreño, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 
2022. “The Slope of the Phillips Curve: Evidence from U.S. 
States.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 137 (3): 1299–344.
Heise, Sebastian, Fatih Karahan, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2020. 
“The Missing Inflation Puzzle: The Role of the Wage-Price 
Pass-Through.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 54 
(Suppl. 1): 7–51.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 2022. World Employ-
ment and Social Outlook: Trends 2022. Geneva, Switzerland: 
ILO Publications.
Jarociński, Marek, and Peter Karadi. 2020. “Deconstructing 
Monetary Policy Surprises—The Role of Information Shocks.” 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (2): 1–43.
Ramey, Valerie A. 2016. “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their 
Propagation.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 2A, edited 
by John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, 71–162. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier.
Rissman, Ellen R. 1995. “Sectoral Wage Growth and Inflation.” 
Economic Perspectives 19 (4): 16–28.
Rouse, Cecilia, Jeffery Zhang, and Ernie Tedeschi. 2021. “His-
torical Parallels to Today’s Inflationary Episode.” Blog post, 
United States White House, July 6, 2021.
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
71
Decades of procrastination have transformed what could 
have been a smooth transition to a more carbon-neutral 
society into what will likely be a more challenging one. 
By the end of the decade, the global economy needs to 
emit 25 percent less greenhouse gases than in 2022 to 
have a fighting chance to reach the goals set in Paris 
in 2015 and avert catastrophic climate disruptions. 
Because the energy transition needed to accomplish 
this has to be rapid, it is bound to involve some costs 
in the next few years. While there is little consensus on 
the expected near-term macroeconomic consequences of 
climate change policies, this chapter’s central message 
is that if the right measures are implemented immedi-
ately and phased in gradually over the next eight years, 
the costs will remain manageable and are dwarfed by 
the innumerable long-term costs of inaction. Different 
assumptions regarding the speed at which electricity 
generation can transition toward low-carbon technologies 
put these costs somewhere between 0.15 and 0.25 per-
centage point of GDP growth and an additional 0.1 to 
0.4 percentage point of inflation a year with respect to 
the baseline, if budget-neutral policies are assumed. To 
avoid amplifying these costs, it is important that both 
climate and monetary policies be credible. Stop-and-go 
policies and further procrastinating on the grounds that 
“now is not the time” will only exacerbate the toll.
Introduction
The scientific consensus recently summarized by 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC 2022) suggests that to limit catastrophic 
climate disruptions, large-scale policy changes need 
to take place rapidly. Decades of procrastination have 
transformed what could have been a slow transition 
to a carbon-neutral society into what will now have 
The authors of this chapter are Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi, 
Benjamin Carton (co-lead), Christopher Evans, Florence Jaumotte, 
Dirk Muir, Jean-Marc Natal (co-lead), Augustus J. Panton, and 
Simon Voigts, with support from Carlos Morales, Cynthia Nyakeri, 
and Yiyuan Qi. They thank Jean Pisani-Ferry for helpful comments 
on an earlier draft.
to be a more abrupt one. To have a fighting chance 
to reach the 2015 Paris Agreement’s goal of limiting 
global warming (relative to the preindustrial age) to 
well below 2°C, and preferably 1.5°C, and to achieve 
net carbon neutrality by 2050 requires immediate and 
ambitious action. By 2030, global emissions have to be 
reduced by at least 25 percent compared with today’s 
emissions, which would require a combination of a 
sustained and large increase in greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emission taxes, regulations on emissions, and large 
investment in low-carbon technologies.1 Advanced 
economies cannot accomplish the needed reduction 
alone; large emitters in emerging markets also have to 
step up the pace of their emission reduction activities 
(Parry, Black, and Roaf 2021).
Concerns about the energy transition’s real 
economic costs have been a key determinant of 
decades-long procrastination on the policy front; while 
costs are often perceived as clear and present, benefits 
are seen as distant and uncertain, despite overwhelm-
ing evidence that any short-term costs will be dwarfed 
by the long-term benefits (with respect to output, 
financial stability, health) of arresting climate change 
(October 2020 World Economic Outlook; IPCC 2022). 
And hesitation in implementing the necessary climate 
mitigation policies seems to have even grown recently 
against a backdrop of rising commodity prices fueling 
inflation (Morawiecki 2022) and worries about energy 
security (see Chapter 1). In some circles, concerns 
have been raised that fighting climate change could 
cause a global inflation shock (Morison 2021), exac-
erbating the output-inflation trade-offs central banks 
currently face and increasing risks to medium-term 
price stability (Schnabel 2022). But are these con-
cerns warranted?
1See Black and others (2022) and Chateau, Jaumotte, and 
Schwerhoff (2022a) for an analysis of the equivalence between 
regulation on emissions and carbon taxes. Note that while incen-
tives for investment in green technology and renewables are an 
important part of any climate package, they are best supplemented 
by carbon taxes or equivalent regulations that will help decrease 
demand for fossil fuels and achieve a faster transition.
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
3
CHAPTER
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
72
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
There is little consensus on the expected 
near-term macroeconomic consequences of climate 
change mitigation policies, such as GHG taxes. At 
the most fundamental level, imposing GHG taxes 
amounts to putting a price on a resource—the 
right to pollute—that used to be free. Internalizing 
this negative externality increases the cost of fossil 
fuels—an adverse supply shock—which on the sur-
face bears many similarities to a standard oil price 
shock (Pisani-Ferry 2021). But the economics of cli-
mate policy and fossil fuel price shocks have import-
ant differences. First and foremost, GHG taxes lead 
to lower (net-of-tax) prices for fossil fuel producers, 
an important deterrent to investment in this kind of 
energy source. Second, while fossil fuel price shocks 
entail a transfer of revenues to fossil fuel exporters, 
GHG taxes generate fiscal revenues that can be allo-
cated in many different ways to partly alleviate their 
negative effect on consumption and production and 
to compensate low-income households, which an 
increase in energy prices affects the most. Depend-
ing on how these revenues are used, they can have 
vastly different effects on the economy. Third, while 
fossil fuel price shocks are usually temporary and 
sudden adverse supply shocks, GHG taxes are meant 
to be permanent and assumed to be implemented 
gradually (October 2020 World Economic Outlook, 
Chapter 3). Forward-looking firms and households 
will understand that future output and income will 
be durably lower than previously expected and will 
want to scale down investment and consumption; 
the balance of supply and demand effects and the 
net effect on output will depend greatly on other 
policies governments undertake. Fourth, fossil fuel 
price surges that do not alter relative prices accord-
ing to the fuel’s carbon content (those that do not 
increase coal prices more than gasoline prices, for 
example) do not provide incentives for emission 
reduction to the same extent as a carbon tax, in 
particular when the surges are expected to be tem-
porary. Also, considerable uncertainty surrounds the 
pace at which electricity generation could transition 
to low-carbon technologies. And as this chapter 
shows, this has important implications for the 
energy transition’s macroeconomic costs.
This chapter employs the IMF’s novel Global 
Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition 
(GMMET) to inform the current policy debate. 
It voluntarily abstracts from issues related to 
long-term costs and benefits of climate policies—
largely covered elsewhere2—and focuses on 
near-term macroeconomic costs borne by agents whose 
horizon is limited. The focus is also on budget-neutral 
climate policies exclusively.3 This strategy makes it 
possible to clearly disentangle the individual impacts 
of climate and fiscal policies on GDP and inflation. 
Moreover, in the current context of high public debt, 
high inflation, and rising interest rates, a strong case 
can be made to avoid further debt-financed demand 
stimulation (Chapter 1).
This chapter aims to illustrate the effect of feasible 
climate policies that balance the need to limit output 
losses against the inflationary effects of higher taxes, 
while ensuring low-income households do not bear 
a disproportionate share of any costs the transition 
entails.4
Given that the resulting output-inflation trade-offs 
could vary a great deal depending on the design and 
credibility of those policies, and in particular their 
interaction with fiscal and monetary policy and the 
pace at which electricity production can be decarbon-
ized, this chapter puts a great deal of emphasis on 
robustness. By shedding light on the range of possible 
outcomes the required transition implies over the 
next eight years, it will help policymakers quantify 
alternative options and better tailor policies to their 
individual situations.
2See Acemoglu and others (2012) and the October 2020 
World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, for a comprehen-
sive discussion.
3The assumption of budget neutrality is in contrast to that in 
Chapter 3 of the October 2020 World Economic Outlook, which 
studies the effect of deficit-financed public investment on green 
infrastructure investment. In the context of depressed economic 
activity related to the COVID-19 pandemic, a fiscal stimulus was 
the right policy; the proposed policy mix—carbon tax and public 
investment—led to fiscal deficit and temporarily boosted GDP 
(October 2020 World Economic Outlook, Figure 3.6). However, in 
the current context of high inflation and rising interest rates, fiscal 
policy should avoid undermining monetary policy’s efforts to tame 
inflation and further build up public debt.
4Complementing the analysis in the October 2020 WEO—where 
the impact of direct public investment in low-carbon technology 
and infrastructure was analyzed—this chapter looks at the impact 
of cost-effective subsidies for investment in renewables. This 
modeling choice makes it possible to target sectors that already 
have low-emission technologies, that is, renewables-based, nuclear, 
and hydroelectric production and electric transportation. To some 
extent, the difference between public investment and subsidies is a 
semantic issue, as these sectors are fully or partly in public hands in 
many countries.
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
73
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
More specifically, this chapter tackles the following 
questions:
•• Energy transition and macroeconomic costs: How fast 
could countries transition toward renewable sources 
of energy? What would be the costs, if any, to 
households and firms?
•• Credibility and design of climate policies: How do 
alternative policy packages fare in terms of their 
effects on employment, investment, consumption 
and output growth, inflation, and income distribu-
tion? What does a lack of policy credibility imply?
•• Challenges for monetary policy: How great is the 
output-inflation trade-off arising from higher GHG 
taxes? How great is it likely to be if central banks 
lose credibility or never had it in the first place?
•• Macroeconomic cost of procrastination: Is delaying 
GHG emission reduction policies a preferable 
option in light of the current inflation environment? 
Can starting later and doing it faster achieve the 
same emission reductions? How great would the 
costs be in terms of output lost and inflation?
Answers to these questions can be summarized as 
follows:
•• The energy transition will entail some costs, but they 
should remain manageable if countries do not delay. 
The speed at which countries are assumed to be able 
to wean themselves off fossil fuels for electricity gen-
eration plays a key role in explaining the near-term 
macroeconomic costs associated with the energy 
transition. The more difficult it is to produce clean 
electricity, the more costly it will be to transition, 
as higher GHG taxes (or tighter regulations) will be 
needed to trigger the necessary drop in the use of 
carbon-intensive goods and services in the rest of the 
economy. Costs will also be variable across regions, 
with the block (in the model employed in this chap-
ter) representing the rest of the world (dominated by 
fossil fuel exporters and carbon-intensive econo-
mies) seeing the largest transition costs (see Online 
Annex 3.3 for an analysis of costs when alternative 
policies are envisioned for these countries). To reflect 
the uncertainty surrounding the energy transition, 
this chapter considers two alternative calibrations 
for the elasticity of substitution between renewables 
and fossil fuels in electricity generation. In the most 
pessimistic case, a sharper increase in GHG taxes 
(about twice as large as in the benchmark case) will 
be necessary to reach the same decarbonization goal. 
While still manageable, the energy transition’s mac-
roeconomic costs—measured in terms of lost output 
and higher inflation—are expected to be about twice 
as large and will crucially depend on policy design. 
Cognizant of this uncertainty, this chapter estimates 
global growth could be lower by 0.15 to 0.25 per-
centage point annually and inflation could be 0.1 to 
0.4 percentage point higher. For China, Europe, and 
the United States, GDP growth costs are expected to 
be lower and in a range between 0.05 and 0.20 per-
centage point annually.
•• Policy design has a major influence on climate policy’s 
final impact on output, inflation, and income distribu-
tion. All policy packages are assumed to be financed 
by GHG taxation only. Using the receipts of GHG 
taxes to cut labor income taxes reduces distortions and 
leads to relatively higher labor supply; higher wages 
net of tax; and higher consumption, investment, 
and output. Recycling part of the GHG tax receipts 
into subsidies for investment in low-carbon technolo-
gies (renewables, nuclear and hydroelectric, electric 
vehicles) facilitates the transition. The same decarbon-
ization level can be achieved with lower GHG taxes 
thanks to investment in carbon-neutral technology. 
The impact on inflation is accordingly smaller, which 
reduces the potential trade-offs for monetary policy. 
Transferring tax revenues to low-­income households 
helps increase the acceptance of climate policies but 
comes at a cost in terms of output growth.
•• Climate policies have a limited impact on output and 
inflation and thus do not present a significant challenge 
for central banks. Gradual and credible implemen-
tation gives agents motive and time to transition 
toward a low-emission economy. Induced mild 
inflationary pressures require some monetary policy 
adjustments to ensure expectations remain anchored, 
but at minimal GDP costs. There may even be some 
room to ease in the near term to facilitate the transi-
tion. In this respect, climate policies contrast greatly 
with supply shocks, in which the sudden increase in 
the energy price creates an immediate challenge for 
monetary authorities. Less credible climate policies 
require sharper adjustments down the road and gen-
erate more inflationary pressures and more challenges 
for monetary authorities. Larger costs materialize only 
with eroded monetary policy credibility, as inflation-
ary pressures call for more policy response.
•• Further delay would only amplify any costs associated 
with the energy transition. Concerns about inflation 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
74
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
and energy security have prompted some to suggest 
that decarbonization should wait until current 
inflationary pressures have been overcome. But this 
would only amplify transition costs. This chapter’s 
analysis shows that further delay would require 
GHG taxes to be raised by even more and faster 
than in the gradual scenario, with much larger costs 
(the resulting inflationary impulse is about three 
times stronger, and preventing it would require sac-
rificing roughly 1 percent of GDP over the course of 
four years).
This chapter starts with a general survey, stressing the 
urgency of cutting GHG emissions by 2030 at least to 
an extent that is compatible with limiting warming at 
the end of the century to well below 2°C. It then intro-
duces the analytical apparatus by illustrating the impact 
on growth and inflation of increasing GHG taxes 
gradually. The next section discusses the importance of 
credibility and complementarity between climate and 
monetary policy for a successful transition. The last sec-
tion quantifies the macroeconomic costs of further delay 
and stresses that now is the time to act.
Decarbonizing the Economy: Now Is the Time to 
Become Credible
Lay of the Land
The Paris Agreement enshrined the goal of 193 coun-
tries to limit global warming by the end of the century 
to well below 2°C and preferably to below 1.5°C. So far, 
countries have collectively failed to honor their pledges, 
and the relentless rise in emissions following the agree-
ment has made achieving the 1.5°C target extremely 
difficult. Temperatures are set to rise further, and the 
adverse consequences are understood to be nonlinear; 
every increment of warming raises the risk of crossing 
“tipping points” that would push the global climate 
system into abrupt and irreversible changes (Lenton and 
others 2019).5
Limiting global warming to below 2°C requires that 
emissions decline by 25 percent relative to current 
levels by 2030, which would mean an unprecedented 
acceleration in mitigation efforts, but one that is 
crucial to limit the extent of damage to the Earth’s 
5Some tipping points amplify global warming itself; for example, 
GHGs released by thawing permafrost or the vanishing of ice sheets, 
which help reflect solar heat.
climate system. Unfortunately, such a regime change 
in climate policy remains elusive in almost all coun-
tries (UNEP and UNEP-CCC 2021; IPCC 2022; 
Black and others 2021). The IPCC projects that under 
policies currently in place, emissions in 2030 will be 
more than 42 percent higher than those required to 
reach the Paris Agreement target (Figure 3.1). Not 
only are existing policy pledges insufficiently ambi-
tious (the “ambition gap” in the figure), but they are 
also projected to be missed under current policies (the 
“implementation gap”). While pledges are more ambi-
tious among advanced economies than among coun-
tries in other economic groups, climate goals can be 
achieved only through a global effort (October 2020 
World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3).
Enhancing Credibility of Climate Policy for More 
Effectiveness
Lack of ambition and failing implementation char-
acterize the history of climate policy, which allows par-
allels to be drawn with other areas of public policy. For 
example, Kydland and Prescott (1977) demonstrate 
how central bankers concerned about inflation as well 
as short-term unemployment form time-inconsistent 
monetary policies that lead to higher inflation with no 
Observed
Ambition gap
Implementation gap
Consistent with 2°C goal
Figure 3.1.  Historical and Projected Global Emissions
(Gigatons a year)
Total projected emissions in 2030 are greater than emissions compatible with the 
2°C goal.
2019
2030 (forecast)
0
25
50
75
100
Source: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Note: The overhang of projected emissions in 2030 over the amount compatible 
with 2°C warming consists of the ambition gap (the amount by which pledged 
emissions exceed the 2°C-compatible amount) and the implementation gap 
(emissions pledged to be avoided but forecast to arise under current policies).
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
75
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
gains in employment. Similarly, governments announce 
carbon-reducing policies but have incentives to renege 
on them to try to maximize output or employment 
or safeguard particular interests (Brulle 2018) during 
their terms.
With investment and research and development 
decisions based on long planning horizons, it is key 
that (to affect behaviors) new climate policy measures 
and commitments to future carbon-reducing policies 
(for example, increments in GHG taxes, regulations, 
and subsidies) be perceived as credible and irrevers-
ible (see “Credible Policies: Key for a Successful 
Transition”). As is the case for monetary policy, the 
credibility—and thereby effectiveness—of climate 
policy will be enhanced if (1) there is a clearly defined 
rules-based commitment rather than pure discretion on 
how future decarbonization targets will be achieved, 
(2) instruments and analysis of policies to reach such 
targets are transparent, and (3) the targets are imple-
mented independently, insulated from the political 
process (Nemet and others 2017). Ideally, the third 
criterion would involve an institutional arrangement 
akin to central banks’ mandates to pursue price stabil-
ity as their primary goal, along with operational inde-
pendence, granted by law. However, this is still a high 
bar, even in countries with the most advanced climate 
mitigation policies (such as Denmark and Sweden). To 
overcome the absence of institutional independence, 
some countries have taken explicit account of political 
economy constraints when designing climate policies. 
For instance, because the impact of GHG taxes tends 
to fall disproportionately on the poor in many coun-
tries, it is important to carve out some transfers for 
the poor from GHG tax revenues to amplify support 
for GHG tax policy; widespread acceptance greatly 
increases credibility. Pragmatic policy design may then 
have to sacrifice some efficiency (usually achieved by 
cutting distortionary taxes) for equity and allow some 
amount of redistribution (Box 3.2).
Climate Policies to Keep Paris within Reach
Conceptual Framework
Past experiences with GHG mitigation policies 
throw only a partial light on such policies’ near-term 
macroeconomic impacts. Most empirical studies point 
to negligible near-term effects of mitigation policies 
on output and inflation (Metcalf and Stock 2020; 
Konradt and Weder di Mauro 2021). But the policies 
analyzed in these studies are much smaller in scale and 
scope than the policies that will be required to achieve 
a path consistent with reaching the Paris Agreement’s 
goals, which limits the studies’ empirical information 
content for the questions at hand.
The literature has long recognized this tension, 
and numerous large-scale general equilibrium global 
models have been used to analyze the impact of 
GHG mitigation policies on emissions and economic 
activity in the long term. However, very few have 
been designed to simultaneously incorporate enough 
granularity in key sectors (energy generation, transpor-
tation), model-consistent expectations, nonlinearities 
that reflect increasing marginal cost to the decarbon-
ization process, and the nominal and real rigidities 
required to analyze the near-term consequences of large 
policy changes for inflation and output (see Box 3.1 
for a review of the empirical literature and an indirect 
validation of the GMMET’s quantitative properties 
based on a battery of large-scale models’ simulations 
of the effect of a gradual rise in carbon tax in the 
United States).
This chapter relies on the new GMMET, which 
shares a set of key features with the IMF’s workhorse 
Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF) model. 
Like the GIMF model, the GMMET is a multicoun-
try, microfounded, nonlinear dynamic general equilib-
rium model used to simulate the transition between an 
initial condition and a final steady state. Households 
and firms are forward-looking and choose consump-
tion, labor supply, asset holdings, and investment 
optimally, considering their preferences and expected 
lifetimes. Nominal and real frictions as well as the 
explicit modeling of expectations allow the analysis of 
cyclical fluctuations and governments’ related stabili-
zation policies. The GMMET is configured for four 
regions: China, the euro area, the United States, and a 
block representing the rest of the world.
The purpose of the GMMET is to analyze the short- 
and medium-term macroeconomic impact of curbing 
GHG emissions. Such an analysis requires a detailed 
description of GHG-emission-generating activities and 
their interaction with the rest of the economy. These 
activities include fossil fuel mining and trade, electric-
ity generation using various technologies (capturing 
the intermittence of renewable sources, discussed in 
more detail in Box 3.3), transportation with electric 
vehicles and conventional cars (with network exter-
nalities between electric vehicles and charging stations 
accounted for), and energy use in the production of 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
76
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
goods and for residential heating, as well as activities 
that emit non-fossil-fuel GHGs, such as agriculture. 
Online Annex 3.1 and Carton and others (2022) 
outline these activities, which are novel relative to 
the GIMF model.
Under the Hood: Analytical Simulations 
Using the GMMET
To set the stage, this section focuses on analytical 
simulations that allow the effect of key elasticities 
to be disentangled and different plans for recycling 
GHG tax revenues to be contrasted. In all exercises 
in this section, GHG taxes are increased gradually 
and globally over the next eight years, such that 
every region decreases its GHG emissions by about 
25 percent. Each region chooses a different level for its 
GHG price, as each has different degrees of emission 
intensity in electricity generation and in its productive 
industries. For example, Chinese steel manufacturing 
relies heavily on coal, the euro area already has a large 
share of renewables technology for its electricity gen-
eration, and the United States has the highest level of 
consumer use of electricity and of fossil fuel usage for 
heating and transportation.6
A key caveat of this chapter’s simulation exercises is 
that they implicitly compare policy scenarios against 
a no-catastrophe, no-action baseline that is environ-
mentally not feasible. Forgoing mitigation action until 
2030 implies irreversible jeopardization of the future of 
the climate system whose long-term costs are expected 
to be very large, even if difficult to quantify (October 
2020 World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3; Keen and 
others 2021). The exercises on delayed mitigation 
policy presented in the following subsections address 
this point by comparing mitigation action today with 
its true alternative: rushed delayed action.
Energy Transition: How Quickly Can It 
Be Achieved?
The pace at which an economy can transition out 
of fossil fuels hinges heavily on the pace at which 
electricity generation can wean itself off such fuels, 
and, in particular, off coal. Two elasticities are key for 
this process in the GMMET: the elasticity of substitu-
tion of fossil fuels—especially coal—for renewables in 
6To understand details on the differences in model calibration that 
have an impact on results in the four regions, please see “Calibrating 
the Energy Sectors” in Online Annex 3.1 and “Decarbonization in 
Different Regions: A Primer” in Online Annex 3.3.
electricity generation and the elasticity of substitution 
of electricity for other fossil fuels in the production of 
goods and services. Considerable uncertainty surrounds 
the value of the first elasticity. On the one hand, 
structural, technological, and geopolitical impediments 
(such as insufficient backup power and grid integration 
for intermittent renewables, slow technological prog-
ress in regard to electricity storage, bottlenecks in the 
supply of metals for renewables and the electricity grid, 
trade restrictions, and supply chain issues) may prevent 
a rapid transition to renewables-based electricity gener-
ation. On the other hand, rapid technological progress 
has led to massive improvements in efficiency and 
drops in prices of renewable energy, and the outlook 
for storage capacity technology is favorable (October 
2020 World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3).7
Under the benchmark calibration, the share of 
renewables in electricity generation increases by 20 per-
centage points by 2030. This increase is broadly in 
line with the experiences of Germany and California 
but is faster than what larger countries or regions have 
achieved so far.8 An alternative calibration assumes the 
pace at which electricity generation can be decarbon-
ized to be roughly half as fast under the same policies, 
reflecting the experience of China and the United 
States over the past decade (the European Union is in 
between, with an increase in the share of renewables 
by about 15 percentage points). In this calibration, 
industry and consumers have to shoulder a larger 
part of the required decarbonization, and a sharper 
increase in GHG taxes (as much as twice as large) will 
be necessary to reach the goal of a 25 percent drop in 
emission by 2030.
Under the alternative calibration, elasticities of 
substitution related to the use of fossil fuels are lower 
(reduced to one-fourth in electricity generation, halved 
in the manufacturing sector; see Annex Table 3.1.2). 
Figure 3.2 contrasts the outcome of the two calibra-
tions and displays the range of possible macroeco-
nomic effects of the energy transition in two different 
cases. The first case assumes that tax revenues are fully 
rebated to households in the form of a lump-sum 
7See Online Annex 3.1 for a more complete description of the 
energy generation sector in the GMMET, as well as key elasticities 
driving the pace of energy transition and its importance for invest-
ment in high- and low-carbon-intensity capital.
8The improvements in renewables technologies and the decline 
in prices since Germany and California deployed such technologies 
suggest a higher speed of decarbonization could be envisioned today 
in certain countries.
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
77
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
transfer (labeled “Trans.” in the figure). This isolates 
the effect of climate policy from fiscal policy, since 
fiscal policy using lump-sum transfers is nondistortion-
ary and budget-neutral. The second case is described 
later in this section and assumes that tax receipts are 
partly recycled through a labor income tax cut (Policy 
Package 1, labeled “P1” in the figure). Under the 
alternative calibration, Policy Package 1 reduces GDP 
by 1–2 percent in China, the euro area, and the US 
by 2030.9 These costs are roughly twice as large as 
those under the benchmark calibration but remain 
manageable; the two calibrations span a range of 
0.15–0.25 percentage point of annual growth.10 They 
are dwarfed by the immense risks to lives and liveli-
hoods across the world (IPCC 2022) and very large 
long-term output costs associated with a business-as-
usual policy potentially leading to catastrophic climate 
disruptions (see Chapter 3 of the October 2020 World 
Economic Outlook for estimates of averted damage).
Alternative Options to Recycle GHG Tax Revenues
A higher GHG tax, because it increases the price 
of energy, has been compared to an oil price shock 
(Pisani-Ferry 2021). But the apparent similarity can 
be misleading. GHG tax revenues can be redistributed 
domestically to alleviate some of the burden of the new 
tax for producers, consumers, or both.11 Moreover, oil 
price shocks are often sudden, unexpected, and tem-
porary, whereas in the simulations here, GHG taxes 
rise gradually from 2022 onward. A better frame of 
reference is the literature on productivity shocks (see, 
for example, Galí 2015). In this chapter’s simulations, 
a GHG tax leads to a permanent decline in future pro-
ductivity. Forward-looking agents will anticipate a drop 
in future profits and income due to higher expected 
future energy prices and will cut investment and 
9For illustration, 1.5 percent of US GDP is about $320 billion 
and corresponds to the climate portion of that country’s recently 
passed Inflation Reduction Act; the costs would be spread over 
eight years, or $40 billion a year.
10The rest-of-the-world region aggregates different economies, and 
drawing conclusions in regard to individual countries is not possible. 
The region encompasses the bulk of fossil fuel producers and is charac-
terized by high energy intensity—in particular, high oil intensity. On 
net, the GDP impact is dominated by fossil fuel producers that are 
particularly affected during the transition as demand for fossil fuel and 
investment drops (see Chapter 3 of the October 2020 World Economic 
Outlook and “Decarbonization in Different Regions: A Primer” in 
Online Annex 3.3 for further discussions).
11In a supply-and-demand analogy, an oil price shock represents 
a shift of the supply curve, while a GHG tax is a shift along the 
supply curve.
Benchmark elasticities
Lower elasticities
Figure 3.2.  Macroeconomic Impact in 2030 of a GHG Tax 
under Different Calibrations of Elasticities
(Deviation from baseline)
Lower elasticities require higher GHG prices to achieve the same reduction in 
emissions by 2030 and magnify the macroeconomic impacts.
0
50
100
150
200
250
1. GHG Price
(US dollars a tCO2e)
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
Trans.
P1
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
2. Real GDP
(Percent)
3. Headline Inﬂation
(Percentage point)
4. Labor Productivity
(Percent)
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: P1 = Policy Package 1: two-thirds labor tax cuts and one-third transfers to 
households; GHG = greenhouse gas; tCO2e = metric ton of carbon dioxide 
equivalent; Trans. = recycling GHG tax revenue as transfers to households.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
78
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
consumption accordingly.12 In the short to medium 
term, while the tax is still low, lower aggregate demand 
dominates the increase in energy costs, and a central 
bank focused on stabilizing core inflation will want to 
accommodate the shock (see Online Annex 3.3 and 
Chapter 2 of the 2022 External Sector Report for a 
discussion of the impact on the real interest rate).13
GHG taxes generate fiscal revenues that can be used 
to (1) help accelerate the transition, through incen-
tives, subsidies, and public investment; (2) cushion the 
taxes’ effect on firms’ output and household income; 
or (3) compensate low-income households through 
targeted transfers. These options are part of fiscal 
policy, and countries will choose among them in line 
with their preferences and political economy consid-
erations.14 The following illustrates the implications of 
these choices for macroeconomic outcomes. Figure 3.3 
contrasts three different strategies by which GHG tax 
revenues are recycled in the economy, by (1) reducing 
distortionary labor income taxes,15 (2) subsidizing 
production by sector to offset the effect of the tax and 
provide incentives for the transition to less-carbon-­
intensive energy (akin to a “feebate”), or (3) simply 
rebating the tax’s proceeds to households.
The tax has a very similar impact on inflation across 
the different strategies, reflecting the central bank’s 
assumed credibility, that is, that it would respond to 
inflation to keep firms’ and households’ inflation expec-
tations anchored. Increasing the GHG tax increases the 
relative price of fossil fuels and, given that other prices 
in the economy do not move quickly, also increases 
the overall price level. Absent indexation schemes, 
12Investment in carbon-intensive capital will drop as firms 
adjust to the soon-to-become-obsolete capital stock. Investment in 
renewables and associated capital increases but not enough to offset 
the drop in carbon-intensive capital (see Online Annex 3.2). The 
price of energy in general increases. If lump-sum transfers are large, 
consumption increases in the short term, but the effect is short-lived. 
In the medium to long term, consumption declines as well owing to 
the tax’s impact on households’ permanent income.
13Note that the material that follows makes no attempt to derive 
“optimal (in the sense of welfare-maximizing) policy.” The goal is 
to illustrate and guide, not to be normative, as the preferred policy 
is left to countries’ authorities, given their individual situations and 
preferences. For discussions of optimal policy in response to an oil 
price shock, please refer to Blanchard and Galí (2007); Castillo, 
Montoro, and Tuesta (2007); Nakov and Pescatori (2010); and 
Natal (2012).
14Recycling tax revenues through lump-sum transfers is 
budget-neutral and nondistortionary, which averts any mixing up of 
the effects of climate and fiscal policy.
15The labor supply elasticity is 0.15, in the middle of the range of 
available estimates.
the impact is limited to the tax’s first-round effect 
on energy prices. However, the impacts on the labor 
market, output, and output’s use differ substantially 
across the three recycling strategies. While both lump-
sum transfers and labor tax cuts boost consumption by 
transferring more income to households, only labor tax 
cuts, by reducing a disincentive to work, have a positive 
Transfers
Labor tax cut
Production subsidies
Figure 3.3.  Macroeconomic Impact of Different Recycling 
Options in the United States
(Percent deviation from baseline, unless noted otherwise)
Different revenue-recycling options shape the impacts of a given greenhouse gas 
price path on the US economy.
1. Real GDP
–1.4
–1.2
–1.0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
2022
24
26
28
30
2. Headline Inﬂation
(Percentage point
deviation from
baseline)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
2022
24
26
28
30
3. Employment
2022
24
26
28
30
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
4. Wages
–4.0
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
2022
24
26
28
30
5. Real Consumption
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
–1.5
2022
24
26
28
30
6. Real Investment
–4.0
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
–5.0
2022
24
26
28
30
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results based on benchmark elasticities.
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
79
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
impact on both employment and output. Transfers 
compensate low-income households for higher energy 
prices and thereby mitigate the regressive effects of the 
GHG tax. Production subsidies have a beneficial effect 
on investment but at the expense of consumption, as 
they preclude transfers or tax cuts to households.
Feasible and Balanced Climate Policy Packages to 
Keep Paris within Reach
This subsection looks at feasible climate policy pack-
ages designed to align emissions by 2030 with the Paris 
Agreement while striking a balance among maximizing 
employment, output growth, investment in renewables, 
and compensating low-income households. The three 
policy packages examined have different objectives, but 
all attempt a compromise in which energy transition 
is realized at relatively low cost in terms of output and 
inflation. All packages allow for some income redistri-
bution through transfers but combine different policy 
instruments and tax-recycling strategies (see Table 3.1). 
Policy Package 1, by using two-thirds of GHG tax 
revenues to cut labor income taxes, focuses on the 
need to engineer the required decarbonization without 
overly penalizing consumption. Relatively higher GHG 
taxes are required to provide incentives for reallocation 
toward less-carbon-intensive production processes, and 
investment declines more than in the other pack-
ages. Policy Package 3 focuses on supporting firms 
during the transition. The transition is then relatively 
smooth in terms of investment, which drops much 
less than in Policy Package 1. Because tax receipts are 
entirely rebated to firms, households bear the brunt 
of the tax-induced slowdown, and the consumption-
to-­investment ratio declines. Policy Package 2 can be 
seen as a combination of Policy Packages 1 and 3, as it 
complements measures to support households during 
the transition with subsidies to low-emission sectors 
(renewables, nuclear and hydro power plants, and pur-
chase of electric vehicles). Subsidies support investment 
more than in Policy Package 1. Using the revenues 
for subsidies comes at the expense of consumption, 
as it reduces the allocations to tax cuts and transfers. 
Moreover, because Policy Package 2 offers incentives 
for investment, the required emission reduction can 
occur with lower GHG taxes and therefore less infla-
tion (see Online Annex 3.3 for more details, including 
the external dimension). This scenario illustrates that 
a strategy relying on large subsidies for low-emission 
technologies poses little risk of inflation.
Differences across countries and regions reflect 
mainly different starting values in terms of energy use, 
proportion of fossil fuels in the consumption basket, 
and GHG tax increases required to reach the 25 per-
cent decarbonization goal (Figure 3.4). Projections 
for inflation in China are a case in point. Because 
households’ direct energy consumption accounts for 
a lower share of the consumer price index (CPI) in 
China, the GHG tax increase does not affect the CPI 
as much there as in the other regions in the simula-
tion. As a result, the demand-contracting effect of the 
tax dominates and pushes the core part of the price 
index down. The impact on growth is much larger in 
the rest of the world—a residual category dominated 
by fossil fuel exporters and oil-intensive economies—
reflecting the rapid energy transition assumed in the 
chapter’s homogeneous reduction of emissions by 
25 percent. To reflect the Paris Agreement’s principle 
that responsibility for decarbonization efforts must 
be simultaneous but can be differentiated, Online 
Annex 3.3 analyzes the global impact on emissions, 
output, and inflation when the rest of the world 
Table 3.1. Three Policy Packages Reducing Emissions by 25 Percent in 2030
Package 1
Package 2
Package 3
Gradual GHG price increase from 2023 to 2030
Gradual GHG price increase from 2023 to 2026
Gradual GHG price increase from 2023 to 2030
Two-thirds of revenue used to reduce labor taxes One-third of revenue used to reduce labor taxes
GHG revenue rebated at the sectoral level 
(electricity generation, manufacturing, services)
One-third of revenue transferred to households
One-third of revenue transferred to households
GHG revenue from households’ activities 
(residential energy and individual 
transportation) transferred back to households
One-third of revenue used to subsidize 
low-emission sectors:
•	 Renewables investment
•	 Nuclear and hydro power plants
•	 Electric-vehicle purchase
Regulation of share of electric vehicles
Source: IMF staff compilation.
Note: GHG = greenhouse gas.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
80
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
does not introduce any new policy.16 In such a case, 
the rest of the world’s investment declines only in 
extraction industries, and the GDP impact is muted 
(see Annex Figure 3.3.3).
All simulations discussed so far have assumed per-
fectly credible monetary and climate policies. The next 
section analyzes the implications of climate policy for 
the macroeconomy when announced policies are less 
than perfectly credible.
Credible Policies: Key for a Successful Transition
Credibility of Climate Policy
So far, the scenarios presented have assumed govern-
ments’ climate policies to be fully credible: the private 
sector (both firms and households) takes current and 
future policies, including the path of the GHG price, 
into account to adjust its decisions. Policy Package 2, 
in which credible green subsidies provide powerful 
incentives to unleash private green investment and 
allow the required emission reduction with lower 
GHG taxes than in Policy Package 1, clearly shows 
the importance of credible policy. This subsection 
illustrates the importance of credible climate policy by 
relaxing the assumption of full credibility under Policy 
Package 1, with its gradually increasing GHG tax path. 
Climate policy is assumed to be believed only grad-
ually over time (partial credibility): more specifically, 
each increment of the GHG tax is expected to remain 
in place, but future increments of the GHG price 
path come as a surprise, thereby having no impact on 
households’ and firms’ current decisions.
For given GHG price paths, partial credibility slows 
down the emission reduction process relative to the 
full-credibility case (the cumulative emission reduction 
by 2030, expressed as a share of 2022 emissions, is 
about 20 percent lower under partial credibility than 
under full credibility; see Figure 3.5), as investment in 
emission-intensive capital does not decline as rapidly. 
The key reason lies in the adjustment of investment in 
16See Mirzoev and others (2020) for a discussion of carbon 
transition risks in Gulf Cooperation Council countries. For these 
countries, accelerating the diversification of their economies is key. 
Policies that seek to strengthen the non-oil sector through better 
business regulation, greater credit availability, reforms to the labor 
market, and increased sources of non-oil revenue for the government 
should be prioritized. In cases in which the transition involves a 
large drop in aggregate demand, fiscal stimulus can be envisioned, 
provided fiscal space is comfortable enough (see Chapter 3 of the 
October 2020 World Economic Outlook for further analysis).
Package 1
Package 2
Package 3
Figure 3.4.  Macroeconomic Impact of the Three Policy 
Packages in Regions in the Simulation
Green subsidies (Package 2) reduce the need for greenhouse gas price increases 
and result in lower inﬂation for the same policy rule. Production subsidies 
(Package 3) boost investment and GDP with little impact on inﬂation.
Real GDP
(Percent deviation from 
baseline)
Headline Inﬂation
(Percentage point deviation 
from baseline)
1. United States
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
2022
24
26
28
30
2. United States
2022
24
26
28
30
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
3. Euro Area
2022
24
26
28
30
–1.0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
4. Euro Area
2022
24
26
28
30–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
5. China
2022
24
26
28
30
–1.2
–1.0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
6. China
2022
24
26
28
30
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
7. Rest of the World
2022
24
26
28
30
–4.0
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
8. Rest of the World
2022
24
26
28
30
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results based on benchmark elasticities. Policy Package 1: one-third 
transfers to households, two-thirds labor tax cuts; Policy Package 2: one-third 
transfers to households, one-third labor tax cuts, one-third green subsidies; Policy 
Package 3: production subsidies and transportation regulation. See Table 3.1 for a 
full description of the three policy packages. 
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
81
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
the electricity sector. When climate policy is fully cred-
ible, the anticipation of further GHG price increases—
which will undermine future profitability—accelerates 
the shift of capital away from emission-­intensive 
investments, such as coal power plants, toward 
low-emission alternatives.
Partially credible policy requires higher GHG taxes 
to reach the same decarbonization goal, leading to 
larger GDP losses by the end of the decade (in the 
United States, the euro area, and China, GDP declines 
by 1.0, 1.0, and 1.2 percent, respectively, rather than 
0.6, 0.5, and 0.6 percent).
Credibility of Monetary Policy
The current high-inflation environment has raised 
concerns that climate policy could create large 
output-inflation trade-offs, complicate the job of 
central banks, and potentially stoke wage-price spirals. 
This subsection shows that as long as central banks 
retain their inflation-fighting credentials, any trade-offs 
implied by the sort of climate policy studied in this 
chapter are bound to be small. As a matter of fact, 
climate policy, if implemented gradually, should be eas-
ier for central banks to handle than supply shocks in 
which the energy price increases suddenly and creates 
an immediate challenge for monetary authorities. If 
central banks lose credibility, however, trade-offs will 
be amplified, underscoring the importance of mone-
tary policy credibility. Climate policy is no exception 
in this respect. If monetary policy is not credible, any 
cost-push shock is bound to entail larger trade-offs 
(Woodford 2003; Galí 2015). When monetary policy 
credibility prevents the de-anchoring of inflation 
expectations, a gradually implemented climate policy 
package will not give rise to a material output-inflation 
trade-off (see Figure 3.6 for results in regard to Policy 
Package 1). A comparison of the impact of a higher 
GHG tax on output and inflation under two different 
monetary policy rules reveals no major differences 
between targeting core inflation (that is, excluding 
energy items) and a modified version in which the 
targeting includes the change in GHG price (core plus 
GHG price). Targeting core inflation will give rise to 
slightly higher headline inflation because of the tax’s 
direct impact on noncore CPI components, while 
targeting the modified version of core inflation (core 
plus GHG price) will have a larger cost in terms of lost 
output (necessary to bring about the required decline 
in marginal costs and core inflation to offset the tax’s 
Fully credible
Partially credible—same GHG price paths
Partially credible—same GHG reduction targets
–125
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
25
50
75
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
1. Cumulative GHG Emissions
(Percent of 2022 emissions deviation from baseline)
     
0
50
100
150
200
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
Decl.
Exp.
Decl.
Exp.
Decl.
Exp.
Decl.
Exp.
2. Capital Stock in the Energy Sector
(US dollars a tCO2e)
3. GHG Price
(US dollars a tCO2e)
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
United States
Euro area
China
Rest of the world
4.  Real GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)
Figure 3.5.  Impact in 2030 of Fully and Partially Credible 
Mitigation Policies
Less credible policies either miss the GHG reduction target when meeting GHG 
price paths, owing to insufﬁcient shifts in the capital structure, or require higher 
GHG prices to meet the GHG reduction targets at a higher macroeconomic cost.
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results based on Policy Package 1 with benchmark elasticities. 
Decl. = declining energy sector: fossil fuel extractions and coal power plants; 
Exp. = expanding sectors: renewables, nuclear, hydro and fossil gas generation, 
electricity grid. See Table 3.1 for a full description of the three policy packages. 
GHG = greenhouse gas; tCO2e = metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
82
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
impact on noncore prices) but will drive headline 
inflation back to target. The difference in magnitudes 
remains quite small. In essence, core plus GHG price 
targeting keeps headline inflation close to target in the 
absence of shocks to other noncore components.
Of course, a great deal depends on how easily 
electricity generation can transition out of fossil fuels 
toward renewables. Larger frictions than assumed in 
the benchmark calibration would imply that to reach 
decarbonization goals, governments would have to 
increase GHG taxes substantially more and faster 
(than in the benchmark elasticity case), with implica-
tions for growth and inflation. Figure 3.6 illustrates 
the differences. For example, under the alternative 
(lower-elasticity) calibration and core plus GHG price 
targeting, by 2030 GDP would be about 1¼ percent 
lower than under the benchmark calibration.
In today’s high-inflation environment, if monetary 
policy were to lose credibility, wages could start index-
ing to past inflation levels. As a result, the inflation 
process would become more inertial, which would 
result in inflation depending more on past inflation 
rather than being anchored to the inflation target. In 
such an environment, introducing climate policies, 
such as Policy Package 1, could potentially lead to 
second-round effects and larger output-inflation trade-
offs. Figure 3.7 shows that in such a case, stabilizing 
the modified version of core inflation (core plus GHG 
price) would have a significantly higher cost in terms 
of output, while stabilizing output could trigger a 
wage-price spiral as the central bank stimulates the 
economy enough to keep labor demand and real wages 
in check, pushing up nominal wages and prices in a 
feedback loop.
Inflation expectations have remained broadly 
anchored in a majority of countries and, in particular, 
in the large emitters that are the chapter’s focus (see 
Chapters 1 and 2). In countries where central banks 
might be less credible, alternative policy packages that 
have a much smaller impact on prices (for example, 
Policy Package 2) could be favored in case concerns 
about the anchoring of inflation expectations are 
warranted.17
While this exercise is meant to be mainly illustra-
tive, highlighting the unpleasant trade-offs that could 
17In such a case, policies that entail a smaller pass-through to 
headline inflation may be favored, such as combining a GHG 
price with subsidies for low-emission technologies in electricity or 
transportation.
Benchmark: core + GHG price
Benchmark: core
Lower: core + GHG price
Lower: core
Figure 3.6.  Macroeconomic Impact of Different Monetary Policy 
Targets in the United States
(Percentage point deviation from baseline, unless noted otherwise)
Including the impact of the GHG price on the consumer price index has limited 
macroeconomic implications as long as monetary policy credibility prevents any 
de-anchoring of inﬂation expectations.
1. Real GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
2022
24
26
28
30
2. Policy Rate
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
2022
24
26
28
30
3. Headline Inﬂation
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
2022
24
26
28
30
4. Core Inﬂation
–0.5
–0.4
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
2022
24
26
28
30
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results based on Policy Package 1 with benchmark and lower elasticities 
described in Annex Table 3.1.1. See Table 3.1 for a full description of the three 
policy packages. GHG = greenhouse gas. 
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
83
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
result from a lack of central bank credibility could raise 
the question of whether it is reasonable to wait—as 
some have proposed—until inflation is tamed before 
implementing the required climate policies. The next 
section shows that waiting would only complicate the 
transition.
Transition Costs under Further Delays
As noted earlier in this chapter, gradually phased-in 
climate policy packages that are rolled out without 
delay would have only very limited consequences in 
regard to inflation, provided central banks remain 
credible. A prominent concern at the current 
juncture, however, is that climate mitigation policies 
could de-anchor inflation expectations by raising 
the specter of future GHG-price-driven inflationary 
pressures in an already-high-inflation environment. 
This section asks whether delaying the necessary cli-
mate action by a few years, until inflation is brought 
under control, could be an option.
To assess this policy option, Policy Package 1 start-
ing in 2023 is compared with a delayed mitigation pol-
icy package that starts in 2027 but is still compatible 
with the Paris Agreement’s objective in that it achieves 
the same reduction in cumulative emissions in the 
long term. The results are reported only for the United 
States; Online Annex 3.4 presents other regions’ 
results. The delayed package has the same composition 
as Policy Package 1 but is phased in more rapidly and 
has a higher GHG tax for some years, since a steeper 
decline in emissions is required to offset the unmiti-
gated accumulation of emissions from 2023 to 2026. 
Both packages assume credible monetary policy.
The higher speed at which the transition must take 
place if it is delayed significantly worsens the output-­
inflation trade-off (Figure 3.8). First, larger annual 
increments in the GHG tax directly generate larger 
increases in headline inflation. Second, a shorter tran-
sition period leads to a rapid fall in the utilization of 
capital for the production of fossil fuels, at a large cost 
to firms and their profitability. This is in addition to 
the decline in investment by all firms to allow them to 
shift out of any emission-intensive capital. If monetary 
policy targets output (to decline at the same pace as in 
the gradual scenario), headline inflation increases by 
much more than in Policy Package 1 (dashed red line); 
if it targets the modified version of core (core plus 
GHG price), output drops much faster (solid red line).
Therefore, if the concern is that higher GHG taxes 
may end up threatening central banks’ credibility, 
leading to larger output-inflation trade-offs, delaying 
climate policy does not appear to be a reasonable 
option. A risk management approach to monetary 
policy might instead suggest starting to implement the 
necessary GHG taxes right away and leaning against 
their impact on headline inflation. Doing so (solid 
blue line in Figure 3.6) would minimize the risk that 
higher headline inflation will weaken the central bank’s 
credibility and lead to widespread wage indexation and 
higher inflation inertia.
Comparing this policy approach with the alter-
native of delaying climate policy implementation to 
after 2026 highlights the much larger costs, in both 
Benchmark elasticities: wage indexation, core + GHG tax targeting
Benchmark elasticities: wage indexation, GDP targeting
Lower elasticities: wage indexation, core + GHG tax targeting
Lower elasticities: wage indexation, GDP targeting
Figure 3.7.  Macroeconomic Impact of Different Monetary 
Policy Targets under Wage Indexation
Wage indexation worsens the output-inﬂation trade-off.
1. Real GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2022
24
26
28
30
2. Headline Inﬂation
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
2022
24
26
28
30
–1
0
1
2
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results based on Policy Package 1. See Table 3.1 for a full description of the 
three policy packages. Panels depict alternative wage and price Phillips curves. 
Benchmark and lower elasticities described in Annex Table 3.1.1. GHG = 
greenhouse gas.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
84
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
inflation and output, of the latter option. Further 
procrastinating requires an even more rushed transition 
in which inflation can be contained only at significant 
cost to real GDP.
Conclusions and Policy Implications
Decades of procrastination on climate policy have 
made it all the more urgent to act now. To keep the 
Paris Agreement’s goal within reach, GHG emissions 
must decline by 25 percent, with respect to current 
levels, by 2030. Achieving such a result would require 
unprecedented global effort and would represent a seri-
ous acceleration with respect to the past decade. Rising 
concerns about energy independence offer the oppor-
tunity to bolster the transition in the energy sector.
How costly such efforts could be depends a great 
deal on how quickly electricity generation can be 
decarbonized. The more difficult it is to transition to 
clean electricity, the larger the GHG tax increase will 
have to be to provide incentives for larger efforts in 
other sectors—and the larger the macroeconomic costs 
in terms of growth and inflation. Different calibrations 
of elasticities of substitution away from fossil fuels sug-
gest global GDP could be between 0.9 and 2.0 percent 
below baseline by 2030, which would amount to a 
slowdown of 0.15 to 0.25 percentage point in yearly 
growth. Inflation could increase to reach 0.1 to 
0.4 percentage point above baseline. Considerable vari-
ation across regions is to be expected, with the largest 
effects concentrated among fossil fuel exporters.
While not trivial, these costs are manageable and 
dwarfed by the innumerable long-term benefits (in 
regard to output, financial stability, health) of arrest-
ing climate change (October 2020 World Economic 
Outlook; IPCC 2022) that have been thoroughly doc-
umented by climate science. However, the route to 
Paris could become more onerous if a series of condi-
tions are not met. First, the required climate policies 
need to be implemented immediately. Further delay-
ing implementation will amplify the output-inflation 
trade-offs that central banks may face. An immediate 
start will allow a gradual process whereby GHG taxes 
can be increased in small and predictable increments, 
driving private expectations and behaviors and lim-
iting inflationary pressures. Second, it is important 
that new climate policy be credible. Credible climate 
policies offer incentives for investment and research 
and development in carbon-neutral technology and 
help accelerate the shift in consumption patterns 
Gradual
Delayed (inﬂation target)
Delayed (GDP target)
Delaying mitigation policies considerably worsens the output-inﬂation trade-off.
Figure 3.8.  Gradual and Delayed GHG Mitigation Policies in 
the United States
1. GHG Price
(US dollars a tCO2e)
0
40
80
120
160
2022
24
26
28
30
32
2. Excess GHG Emissions from Delaying Policies
(Percent of baseline emissions)
–8
–4
0
4
8
12
16
2022
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
3. Real GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)
–2.0
–1.6
–1.2
–0.8
–0.4
0.0
0.4
0
1
2
3
4
Years since implementation
4. Headline Inﬂation
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
0
1
2
3
4
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Years since implementation
Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff 
estimates.
Note: Results based on Policy Package 1 with benchmark elasticities. Monetary 
policy targets Core + GHG price under “Gradual” and “Delayed”; Under “Delayed 
(GDP target),” monetary policy targets the same GDP as in “Gradual.” GHG = 
greenhouse gas; tCO2e = metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent.
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
85
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
toward low-carbon alternatives. International experi-
ence shows that rebating tax revenues to low-income 
households (which are bound to suffer the most from 
the new carbon pricing) helps bolster acceptance and 
reinforces such policies’ credibility. Third, mone-
tary policy credibility complements climate policy 
credibility and is essential to keep output-inflation 
trade-offs low. Doubts about central banks’ price sta-
bilization credentials could lead to more widespread 
wage indexation and higher inflation inertia, which 
would further amplify output-inflation trade-offs and 
the cost of future stabilization. Concerns about cur-
rent high inflation offer no justification for delaying 
necessary actions.
It is not too late to avert the most catastrophic 
climate damages, but ensuring that temperature 
increases remain well below 2°C at a reasonable cost 
will require immediate, credible, transparent, and 
ambitious action. Because GHGs know no borders, 
the effort to accomplish this goal needs to be global. 
The rise in geopolitical tensions related to the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine and the recent deterioration in 
China–US relationships have put global cooperation 
on climate goals at risk. If different international stan-
dards arose, carbon border adjustment taxes could help 
prevent excess leakage and accelerate the convergence 
of tax and regulations to the highest global standard. 
International coordination in GHG taxation could 
also allow faster decarbonization, as low-hanging fruit 
could be plucked in many countries that have not yet 
started decarbonization. Productive areas of cooper-
ation might include bridging data gaps, improving 
reporting standards, and increasing access to climate 
finance in emerging market and developing econo-
mies (October 2022 Global Financial Stability Report, 
Chapter 2; Ferreira and others 2021).
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
86
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Most empirical studies find that carbon-pricing 
programs implemented so far, even though quite 
modest, have led to significant reductions in emis-
sions. Over the past two decades, a number of 
countries have rolled out carbon-pricing programs, 
with carbon tax rates and coverage of various mag-
nitudes (Figure 3.1.1). Empirical analyses find that 
despite low carbon prices, emission-trading markets 
and carbon taxes have led to sizable reductions in 
emissions. For instance, the European Union (EU) 
Emissions Trading System (ETS)1 has been found 
to have reduced EU-wide emissions by 3.8 percent 
between 2008 and 2016, although the market covered 
only 50 percent of EU carbon emissions and the price 
remained below €20 a ton up to 2018 (Bayer and 
Aklin 2020). ETS-regulated manufacturing plants 
have been found to have reduced emissions by close 
to 15–20 percent in France (Wagner and others 2014) 
and Germany (Petrick and Wagner 2014). An emis-
sion market introduced in the northeastern US states 
and targeting emissions from the power sector has 
also been determined to have contributed more than 
half of emission reductions achieved in the sector2 in 
the late 2000s and early 2010s (Murray and Maniloff 
2015), despite a low price averaging $2–$3 a ton 
during the time period.
Carbon pricing’s macroeconomic impact remains 
indiscernible, however, even though effects are more 
tangible at the sectoral level. Recent macro empiri-
cal studies have assessed the impact of carbon taxes 
on GDP using cross-country panel regressions and 
have found no evidence that carbon taxes have led 
to reductions in activity. Metcalf and Stock (2020) 
and Konradt and Weder di Mauro (2022) focus 
on the economic response to carbon tax changes in 
EU countries, controlling for previous tax changes 
or GDP growth, and point to negligible near-term 
effects of mitigation policies on output and inflation. 
One of the reasons could be related to the fact that 
these countries were able to achieve emission reduc-
tions through investment in abatement technologies, 
The authors of this box are Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi and 
Augustus J. Panton.
1The ETS is the EU’s flagship climate policy, establishing in 2005 
a carbon market across Europe, with more than 11,400 plants in 
31 countries regulated at present.
2In states involved in the emission market, power sector emis-
sions dropped by close to 25 percent between 2000 and 2011.
the switching of production and demand to cleaner 
technologies, and energy efficiency gains.
The effect of carbon pricing on activity seems 
easier to identify using microeconomic data. Several 
studies have found that the EU ETS has led firms 
to reduce the carbon intensity of their produc-
tion through improvements in energy efficiency. 
An energy tax implemented in the UK resulted 
in energy use reductions of 23 percent in targeted 
manufacturing plants, leading them to cut emis-
sions without cutting production or employment 
or reducing productivity (Martin, de Preux, and 
Wagner 2014). On the other end, carbon pricing has 
been shown to affect sectors differently, depending 
on their carbon intensity. For example, sectoral data 
analysis reveals that the carbon taxation imple-
mented in British Columbia, Canada, led to a fall in 
employment in carbon-intensive and trade-intensive 
sectors (Yamazaki 2017). Studies also show that 
the 1970 US Clean Air Act3 had a negative impact 
3The Clean Air Act regulates the emission of local air pollut-
ants in the United States.
Share of GHG emissions
Carbon price: carbon tax (right scale)
Carbon price: ETS (right scale)
Figure 3.1.1.  Carbon Pricing in 2022 for 
Selected Economies
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Percent
US dollars a tCO2e
South Africa
California, US
Korea
Luxembourg
Norway
Iceland
New Zealand
European Union
Sweden
Ireland
Germany
Finland
France
Switzerland
Uruguay
Sources: International Carbon Action Partnership; World 
Bank (2022); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: ETS = Emissions Trading System; GHG = greenhouse 
gas; tCO2e = metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Box 3.1. Near-Term Implications of Carbon Pricing: A Review of the Literature
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
87
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
on employment in pollution-intensive industries 
over the medium term: Employment in polluting 
sectors fell by 15 percent in the 10 years following 
an increase in the stringency of the regulation rolled 
out in the 1990s (Walker 2011).
There are limitations to how much can be inferred 
from past experiences to project future macroeco-
nomic impacts of carbon pricing. First, the available 
empirical evidence refers to policies that were much 
smaller in scale and scope than those that will be 
required to achieve a path consistent with reaching the 
Paris Agreement’s goals. Second, the impact of carbon 
pricing on output and inflation will vary depending 
on the way climate policies are designed and the 
other policies that accompany them. The multiplic-
ity of channels through which climate policies have 
an impact implies that disentangling their effects 
(for example, on output and inflation) is empirically 
challenging. The literature has long recognized this 
tension, and numerous large-scale general equilibrium 
global models have been used to analyze the impact of 
greenhouse gas mitigation policies on emissions and 
economic activity. The modeling literature suggests 
that climate policies comparable to those needed to 
achieve the Paris Agreement targets have moderate 
adverse effects on output. It is important to note that 
these output costs pale in comparison with the macro-
economic risk associated with the catastrophic climate 
damages these policies aim to avert. Models with low 
elasticities of substitution between carbon-intensive 
and green-energy-generating technologies (NGFS 
2022) and high capital adjustment costs (McKibbin 
and Wilcoxen 2013), limited public subsidization of 
the development of green technologies (Acemoglu and 
others 2012), and difficulty in scaling up green energy 
supply (IEA 2021) typically show higher output 
costs. The design of climate policies also matters. For 
instance, recycling carbon tax revenues as lump-sum 
transfers to households helps support consumption 
(Williams and others 2015; Goulder and others 2019), 
while using the revenues to reduce distortionary taxes, 
including labor income taxes, enhances growth and 
investment more (Chiroleu-Assouline and Fodha 
2014; Caron and others 2018; McFarland and others 
2018; Böhringer and others 2021).
Goulder and Hafstead (2018) compare the out-
put costs for the US from an economy-wide carbon 
tax starting at $25 a ton in 2020 (and increasing by 
5 percent annually until 2050) in six leading models 
under three common recycling plans (see Table 3.1.1). 
This would imply a carbon price reaching close to 
$38 a ton in 2030 or about half of the $75 a ton tax 
analyzed in this chapter across advanced economies.4 
Under a lump-sum recycling scheme, model averaging 
would suggest a cost of 1.2 percent of GDP by 2030 
in the US, similar in scale to results from the Global 
Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition 
(GMMET) in advanced economies. Under a labor 
income tax cut, model averaging would imply a 
0.6 percent loss in GDP by 2030, while the GMMET 
suggests essentially no loss in output over this horizon, 
thanks to an increase in labor supply.
4With a linear approximation assumed, results in Table 3.1.1 
could be multiplied by 2 to reflect the impact of a carbon tax 
that is twice as high as in the experiment conducted in the study.
Table 3.1.1. Cross-Model Comparison of Changes in GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)
2030
Model
Lump-Sum Rebates
Labor Income Tax Cuts
Capital Income Tax Cuts
E3
−0.8
−0.7
−0.6
DIEM
−0.4
−0.2
0.8
IGEM
−0.8
0.2
0.5
NewERA
−0.5
−0.4
0.2
RTI-ADAGE
−0.8
−0.6
0.9
ReEDS-USREP
−0.3
−0.1
0.0
Model average
−0.6
−0.3
0.3
Source: Goulder and Hafstead (2018).
Note: DIEM = Dynamic Integrated Evaluation Model; E3 = Goulder-Hafstead Environment-Energy-Economy; 
IGEM = Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model; NewERA = National Economic Research Associates economic 
consulting model; RTI-ADAGE = Applied Dynamic Analysis of the Global Economy; ReEDS-USREP = Region Energy 
Deployment System model−US Regional Energy Policy model. 
Box 3.1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
88
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
The use of comprehensive policy packages and 
coordinated approaches to drive the green transition 
can help reduce short-term output costs. Comple-
menting carbon taxes with green public investments 
can boost aggregate demand in the short term and 
reduce energy supply bottlenecks (October 2020 World 
Economic Outlook, Chapter 3; Pahle and others 2022). 
Internationally coordinated policy action, for instance, 
through an international carbon price floor arrange-
ment in which emission reduction obligations are 
equitably differentiated by countries’ level of develop-
ment, would address concerns about carbon leakage 
and competitiveness impacts on energy-intensive 
and trade-exposed industries that would arise from 
unilateral or uncoordinated action (Parry, Black, 
and Roaf 2021; Chateau, Jaumotte, and Schwerhoff 
2022b). Finally, how central banks respond to the 
climate-policy-related supply shock can affect the mag-
nitude of the output and inflation effects (McKibbin 
and others 2020).
Box 3.1 (continued)
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
89
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
This box examines the political economy of the 
introduction of carbon pricing in very different 
countries: one advanced economy and two emerging 
market economies. The long-standing experience of 
Sweden shows that with a judicious policy design that 
includes gradualism, strong distributional incentives, 
and a rules-based and transparent framework, a credible 
mitigation strategy involving carbon pricing is possible 
(Nemet and others 2017). More recently, South Africa, 
a highly fossil-fuel-dependent economy, and Uruguay 
embarked on decarbonization using similar strategies. 
It is worth emphasizing that—for all economies—
climate mitigation policies can be effective only if 
they are deemed credible. Sudden departures from 
previously announced policies—analogous to Austra-
lia’s carbon tax reversal in 2014—undermine policy 
credibility. Also, gradual and distribution-friendly 
policies are more likely to overcome political resistance 
(France’s Yellow Vests movement is a counterexample).
Sweden became, in 1991, one of the first countries 
in the world to introduce a carbon tax (Andersson 
2019; Jonsson, Ydstedt, and Asen 2020). While 
environmental taxes were already part of the Swedish 
tax system prior to the carbon tax, strengthening 
political buy-in for the carbon tax required a gradual 
implementation and the use of distributional incentives, 
notably exemptions. Sweden’s carbon tax rate started 
at a low level and increased to $130 a ton (as of 2022, 
and covering 40 percent of total emissions), giving 
society time to adapt and thereby minimizing the 
overall economic impact (Figure 3.2.1). The inclusion 
of exemptions—motivated by concerns about carbon 
leakage and international competitiveness—also 
strengthened political support for the tax by making 
the carbon tax regime more robust to resistance from 
different sectoral interests. For example, in its early 
phase, the carbon tax regime had two tiers, with some 
carbon-intensive and trade-exposed industries fully 
exempt (for example, steel), while others faced a tax 
rate as low as 25 percent of the general carbon tax 
rate (for example, mining, agriculture) (Figure 3.2.1). 
Most exemptions were finally removed in 2019. While 
the carbon tax revenues were not directly earmarked 
in Sweden’s budget, a reduction in labor income taxes 
was implemented alongside the imposition of the 
carbon tax, in effect recycling carbon tax revenues to 
help improve efficiency.
The author of this box is Augustus J. Panton.
Over the years, Sweden has strengthened the 
credibility of its climate policy by defining a clear 
climate mitigation target that is rules-based and 
transparent, as articulated in the 2018 Climate Act 
of the Riksdag (Swedish parliament). Transitional 
rules-based targets (for example, 63 percent emis-
sion reduction by 2030 relative to 1990 levels) and 
a predefined provision for national review of prog-
ress every four years—entrusted to an independent 
body of scientific experts, the Swedish Climate Policy 
Council—support the national goal of reaching net-
zero emissions by 2045.
South Africa, one of the world’s most fossil-fuel-­
dependent economies, became the first African country 
in 2019 to implement a formal carbon-pricing regime, 
with a carbon tax rate starting at $9.20 a ton of carbon 
dioxide and covering 80 percent of total emissions 
(Figure 3.2.2; World Bank 2022). The tax was largely 
premised on positioning the South African econ-
omy to be competitive and compliant with potential 
climate-related trade restrictions (for example, border 
carbon adjustment) (South African National Trea-
sury 2013). The national Integrated Resource Plan, 
focused on decarbonizing the electricity sector, and 
the Green Transport Strategy complement the carbon 
tax, thus creating a robust strategy and mix of policy 
instruments to drive the green transition. Given the 
South African economy’s high fossil fuel dependence, 
the need for strong political incentives to galvanize 
support cannot be overemphasized. As in the Swedish 
two-tier carbon tax regime, the transitional phase 
(2020–25) is characterized by strong distributional 
General rate
Industry rate
0
40
80
120
160
200
1990
95
2000
05
10
15
22
Source: World Bank (2022).
Note: tCO2e = metric ton of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Figure 3.2.1.  Carbon Price in Sweden
(US dollars a tCO2e)
Box 3.2. Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
90
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
incentives aimed at gradually transitioning people and 
firms to a low-carbon economy. During this phase, 
carbon-tax-free allowances range from 60 to 95 per-
cent of firms’ emissions, with a further 10 percent for 
trade-exposed firms. Other transitional incentives, such 
as an electricity price neutrality commitment (that is, 
offsets to make electricity prices carbon-tax-neutral), 
have been put in place to get buy-in from energy-­
intensive sectors (for example, steel). Also, while the 
tax is integrated within a carbon budget framework 
(that is, caps on emissions over a given period), the 
enforcement of carbon budgets is expected only after 
the transition period. While distributional incentives, 
including tax-free emission allowances, are critical 
for broadening political support in the early stages of 
carbon pricing, their eventual removal must be well 
telegraphed to anchor expectations. In this context, 
the extension of the transitional phase of South Africa’s 
carbon tax to 2025 (instead of the end of 2022, as 
initially announced) risks weakening credibility, locking 
in fossil fuel investments while undermining green 
private investments. Furthermore, the exemption of 
Eskom, the state-owned power company and South 
Africa’s largest emitter, from the carbon tax strongly 
weakens the carbon tax regime’s effectiveness. It is also 
worth noting that the full implementation of South 
Africa’s climate mitigation agenda is conditional on the 
country’s receiving external climate finance support, 
including the 2021 United Nations Climate Change 
Conference (COP26) commitment by the European 
Union, France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and 
the United States to finance South Africa’s transition 
away from coal. Such conditionality creates uncertainty 
regarding the future direction of policy, weakening 
credibility. The establishment in 2020 of the Presiden-
tial Climate Commission is a step in the right direc-
tion for strengthening credibility. Further insulating 
the commission from political influence would help 
increase transparency and trust in the green transition.
Uruguay embarked on a carbon-pricing journey earlier 
this year by converting its gasoline excise tax regime into 
a formal carbon tax, with the 2022 tax rate set at $137 
a ton of carbon dioxide. Despite the lower coverage in 
terms of total greenhouse gas emissions, the tax covers 
about half of carbon dioxide emissions (Figure 3.2.2). 
While not resorting to exemptions—reflecting the 
low share of carbon emissions in total greenhouse gas 
emissions—Uruguay is earmarking a portion of the car-
bon tax revenues to be spent on a different set of incen-
tives, including subsidies for purchases of electric vehicles 
and investment in green public transport.1 Whether these 
incentives are enough to broaden support for further 
stringency in the carbon tax—currently applied only to 
gasoline—remains to be seen.
Uruguay passed into law a carbon tax bill in 
November of last year, but challenges to the credibility 
of further advances in this direction remain. The lack of 
a rules-based mitigation path, specifically indicating how 
and the conditions under which the country’s sectoral 
emission intensity targets would be adjusted, could create 
uncertainty for long-term private investment decisions. 
Uruguay’s climate mitigation agenda would not be fully 
implemented without external climate finance support, 
adding to uncertainty. Finally, while the country’s carbon 
tax framework is still in its infancy, delegating the peri-
odic evaluation of climate policy and progress to an inde-
pendent body would enhance transparency and trust.2 
Such transparency would be crucial not just locally but 
also internationally, given the Uruguayan government’s 
plan for issuing sustainability-linked sovereign bonds tied 
to its climate mitigation agenda.
In sum, while a one-size-fits-all climate mitigation 
strategy does not exist, the experiences of these countries 
suggest that starting at a gradual pace, using targeted 
incentives and redistribution arrangements, can help 
establish a credible mitigation program and ease resistance 
to the use of carbon taxes for green transition.
1See the IMF Article IV Consultation for Uruguay (IMF 2021).
2Uruguay’s new Sovereign Sustainability-Linked Bond 
Framework, launched on September 20, 2022, would help in 
that direction.
Figure 3.2.2.  Carbon Price and Emissions
Coverage, 2022 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Percent of GHG emissions
US dollars a tCO2e
Carbon
price
Emissions
coverage
(right scale)
Uruguay
South
Africa
South
Africa
Uruguay
Source: World Bank (2022).
Note: GHG = greenhouse gas; tCO2e = metric ton of carbon 
dioxide equivalent.
Box 3.2 (continued)
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
91
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Intermittent renewables, such as solar and wind, will 
be a key component of power sector decarbonization. 
Their penetration has already increased steadily over 
the past two decades, surpassing 20 percent in some 
countries, amid a favorable policy environment and 
rapidly falling capital costs. To bring emissions in 
line with the 2°C goal, simulations discussed in this 
chapter suggest that intermittent-renewables pene-
tration will need to grow further and reach between 
34 and 47 percent of power generation by 2030. 
Intermittence presents challenges to electricity price 
variability and power system stability. Since storing 
electricity at grid scale remains very expensive, power 
systems need to be balanced at every point in time, 
with generation continuously matching fluctuating 
electricity demand. Power plants are turned on to 
satisfy demand, and priority is given to those with the 
lowest cost of production. Because renewables’ cost 
of production is close to zero, as their fuel is free (for 
example, wind, sun), they will always be prioritized to 
supply electricity. Where electricity markets follow mar-
ginal pricing,1 electricity prices will be pushed down—
as costlier units are forced to turn off—and can even 
reach zero in the hours renewables produce enough 
electricity to satisfy demand and become the marginal 
unit.2 Conversely, when renewables do not produce 
enough to satisfy demand, electricity prices can jump 
sharply, particularly if the sources for the marginal 
units that need to be turned on to satisfy demand 
have a high cost of production. As the availability of 
wind and solar varies within a day and across days and 
seasons, intermittence can lead to price volatility.
Several measures, including enhanced electricity grid 
interconnections and low-cost backup technologies, 
have dampened intermittence’s impact on price vari-
ability so far. In Europe, price volatility from inter-
mittence has remained limited. Before the pandemic, 
monthly price variability was similar in countries with 
high and low penetration of intermittent renew-
ables (Figure 3.3.1). To increase the penetration of 
intermittent renewables while avoiding sharp swings 
The author of this box is Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi.
1In such markets, wholesale electricity prices are set equal to 
the operational cost of the costliest unit among those selected to 
satisfy demand at any point in time.
2An emerging body of literature documents that wind and 
solar generation push wholesale electricity prices down, having 
done so, for instance, in Australia (Csereklyei, Qu, and Ancev 
2019), California (Bushnell and Novan 2018), and Europe 
(Halttunen and others 2020).
in electricity prices, countries have adopted a mul-
tipronged approach, including by ensuring greater 
interconnection of electricity grids, which allows 
surplus production from renewables to satisfy demand 
in neighboring countries (for example, Denmark), or 
by using low-cost backup technologies—such as hydro 
(for example, Norway) or gas power plants (for exam-
ple, Spain). Indeed, low gas prices allowed backup gas 
power plants to run at low cost when production from 
renewables dropped, limiting price variability. Between 
2015 and 2019, electricity prices remained low and 
varied little day to day, getting closer to zero when 
renewables accounted for larger shares of electricity 
generation, but staying low even on days with low 
renewables penetration, as the cost of backup gas units 
remained low (blue circles in Figure 3.3.2).
This stability contrasts with the high volatility that 
has come from disruption in gas supplies during 
Russia’s recent invasion of Ukraine. Electricity prices 
have risen sharply on wholesale markets amid recent 
gas price spikes, including in countries that rely more 
Nordic
Insular
Continental
Figure 3.3.1.  Monthly Wholesale Electricity 
Prices in Selected European Economies
(Euros a megawatt-hour)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2015
16
17
18
19
20
21
May
22
Sources: European Network of Transmission System 
Operators for Electricity; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Country grouping reﬂects the degree of grid 
interconnectedness. “Insular” countries (Ireland, Portugal, 
Spain) have limited interconnections with continental Europe 
and have high gas dependence (32 percent of generation in 
2019) and high renewables penetration (29 percent). 
“Continental” countries are well interconnected, with high 
penetration of renewables (23 percent) and high 
dependence on gas (16 percent). “Nordic” countries 
(Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden) constitute a 
well-interconnected group and use hydro as a backup for 
renewables (12 percent of production), with low gas 
dependence (2.6 percent).
Box 3.3. Decarbonizing the Power Sector while Managing Renewables’ Intermittence
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
92
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
heavily on intermittent renewables, such as Denmark, 
Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. But where renewables 
are backed up by hydro (for example, Norway and 
Sweden), price volatility has increased only partly in 
response to the gas price spike (see Figure 3.3.1).3 
Furthermore, price volatility has increased sharply in 
countries that have high penetrations of renewables 
and use gas as a backup. At the end of 2021 and in 
2022, as gas prices have surged, the cost of produc-
tion of electricity from gas units has climbed, leading 
to high electricity prices when gas units have become 
marginal on days with low generation from renew-
ables, while prices have pointed downward on days 
with high penetration from renewables (red circles 
in Figure 3.3.2). That has been true even where gas 
represents only a small share of generation, as in 
Denmark—where it accounts for less than 10 percent 
of production, whereas wind represented close to 
60 percent of power production in 2021—since prices 
are set for the whole market by the marginal unit. Gas 
power plants were envisioned as becoming the choice 
of backup that would allow greater penetration of 
renewables. Yet, this choice risks exposing electricity 
prices to price swings in gas markets.
Looking ahead, decarbonizing the power sector will 
require a system-wide approach. As many sectors turn 
to electricity, electricity prices will become ever more 
central to price setting in vast swaths of the economy. 
Ensuring affordable and reliable electricity is thus 
crucial. Sector-level regulations and investment will be 
needed to accommodate higher intermittent-renewables 
penetration. These could include regulations to ensure 
adequate investment in backup capacity (for exam-
ple, capacity markets), demand management to align 
peak demand with peak supply from renewables (for 
example, time-of-day pricing), public investment in 
grid interconnections, and support for research and 
development on storage (including from electric vehi-
cles) and low-cost dispatchable backup technologies (for 
example, hydrogen, modular nuclear power plants) (see, 
for instance, ACER 2022; Green 2021; and Cleary, 
Fischer, and Palmer 2021). Further investment will also 
be needed to limit price volatility in gas markets (for 
example, liquid natural gas terminals). Finally, using 
a diversified mix of decarbonized power sources (for 
example, renewables, hydropower, and nuclear energy) 
will enhance power sector resilience.
3Pass-through to retail electricity prices has been more limited 
so far as a result of regulations (Ari and others, 2022).
2021–22
2015–19
Figure 3.3.2.  Daily Electricity Prices in 
Selected European Countries as a Function 
of Share of Renewables in Power Production
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Electricity price
(euros a MWh)
0
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
1. Denmark
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Electricity price
(euros a MWh)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Daily share of intermittent renewables in
power production (percent)
2. Ireland
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Electricity price
(euros a MWh)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Daily share of intermittent renewables in
power production (percent)
3. Portugal and Spain
Daily share of intermittent renewables in
power production (percent)
Sources: European Network of Transmission System 
Operators for Electricity; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The solid and dashed lines represent the linear ﬁt. 
MWh = megawatt-hour.
Box 3.3 (continued)
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
93
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and 
David Hémous. 2012. “The Environment and Directed 
Technical Change.” American Economic Review 102 (1): 
131–66.
Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER). 
2022. Final Assessment of the EU Wholesale Electricity Market 
Design. Ljublana, Slovenia.
Andersson, Julius J. 2019. “Carbon Taxes and CO2 Emissions: 
Sweden as a Case Study.” American Economic Journal: Eco-
nomic Policy 11 (4): 1–30. https://​www​.aeaweb​.org/​articles​?id​
=​10​.1257/​pol​.20170144.
Ari, Anil, Nicolas Arregui, Simon Black, Oya Celasun, Dora 
Iakova, Aiko Mineshima, Victor Mylonas, and others. 2022. 
“Surging Energy Prices in Europe in the Aftermath of the 
War: How to Support the Vulnerable and Speed Up the Tran-
sition away from Fossil Fuels.” IMF Working Paper 22/152, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bayer, Patrick, and Michael Aklin. 2020. “The European 
Union Emissions Trading System Reduced CO2 Emissions 
Despite Low Prices.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 117 (16): 8804–12. 
https://​www​.pnas​.org/​doi/​10​.1073/​pnas​.1918128117.
Black, Simon, Danielle Minnett, Ian Parry, James Roaf, and 
Karlygash Zhunussova. 2022. “The Carbon Price Equivalence 
of Climate Mitigation Policies.” Unpublished, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Black, Simon, Ian Parry, James Roaf, and Karlygash Zhunussova. 
2021. “Not Yet on Track to Net Zero: The Urgent Need for 
Greater Ambition and Policy Action to Achieve Paris Tempera-
ture Goals.” IMF Staff Climate Note 2021/005, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Jordi Galí. 2007. “The Macroeconomic 
Effects of Oil Shocks: Why Are the 2000s So Different from 
the 1970s?” NBER Working Paper 13368, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Böhringer, Christoph, Sonja Peterson, Thomas Rutherford, Jan 
Schneider, and Malte Winkler. 2021. “Climate Policies after 
Paris: Pledge, Trade and Recycle; Insights from the 36th 
Energy Modeling Forum Study (EMF36).” Energy Economics 
103: 105471. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.eneco​.2021​.105471.
Brulle, Robert J. 2018. “The Climate Lobby: A Sectoral Analysis 
of Lobbying Spending on Climate Change in the USA, 2000 
to 2016.” Climatic Change 149 (3): 289–303.
Bushnell, James, and Kevin Novan. 2018. “Setting with the 
Sun: The Impacts of Renewable Energy on Wholesale Power 
Markets.” NBER Working Paper 24980, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Caron, Justin, Stuart M. Cohen, Maxwell Brown, and John 
M. Reilly. 2018. “Exploring the Impacts of a National U.S. 
CO2 Tax and Revenue Recycling Options with a Coupled 
Electricity-Economy Model.” Climate Change Economics 9 (1): 
1840015. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1142/​S2010007818400158.
Carton, Benjamin, Christopher Evans, Dirk Muir, and Simon 
Voigts. 2022. “Getting to Know GMMET: The Theoretical 
Structure and Simulation Properties of the Global Macro-
economic Model for the Energy Transition.” Unpublished, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Castillo, Paul, Carlos Montoro, and Vicente Tuesta. 2007. 
“Inflation Premium and Oil Price Volatility.” CEP Discus-
sion Paper 782, Centre for Economic Performance, London 
School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK.
Chateau, Jean, Florence Jaumotte, and Gregor Schwerhoff. 
2022a. “Climate Policy Options: A Comparison of Economic 
Performance.” Unpublished, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Chateau, Jean, Florence Jaumotte, and Gregor Schwerhoff. 
2022b. “Economic and Environmental Benefits from Inter-
national Cooperation on Climate Policies.” IMF Depart-
mental Paper 2022/007, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, DC.
Chiroleu-Assouline, Mireille, and Mouez Fodha. 2014. “From 
Regressive Pollution Taxes to Progressive Environmental Tax 
Reforms.” European Economic Review 69: 126–42.
Cleary, Kathryne, Carolyn Fischer, and Karen Palmer. 2021. 
“Tools and Policies to Promote Decarbonization of the 
Electricity Sector.” In Handbook on Electricity Markets, edited 
by Jean-Michel Glachant, Paul L. Joskow, and Michael G. 
Pollitt, 383–407. Cheltenham, UK: Elgar. https://​econpapers​
.repec​.org/​bookchap/​elgeechap/​18895​_5f14​.htm.
Csereklyei, Zsuzsanna, Songze Qu, and Tihomir Ancev. 2019. 
“The Effect of Wind and Solar Power Generation on Whole-
sale Electricity Prices in Australia.” Energy Policy 131: 358–69. 
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.enpol​.2019​.04​.007.
Ferreira, Caio, David Lukáš Rozumek, Ranjit Singh, and Felix 
Suntheim. 2021. “Strengthening the Climate Information 
Architecture.” IMF Staff Climate Note 2021/003, Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Galí, Jordi. 2015. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business 
Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework and 
Its Applications. 2nd ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Marc A. C. Hafstead. 2018. Con-
fronting the Climate Challenge: U.S. Policy Options. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Marc A. C. Hafstead, GyuRim Kim, and 
Xianling Long. 2019. “Impacts of a Carbon Tax across US 
Household Income Groups: What Are the Equity-Efficiency 
Trade-Offs?” Journal of Public Economics 175: 44–64. 
https://​doi​.org/​10​.1016/​j​.jpubeco​.2019​.04​.002.
Green, Richard. 2021. “Shifting Supply as Well as Demand: 
The New Economics of Electricity with High Renewables.” 
In Handbook on Electricity Markets, edited by Jean-Michel 
Glachant, Paul L. Joskow, and Michael G. Pollitt, 408–27. 
Cheltenham, UK: Elgar. https://​econpapers​.repec​.org/​
bookchap/​elgeechap/​18895​_5f15​.htm.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
94
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Halttunen, Krista, Iain Staffell, Raphael Slade, Richard Green, 
Yves-Marie Saint-Drenan, and Malte Jansen. 2020. “Global 
Assessment of the Merit-Order Effect and Revenue Canni-
balisation for Variable Renewable Energy.” Preprint, posted 
December 2, 2020. https://​ssrn​.com/​abstract​=​3741232.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2022. 
Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability: 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by 
Hans-O. Pörtner, Debra C. Roberts, Melinda Tignor, Elvira 
S. Poloczanska, Katja Mintenbeck, Andrés Alegría, Marlies 
Craig, and others. Geneva, Switzerland.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2021. World Energy Outlook 
2021. Paris, France. https://​iea​.blob​.core​.windows​.net/​assets/​
4ed140c1​-c3f3​-4fd9​-acae​-789a4e14a23c/​WorldEnergyOut-
look2021​.pdf.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021. “Uruguay: Staff 
Report for the 2021 Article IV Consultation.” International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://www.imf.org/en/
Publications/CR/Issues/2022/01/25/Uruguay-2021-Article-
IV-Consultation-Press-Release-Staff-Report-and-Statement-by-
the-512205.
Jonsson, Samuel, Anders Ydstedt, and Elke Asen. 2020. “Look-
ing Back on 30 Years of Carbon Taxes in Sweden.” Fiscal Fact 
727, Tax Foundation, Washington, DC. https://​taxfoundation​
.org/​sweden​-carbon​-tax​-revenue​-greenhouse​-gas​-emissions.
Keen, Stephen, Timothy M. Lenton, Antoine Godin, Devrim 
Yilmaz, Matheus Grasselli, and Timothy J. Garrett. 2021. 
“Economists’ Erroneous Estimates of Damages from Climate 
Change.” arXiv preprint arXiv:​2108​.07847.
Konradt, Maximillian, and Beatrice Weder di Mauro. 2021. 
“Carbon Taxation and Greenflation: Evidence from Europe and 
Canada.” CEPR Discussion Paper 16396, Centre for Economic 
Policy Research, London.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. 1977. “Rules Rather 
Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans.” The 
Journal of Political Economy 85 (3): 473–92.
Lenton, Timothy M., Johan Rockström, Owen Gaffney, Stefan 
Rahmstorf, Katherine Richardson, Will Steffen, and Hans 
Joachim Schellnhuber. 2019. “Climate Tipping Points—Too 
Risky to Bet Against.” Nature 575 (7784): 592–95.
Martin, Ralf, Laure B. de Preux, and Ulrich J. Wagner. 2014. 
“The Impact of a Carbon Tax on Manufacturing: Evi-
dence from Microdata.” Journal of Public Economics 117: 
1–14. https://​www​.sciencedirect​.com/​science/​article/​pii/​
S0047272714001078.
Maximilian Konradt and Beatrice Weder di Mauro. 2022. 
“Carbon Taxation and Greenflation: Evidence from Europe 
and Canada.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP16396. 
Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.
McFarland, James R., Allen A. Fawcett, Adele C. Morris, John 
M. Reilly, and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 2018. “Overview of the 
EMF 32 Study on US Carbon Tax Scenarios.” Climate 
Change Economics 9 (1): 1840002. https://​doi​.org/​10​.1142/​
S201000781840002X.
McKibbin, Warwick J., Adele C. Morris, Peter J. Wilcoxen, and 
Augustus J. Panton. 2020. “Climate Change and Monetary 
Policy: Issues for Policy Design and Modelling.” Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy 36 (3): 579–603. https://​doi​.org/​10​
.1093/​oxrep/​graa040.
McKibbin, Warwick J., and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 2013. “A Global 
Approach to Energy and the Environment: The G-Cubed 
Model.” In Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium 
Modeling, Vol. 1A, edited by Peter B. Dixon and Dale W. 
Jorgenson, 995–1068. North Holland, Netherlands: Elsevier.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and James H. Stock. 2020. “The Macroeco-
nomic Impact of Europe’s Carbon Taxes.” NBER Working Paper 
27488, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Mirzoev, Tokhir N., Ling Zhu, Yang Yang, Andrea Pescatori, 
and Akito Matsumoto. 2020. “The Future of Oil and Fiscal 
Sustainability in the GCC Region.” IMF Departmental Paper 
20/01, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Morawiecki, Mateusz. 2022. “Polish PM: The Green Transition 
Cannot Come at the Cost of European Security.” Financial 
Times, July 4. https://​www​.ft​.com/​content/​3d592adc​-b0b0​
-4098​-8616​-9d615c9fcde5.
Morison, Rachel. 2021. “The Climate-Change Fight Is Adding to 
the Global Inflation Scare.” Bloomberg, June 18. https://​www​
.bloomberg​.com/​news/​articles/​2021​-06​-18/​the​-climate​-change​
-fight​-is​-adding​-to​-the​-global​-inflation​-scare​#xj4y7vzkg.
Murray, Brian C., and Peter T. Maniloff. 2015. “Why Have 
Greenhouse Emissions in RGGI States Declined? An Econo-
metric Attribution to Economic, Energy Market, and Policy 
Factors.” Energy Economics 51: 581–89.
Nakov, Anton, and Andrea Pescatori. 2010. “Monetary Policy 
Trade-Offs with a Dominant Oil Producer.” Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking 42 (1): 1–32.
Natal, Jean-Marc. 2012. “Monetary Policy Response to Oil Price 
Shocks.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44 (1): 53–101.
Nemet, Gregory F., Michael Jakob, Jan Christoph Steckel, and 
Ottmar Edenhofer. 2017. “Addressing Policy Credibility 
Problems for Low-Carbon Investment.” Global Environmental 
Change 42: 47–57.
Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). 2022. 
“Running the NGFS Scenarios in G-Cubed: A Tale of Two 
Modelling Frameworks.” NGFS Occasional Paper, Banque de 
France, Paris, France. https://​www​.ngfs​.net/​sites/​default/​files/​
medias/​documents/​running​_the​_ngfs​_scenarios​_in​_g​-cubed​
_a​_tale​_of​_two​_modelling​_frameworks​.pdf.
Pahle, Michael, Oliver Tietjen, Sebastian Osorio, Florian Egli, 
Bjarne Steffen, Tobias Schmidt, and Ottmar Edenhofer. 2022. 
“Safeguarding the Energy Transition against Political Backlash 
to Carbon Markets.” Nature Energy 7 (3): 290–96. https://​doi​
.org/​10​.1038/​s41560​-022​-00984​-0.
Parry, Ian, Simon Black, and James Roaf. 2021. “Proposal for 
an International Carbon Price Floor among Large Emit-
ters.” IMF Staff Climate Note 2021/001, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://​www​.imf​.org/​-/​
media/​Files/​Publications/​Staff​-Climate​-Notes/​2021/​English/​
CLNEA2021001​.ashx.
CHAPTER 3 
NEAR-TERM MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DECARBONIZATION POLICIES
95
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Petrick, Sebastian, and Ulrich J. Wagner. 2014. “The Impact of 
Carbon Trading on Industry: Evidence from German Manu-
facturing Firms.” Kiel Working Paper 1912, Kiel Institute for 
the World Economy, Kiel, Germany. https://​papers​.ssrn​.com/​
sol3/​papers​.cfm​?abstract​_id​=​2389800.
Pisani-Ferry, Jean. 2021. “Climate Policy Is Macroeconomic Policy, 
and the Implications Will Be Significant.” Policy Brief 21-20, 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC.
Schnabel, Isabel. 2022. “A New Age of Energy Inflation: Cli-
mateflation, Fossilflation and Greenflation.” Speech delivered 
at “Monetary Policy and Climate Change” panel, 22nd “The 
ECB and Its Watchers” Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 
March 17. https://​www​.ecb​.europa​.eu/​press/​key/​date/​2022/​
html/​ecb​.sp220317​_2~dbb3582f0a​.en​.html.
South African National Treasury. 2013. “Reducing Green-
house Gas Emissions and Facilitating the Transition to 
a Green Economy.” Carbon Tax Policy Paper, Pretoria. 
http://​www​.treasury​.gov​.za/​public​%20comments/​Carbon​
%20Tax​%20Policy​%20Paper​%202013​.pdf.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and UNEP 
Copenhagen Climate Centre (UNEP-CCC). 2021. Emissions 
Gap Report 2021: The Heat Is On; A World of Climate Promises 
Not Yet Delivered. Nairobi, Kenya.
Wagner, Ulrich, Mirabelle Muûls, Ralf Martin, and Jonathan 
Colmer. 2014. “The Causal Effects of the European Union 
Emissions Trading Scheme: Evidence from French Manufac-
turing Plants.” Paper presented at the IZA Institute of Labor 
Economics workshop “Labor Market Effects of Environmental 
Policies,” Bonn, Germany, September 4–5. https://​conference​
.iza​.org/​conference​_files/​EnvEmpl2014/​martin​_r7617​.pdf.
Walker, W. Reed. 2011. “Environmental Regulation and Labor 
Reallocation: Evidence from the Clean Air Act.” American 
Economic Review 101 (3): 442–47.
Williams III, Roberton C., Hal Gordon, Dallas Burtraw, Jared 
C. Carbone, and Richard D. Morgenstern. 2015. “The Initial 
Incidence of a Carbon Tax across Income Groups.” National 
Tax Journal 68 (1): 195–213. https://​doi​.org/​10​.17310/​ntj​
.2015​.1​.09.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a The-
ory of Monetary Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
World Bank. 2022. “Carbon Pricing Dashboard.” Washington 
DC. https://​carbonpricingdashboard​.worldbank​.org/​map​_data.
Yamazaki, Akio. 2017. “Jobs and Climate Policy: Evidence 
from British Columbia’s Revenue-Neutral Carbon Tax.” 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 83: 
197–216.
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
97
T
he Statistical Appendix presents historical 
data as well as projections. It comprises 
eight sections: Assumptions, What’s New, 
Data and Conventions, Country Notes, 
Classification of Countries, General Features and 
Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook 
Classification, Key Data Documentation, and Statistical 
Tables.
The first section summarizes the assumptions 
underlying the estimates and projections for 2022–23. 
The second section briefly describes the changes to 
the database and statistical tables since the April 2022 
World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section 
offers a general description of the data and the con-
ventions used for calculating country group com-
posites. The fourth section presents key information 
for selected countries. The fifth section summarizes 
the classification of countries in the various groups 
presented in the WEO, and the sixth section explains 
that classification in further detail. The seventh section 
provides information on methods and reporting stan-
dards for the member countries’ national account and 
government finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical 
tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statisti-
cal Appendix B is available online at www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO). 
Data in these tables have been compiled on the 
basis of information available through September 26, 
2022. The figures for 2022–23 are shown with the 
same degree of precision as the historical figures solely 
for convenience; because they are projections, the same 
degree of accuracy is not to be inferred.
Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced econo-
mies are assumed to remain constant at their average 
levels measured during July 22, 2022–August 19, 2022. 
For 2022 and 2023 these assumptions imply aver-
age US dollar–special drawing right conversion rates 
of 1.346 and 1.330, US dollar–euro conversion 
rates1 of 1.057 and 1.025, and yen–US dollar conver-
sion rates of 128.4 and 129.3, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $98.19 
a barrel in 2022 and $85.52 a barrel in 2023.
National authorities’ established policies are assumed 
to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific 
policy assumptions underlying the projections for 
selected economies.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the 
three-month government bond yield for the United States 
will average 1.8 percent in 2022 and 4.0 percent in 
2023, that for the euro area will average –0.2 percent 
in 2022 and 0.8 percent in 2023, and that for Japan 
will average –0.1 percent in 2022 and 0.0 percent in 
2023. Further it is assumed that the 10-year govern-
ment bond yield for the United States will average 
3.2 percent in 2022 and 4.4 percent in 2023, that for 
the euro area will average 0.9 percent in 2022 and 
1.3 percent in 2023, and that for Japan will average 
0.2 percent in 2022 and 0.3 percent in 2023.
What’s New
•	 For Algeria, starting with the October 2022 WEO, 
total government expenditure and net lending/
borrowing include net lending by the government, 
which mostly reflects support to the pension system 
and other public sector entities.
•	 Ecuador’s fiscal sector projections, which were previ-
ously omitted because of ongoing program review 
discussions, are now included.
•	 Tunisia’s forecast data, which were previously 
omitted because of ongoing technical discussions 
pending potential program negotiations, are now 
included.
1 In regard to the introduction of the euro, on December 31, 
1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective 
January 1, 1999, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the 
euro and currencies of the member countries adopting the euro are 
as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO. See that box 
as well for details on how the conversion rates were established. For 
the most recent table of fixed conversion rates, see the Statistical 
Appendix of the October 2020 WEO.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
98	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
•	 Turkey is now referred to as Türkiye.
•	 For Sri Lanka, certain projections for 2023–27 are 
excluded from publication owing to ongoing discus-
sions on sovereign debt restructuring, following the 
recently reached staff-level agreement on an IMF-
supported program.
•	 For Venezuela, following methodological upgrades, 
historical data have been revised from 2012 onward. 
Nominal variables that were omitted from publica-
tion in the April 2022 WEO are now included.
Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 196 economies form the 
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are 
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department 
and regional departments, with the latter regularly 
updating country projections based on consistent 
global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the 
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions, 
international organizations are also involved in statisti-
cal issues, with the objective of harmonizing meth-
odologies for the compilation of national statistics, 
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions, 
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the 
production of economic statistics. The WEO database 
reflects information from both national source agencies 
and international organizations. 
Most countries’ macroeconomic data as presented 
in the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version 
of the System of National Accounts (SNA 2008). The 
IMF’s sector statistical standards—the sixth edition of 
the Balance of Payments and International Investment 
Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Finan-
cial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide, and the 
Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM 
2014)—have been aligned with the SNA 2008. These 
standards reflect the IMF’s special interest in coun-
tries’ external positions, financial sector stability, and 
public sector fiscal positions. The process of adapting 
country data to the new standards begins in earnest 
when the manuals are released. However, full con-
cordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent 
on the provision by national statistical compilers of 
revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are 
only partly adapted to these manuals. Nonetheless, for 
many countries, conversion to the updated standards 
will have only a small impact on major balances and 
aggregates. Many other countries have partly adopted 
the latest standards and will continue implementation 
over a number of years.2 
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the 
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF staff 
estimates. While attempts are made to align gross and 
net debt data with the definitions in the GFSM 2014, as 
a result of data limitations or specific country circum-
stances, these data can sometimes deviate from the for-
mal definitions. Although every effort is made to ensure 
the WEO data are relevant and internationally compara-
ble, differences in both sectoral and instrument coverage 
mean that the data are not universally comparable. As 
more information becomes available, changes in either 
data sources or instrument coverage can give rise to data 
revisions, sometimes substantial ones. For clarification on 
the deviations in sectoral or instrument coverage, please 
refer to the metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are 
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual 
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages 
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates 
of change.3 Arithmetically weighted averages are used 
for all data for the emerging market and developing 
economies group—except data on inflation and money 
growth, for which geometric averages are used. The 
following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, inter-
est rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are 
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market 
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three 
years) as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic 
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted 
by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share 
of total world or group GDP.4 For the aggregation of 
2 Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or the European 
System of National and Regional Accounts 2010, and a few countries 
use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar adoption 
pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer to Table 
G, which lists the statistical standards to which each country adheres.
3 Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and com-
modity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of 
change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based 
on the simple arithmetic average.
4 See Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO for a summary of the 
revised purchasing-power-parity-based weights as well as “Revised Pur-
chasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 WEO Update, Appen-
dix 1.1 of the April 2008 WEO, Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO, Box 
A1 of the May 2000 WEO, and Annex IV of the May 1993 WEO. See 
also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne Schulze-Ghattas, “Purchasing 
Power Parity Based Weights for the World Economic Outlook,” in Staff 
Studies for the World Economic Outlook (Washington, DC: International 
Monetary Fund, December 1993), 106–23.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
99
world and advanced economies (and subgroups) infla-
tion, annual rates are simple percentage changes from 
the previous years; for the aggregation of emerging 
market and developing economies (and subgroups) 
inflation, annual rates are based on logarithmic 
differences. 
Composites for real GDP per capita in purchasing-
power-parity terms are sums of individual country data 
after conversion to the international dollar in the years 
indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors 
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrep-
ancies in intra-area transactions. Unadjusted annual 
GDP data are used for the euro area and for the 
majority of individual countries, except for Cyprus, 
Ireland, Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-
adjusted data. For data prior to 1999, data aggrega-
tions apply 1995 European currency unit exchange 
rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual 
country data after conversion to US dollars at the aver-
age market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment 
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group 
labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are 
sums of individual country data after conversion to 
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the 
years indicated for balance of payments data and at 
end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denomi-
nated in currencies other than US dollars. 
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes 
and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent 
changes for individual countries weighted by the US 
dollar value of exports or imports as a share of total 
world or group exports or imports (in the preceding 
year). 
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are 
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group 
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of 
a few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the 
economies with exceptional reporting periods for 
national accounts and government finance data. 
For some countries, the figures for 2021 and 
earlier are based on estimates rather than actual out-
turns; Table G lists the latest actual outturns for the 
indicators in the national accounts, prices, govern-
ment finance, and balance of payments for each 
country.
Country Notes
For Afghanistan, data and projections for 
2021–27 are omitted because of an unusually 
high degree of uncertainty given that the IMF has 
paused its engagement with the country owing to 
a lack of clarity within the international commu-
nity regarding the recognition of a government in 
Afghanistan.
For Albania, projections were prepared prior to the 
2022 Article IV mission that ended on October 10th 
and thereby do not reflect updates during the mission.
For Algeria, starting with the October 2022 WEO, 
total government expenditure and net lending/borrowing 
include net lending by the government, which mostly 
reflects support to the pension system and other public 
sector entities.
For Argentina, the official national consumer 
price index (CPI) starts in December 2016. For 
earlier periods, CPI data for Argentina reflect the 
Greater Buenos Aires Area CPI (prior to December 
2013), the national CPI (IPCNu, December 2013 
to October 2015), the City of Buenos Aires CPI 
(November 2015 to April 2016), and the Greater 
Buenos Aires Area CPI (May 2016 to December 
2016). Given limited comparability of these series 
on account of differences in geographical coverage, 
weights, sampling, and methodology, the WEO 
does not report average CPI inflation for 2014–16 
and end-of-period inflation for 2015–16. Also, 
Argentina discontinued the publication of labor 
market data starting in the fourth quarter of 2015, 
and new series became available starting in the 
second quarter of 2016. 
Data and forecasts for Bangladesh are presented 
on a fiscal year basis. However, country group 
aggregates that include Bangladesh use calendar year 
estimates of real GDP and purchasing-power-parity 
GDP.
For Costa Rica, the central government definition 
has been expanded as of January 1, 2021, to include 
51 public entities as per Law 9524. Data back to 2019 
are adjusted for comparability.
The fiscal series for the Dominican Republic have 
the following coverage: public debt, debt service, and 
the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the 
consolidated public sector (which includes the central 
government, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector, 
and the central bank); the remaining fiscal series are 
for the central government.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
100	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
For Ecuador, the authorities are undertaking revi-
sions of the historical fiscal data with technical support 
from the IMF.
For Honduras, projections were prepared prior to the 
2022 Article IV mission that ended on October 5th 
and thereby do not reflect updates.
India’s real GDP growth rates are calculated as 
per national accounts: for 1998–2001 with base year 
2004/05 and, thereafter, with base year 2011/12.
For Lebanon, data and projections for 2021–27 are 
omitted owing to an unusually high degree of uncertainty.
Against the backdrop of a civil war and weak capacity, 
the reliability of Libya’s data, especially those regarding 
national accounts and medium-term projections, is low.
The 2022 projections for Pakistan are based on 
information available as of the end of August and do 
not include the impact of the recent floods.
Sierra Leone redenominated its currency on July 1, 
2022; however, local currency data are expressed in the 
old leone for the October 2022 WEO.
For Sri Lanka, certain projections for 2023–27 are 
excluded from publication owing to ongoing discus-
sions on sovereign debt restructuring, following the 
recently reached staff-level agreement on an IMF-
supported program.
Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward 
because of the uncertain political situation.
For Turkmenistan, real GDP data are IMF staff 
estimates compiled in line with international methodolo-
gies (SNA), using official estimates and sources as well as 
United Nations and World Bank databases. Estimates of 
and projections for the fiscal balance exclude receipts from 
domestic bond issuances as well as privatization opera-
tions, in line with GFSM 2014. The authorities’ official 
estimates for fiscal accounts, which are compiled using 
domestic statistical methodologies, include bond issuance 
and privatization proceeds as part of government revenues.
For Ukraine, all projections for 2022–27 except those 
for real GDP and consumer prices are omitted owing to 
an unusually high degree of uncertainty. Real GDP and 
consumer prices are projected through 2022. Revised 
national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 
and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
The projections for the United Kingdom are based 
on information available as of September 12, 2022, 
and do not fully incorporate the fiscal announcement 
on September 23, 2022.
In December 2020 the Uruguay authorities began 
reporting the national accounts data according to SNA 
2008, with the base year 2016. The new series begin 
in 2016. Data prior to 2016 reflect the IMF staff’s best 
effort to preserve previously reported data and avoid 
structural breaks.
Since October 2018 Uruguay’s public pension 
system has been receiving transfers in the context of 
a new law that compensates persons affected by the 
creation of the mixed pension system. These funds are 
recorded as revenues, consistent with the IMF’s meth-
odology. Therefore, data and projections for 2018–22 
are affected by these transfers, which amounted to 
1.2 percent of GDP in 2018, 1.1 percent of GDP in 
2019, 0.6 percent of GDP in 2020, and 0.3 percent 
of GDP in 2021 and are projected to be 0.1 percent 
of GDP in 2022 and 0 percent thereafter. See IMF 
Country Report 19/64 for further details.5 The dis-
claimer about the public pension system applies only 
to the revenues and net lending/borrowing series.
The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was changed 
from consolidated public sector to nonfinancial public 
sector with the October 2019 WEO. In Uruguay, non-
financial public sector coverage includes central govern-
ment, local government, social security funds, nonfinancial 
public corporations, and Banco de Seguros del Estado. 
Historical data were also revised accordingly. Under this 
narrower fiscal perimeter—which excludes the central 
bank—assets and liabilities held by the nonfinancial public 
sector for which the counterpart is the central bank are not 
netted out in debt figures. In this context, capitalization 
bonds issued in the past by the government to the central 
bank are now part of the nonfinancial public sector debt. 
Gross and net debt estimates for 2008–11 are preliminary. 
Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela, includ-
ing assessing past and current economic developments 
used as the basis for the projections, is rendered difficult 
by the lack of discussions with the authorities (the last 
Article IV consultation took place in 2004), incomplete 
metadata of limited reported statistics, and difficul-
ties in reconciling reported indicators with economic 
developments. The fiscal accounts include the budgetary 
central government; social security; FOGADE (insur-
ance deposit institution); and a reduced set of public 
enterprises, including Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. 
(PDVSA). Following some methodological upgrades 
to achieve a more robust nominal GDP, historical data 
and indicators expressed as percentage of GDP have 
been revised from 2012 onward. For most indicators, 
data for 2018–22 are IMF staff estimates. The effects of 
5 Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Coun-
try Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, 
February 2019).
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
101
hyperinflation and the paucity of reported data mean 
that IMF staff’s projected macroeconomic indicators 
need to be interpreted with caution. Wide uncertainty 
surrounds these projections. Venezuela’s consumer prices 
are excluded from all WEO group composites. 
In 2019 Zimbabwe authorities introduced the Real 
Time Gross Settlement dollar, later renamed the 
Zimbabwe dollar, and are in the process of redenomi-
nating their national accounts statistics. Current data 
are subject to revision. The Zimbabwe dollar previously 
ceased circulating in 2009, and during 2009–19, Zim-
babwe operated under a multicurrency regime with the 
US dollar as the unit of account.
Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the 
world into two major groups: advanced economies 
and emerging market and developing economies.6 This 
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic 
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objec-
tive is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably 
meaningful method of organizing data. Table A pro-
vides an overview of the country classification, showing 
the number of countries in each group by region and 
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size 
(GDP valued at purchasing power parity, total exports 
of goods and services, and population). 
Some countries remain outside the country classifica-
tion and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba 
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are 
examples of countries that are not IMF members, and 
the IMF therefore does not monitor their economies.
General Features and Composition of Groups in 
the World Economic Outlook Classification
Advanced Economies
Table B lists the 40 advanced economies. The seven 
largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange 
rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, France, 
Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute 
the subgroup of major advanced economies often 
referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of the 
6 As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always 
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by interna-
tional law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are 
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate 
and independent basis.
euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Com-
posite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover 
the current members for all years, even though the 
membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European 
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced 
economies in the WEO.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing 
economies (156) includes all those that are not classi-
fied as advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and 
developing economies are emerging and developing 
Asia; emerging and developing Europe (sometimes 
also referred to as “central and eastern Europe”); Latin 
America and the Caribbean; Middle East and Central 
Asia (which comprises the regional subgroups Cauca-
sus and Central Asia; and Middle East, North Africa, 
Afghanistan, and Pakistan); and sub-Saharan Africa.
Emerging market and developing economies are also 
classified according to analytical criteria that reflect 
the composition of export earnings and a distinction 
between net creditor and net debtor economies. Tables 
D and E show the detailed composition of emerging 
market and developing economies in the regional and 
analytical groups. 
The analytical criterion source of export earnings dis-
tinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard Inter-
national Trade Classification 3) and nonfuel and then 
focuses on nonfuel primary products (Standard Interna-
tional Trade Classifications 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Econo-
mies are categorized into one of these groups if their 
main source of export earnings exceeded 50 percent of 
total exports on average between 2017 and 2021.
The financial and income criteria focus on net creditor 
economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor coun-
tries (HIPCs), low-income developing countries (LIDCs), 
and emerging market and middle-income economies. Econ-
omies are categorized as net debtors when their latest net 
international investment position, where available, was 
less than zero or their current account balance accumula-
tions from 1972 (or earliest available data) to 2021 were 
negative. Net debtor economies are further differentiated 
on the basis of experience with debt servicing.7 
7 During 2017–21, 37 economies incurred external payments 
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling 
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or 
rescheduling during 2017–21.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
102	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
The HIPC group comprises the countries that 
are or have been considered by the IMF and the 
World Bank for participation in their debt initiative 
known as the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce 
the external debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs 
to a “sustainable” level in a reasonably short period 
of time.8 Many of these countries have already 
8 See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and 
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The 
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).
benefited from debt relief and have graduated from 
the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita 
income levels below a certain threshold (set at $2,700 
in 2016 as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas 
method), structural features consistent with limited 
development and structural transformation, and 
external financial linkages insufficiently close for them 
to be widely seen as emerging market economies.
The emerging market and middle-income economies 
group comprises emerging market and developing 
economies that are not classified as LIDCs.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
103
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods  
and Services, and Population, 20211
(Percent of total for group or world)
GDP
Exports of Goods  
and Services
Population
Number of 
Economies
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced 
Economies
World
Advanced Economies
  40
100.0
42.0
100.0
61.4
100.0
14.0
United States
37.4
15.7
15.0
9.2
30.8
4.3
Euro Area
  19
28.5
12.0
42.3
26.0
31.6
4.4
Germany
7.9
3.3
11.8
7.2
7.7
1.1
France
5.5
2.3
5.4
3.3
6.1
0.9
Italy
4.4
1.9
4.0
2.5
5.5
0.8
Spain
3.2
1.4
2.9
1.8
4.4
0.6
Japan
9.1
3.8
5.4
3.3
11.7
1.6
United Kingdom
5.5
2.3
5.0
3.1
6.3
0.9
Canada
3.3
1.4
3.6
2.2
3.5
0.5
Other Advanced Economies
  17
16.2
6.8
28.7
17.6
16.1
2.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
    7
73.2
30.7
50.2
30.8
71.6
10.0
Emerging and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging and 
Developing 
Economies
World
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
156
100.0
58.0
100.0
38.6
100.0
86.0
Emerging and Developing Asia
  30
55.9
32.5
52.2
20.2
56.0
48.1
China
32.0
18.6
33.1
12.8
21.3
18.4
India
12.0
7.0
6.4
2.5
21.1
18.1
ASEAN-52
    5
9.4
5.5
11.4
4.4
8.8
7.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
  16
13.4
7.8
16.7
6.5
5.7
4.9
Russia
5.3
3.1
5.1
2.0
2.2
1.9
Latin America and the Caribbean
  33
12.6
7.3
12.8
4.9
9.7
8.3
Brazil
4.0
2.3
3.0
1.1
3.2
2.8
Mexico
3.1
1.8
4.9
1.9
1.9
1.7
Middle East and Central Asia
  32
12.8
7.4
14.1
5.5
12.4
10.7
Saudi Arabia
2.1
1.2
2.7
1.0
0.5
0.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
  45
5.4
3.1
4.1
1.6
16.2
14.0
Nigeria
1.4
0.8
0.5
0.2
3.2
2.7
South Africa
1.0
0.6
1.2
0.5
0.9
0.8
Analytical Groups3
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
  26
10.1
5.9
13.7
5.3
9.6
8.2
Nonfuel
128
89.8
52.1
86.2
33.3
90.3
77.7
Of Which, Primary Products 
  37
5.6
3.3
5.6
2.1
9.4
8.0
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies 
122
49.9
28.9
42.8
16.6
67.9
58.4
Net Debtor Countries by Debt-Servicing 
Experience
Countries with Arrears and/or Rescheduling 
during 2017–21
  37
4.8
2.8
3.1
1.2
11.7
10.1
Other Groups3
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
  96
91.7
53.2
93.1
36.0
76.8
66.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
  59
8.3
4.8
6.9
2.7
23.2
19.9
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
  39
2.8
1.6
2.0
0.8
11.8
10.2
1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those 
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
3Syria and West Bank and Gaza are omitted from the source of export earnings, and Syria is omitted from the net external position group composites 
because of insufficient data. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
104	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Greece
The Netherlands
Belgium
Ireland
Portugal
Cyprus
Italy
Slovak Republic
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Finland
Lithuania
Spain 
France
Luxembourg
Germany 
Malta 
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
United States
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Andorra
Israel
San Marino
Australia
Korea
Singapore
Czech Republic
Macao SAR2
Sweden
Denmark
New Zealand
Switzerland
Hong Kong SAR1
Norway
Taiwan Province of China
Iceland
Puerto Rico
1On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special 
Administrative Region of China.
2On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a 
Special Administrative Region of China.
Table C. European Union
Austria
France
Malta
Belgium
Germany
The Netherlands
Bulgaria
Greece
Poland
Croatia
Hungary
Portugal
Cyprus
Ireland
Romania
Czech Republic
Italy
Slovak Republic
Denmark
Latvia
Slovenia
Estonia
Lithuania
Spain 
Finland
Luxembourg
Sweden
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
105
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings1
Fuel
Nonfuel Primary Products
Emerging and Developing Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Kiribati
Timor-Leste
Marshall Islands
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu
Latin America and the Caribbean
Ecuador
Argentina
Trinidad and Tobago
Bolivia
Venezuela
Chile
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Middle East and Central Asia
Algeria
Afghanistan
Azerbaijan
Mauritania
Bahrain
Somalia
Iran
Sudan
Iraq
Tajikistan
Kazakhstan
Uzbekistan
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Chad
Botswana
Republic of Congo
Burkina Faso
Equatorial Guinea
Burundi
Gabon
Central African Republic
Nigeria
Democratic Republic of the Congo
South Sudan
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe
1Emerging and Developing Europe is omitted because no economies in the group have fuel or nonfuel primary products as the main source of export 
earnings.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
106	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
*
*
Bhutan
*
*
Brunei Darussalam
•
•
Cambodia
*
*
China
•
•
Fiji
*
•
India
*
•
Indonesia
*
•
Kiribati
•
*
Lao P.D.R.
*
*
Malaysia
•
•
Maldives
*
•
Marshall Islands
*
•
Micronesia
•
•
Mongolia
*
•
Myanmar
*
*
Nauru
*
•
Nepal
•
*
Palau
*
•
Papua New Guinea
*
*
Philippines
*
•
Samoa
*
•
Solomon Islands
*
*
Sri Lanka
*
•
Thailand
•
•
Timor-Leste
•
*
Tonga
*
•
Tuvalu
•
•
Vanuatu
*
•
Vietnam
*
*
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
*
•
Belarus
*
•
Bosnia and Herzegovina
*
•
Bulgaria
*
•
Croatia
*
•
Hungary
*
•
Kosovo
*
•
Moldova
*
*
Montenegro
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
North Macedonia
*
•
Poland
*
•
Romania
*
•
Russia
•
•
Serbia
*
•
Türkiye
*
•
Ukraine
*
•
Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
*
•
Argentina
•
•
Aruba
*
•
The Bahamas
*
•
Barbados
*
•
Belize
*
•
Bolivia
*
•
•
Brazil
*
•
Chile
*
•
Colombia
*
•
Costa Rica
*
•
Dominica
*
•
Dominican Republic
*
•
Ecuador
*
•
El Salvador
*
•
Grenada
*
•
Guatemala
*
•
Guyana
*
•
•
Haiti
*
•
*
Honduras
*
•
*
Jamaica
*
•
Mexico
*
•
Nicaragua
*
•
*
Panama
*
•
Paraguay
*
•
Peru
*
•
St. Kitts and Nevis
*
•
St. Lucia
*
•
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
*
•
Suriname
*
•
Trinidad and Tobago
•
•
Uruguay
*
•
Venezuela
•
•
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries,  
and per Capita Income Classification 
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
107
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan
•
•
*
Algeria
•
•
Armenia
*
•
Azerbaijan
•
•
Bahrain
•
•
Djibouti
*
*
Egypt
*
•
Georgia
*
•
Iran
•
•
Iraq
•
•
Jordan
*
•
Kazakhstan
*
•
Kuwait
•
•
Kyrgyz Republic
*
*
Lebanon
*
•
Libya
•
•
Mauritania
*
•
*
Morocco
*
•
Oman
*
•
Pakistan
*
•
Qatar
•
•
Saudi Arabia
•
•
Somalia
*
*
*
Sudan
*
*
*
Syria4
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
*
*
Tunisia
*
•
Turkmenistan
•
•
United Arab Emirates
•
•
Uzbekistan
•
*
West Bank and Gaza
*
•
Yemen
*
*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
*
•
Benin
*
•
*
Botswana
•
•
Burkina Faso
*
•
*
Burundi
*
•
*
Cabo Verde
*
•
Net External 
Position1
Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries2
Per Capita  
Income 
Classification3
Cameroon
*
•
*
Central African Republic
*
•
*
Chad
*
•
*
Comoros
*
•
*
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo
*
•
*
Republic of Congo
*
•
*
Côte d’Ivoire
*
•
*
Equatorial Guinea
•
•
Eritrea
•
*
*
Eswatini
•
•
Ethiopia
*
•
*
Gabon
•
•
The Gambia
*
•
*
Ghana
*
•
*
Guinea
*
•
*
Guinea-Bissau
*
•
*
Kenya
*
*
Lesotho
*
*
Liberia
*
•
*
Madagascar
*
•
*
Malawi
*
•
*
Mali
*
•
*
Mauritius
•
•
Mozambique
*
•
*
Namibia
*
•
Niger
*
•
*
Nigeria
*
*
Rwanda
*
•
*
São Tomé and Príncipe
*
•
*
Senegal
*
•
*
Seychelles
*
•
Sierra Leone
*
•
*
South Africa
•
•
South Sudan
* 
*
Tanzania
*
•
*
Togo
*
•
*
Uganda
*
•
*
Zambia
*
•
*
Zimbabwe
*
*
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries,  
and per Capita Income Classification (continued)
1Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
2Dot instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the decision point.
3Dot (star) indicates that the country is classified as an emerging market and middle-income economy (low-income developing country).
4Syria is omitted from the net external position group and per capita income classification group composites for lack of a fully developed database.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
108	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
Government Finance
The Bahamas
Jul/Jun
Bangladesh
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Barbados
Apr/Mar
Bhutan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Botswana
Apr/Mar
Dominica
Jul/Jun
Egypt
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Eswatini
Apr/Mar
Ethiopia
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Fiji
Aug/Jul
Haiti
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Hong Kong SAR
Apr/Mar
India
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Iran
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jamaica
Apr/Mar
Lesotho
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Marshall Islands
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Mauritius
Jul/Jun
Micronesia
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Myanmar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Nauru
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Nepal
Aug/Jul
Aug/Jul
Pakistan
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Palau
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Puerto Rico
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
St. Lucia
Apr/Mar
Samoa
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Singapore
Apr/Mar
Thailand
Oct/Sep
Tonga
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Trinidad and Tobago
Oct/Sep
1Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
109
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Afghanistan
Afghan afghani
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Albania
Albanian lek
IMF staff
2020
1996
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2020
Algeria
Algerian dinar
NSO
2021
2001
SNA 1993
From 2005
NSO
2021
Andorra
Euro
NSO
2021
2010
. . .
NSO
2021
Angola
Angolan kwanza
NSO and MEP
2021
2002
ESA 1995
NSO
2021
Antigua and 
Barbuda
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
CB
2020
20066
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Argentina
Argentine peso
NSO
2020
2004
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Armenia
Armenian dram
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Aruba
Aruban florin
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 1993
From 2000
NSO
2021
Australia
Australian dollar
NSO 
2021
2020
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Austria
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan manat
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
NSO
2021
The Bahamas
Bahamian dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Bahrain
Bahrain dinar
NSO and IMF staff
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Bangladesh
Bangladesh taka
NSO
2021/22
2015/16
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
Barbados
Barbados dollar
NSO and CB
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Belarus
Belarusian ruble
NSO
2020
2018
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2021
Belgium
Euro
CB
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
CB
2021
Belize
Belize dollar
NSO
2020
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Benin
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Bhutan
Bhutanese 
ngultrum
NSO
2020/21
1999/20006
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Bolivia
Bolivian boliviano
NSO
2021
1990
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bosnian convertible 
marka
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2021
Botswana
Botswana pula
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Brazil
Brazilian real
NSO
2021
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Brunei Darussalam
Brunei dollar
MoF
2021
2010
SNA 2008
MoF
2020
Bulgaria
Bulgarian lev
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1996
NSO
2021
Burkina Faso
CFA franc
NSO and MEP
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Burundi
Burundi franc
NSO and IMF staff
2019
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verdean 
escudo
NSO
2020
2007
SNA 2008
From 2011
NSO
2020
Cambodia
Cambodian riel
NSO
2020
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Cameroon
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
From 2016
NSO
2021
Canada
Canadian dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
MoF and NSO
2021
Central African 
Republic
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Chad
CFA franc
CB
2017
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Chile
Chilean peso
CB
2021
20186
SNA 2008
From 2003
NSO
2021
China
Chinese yuan
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Colombia
Colombian peso
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2021
Comoros
Comorian franc
MoF
2019
2007
SNA 1993
From 2007
NSO
2021
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
Congolese franc
NSO
2020
2005
SNA 1993
CB
2020
Republic of Congo
CFA franc
NSO
2019
2005
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Costa Rica
Costa Rican colón
CB
2021
2017
SNA 2008
CB
2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
110	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Afghanistan
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
NSO, MoF, and CB
2020
BPM 6
Albania
IMF staff
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS,MPC, 
NFPC
. . .
CB
2020
BPM 6
Algeria
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Andorra
NSO and MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Angola
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
. . .
CB
2021
BPM 6
Antigua and 
Barbuda
MoF
2020
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Argentina
MEP
2021
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Armenia
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Aruba
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Australia
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,TG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Austria
NSO
2020
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Azerbaijan
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
The Bahamas
MoF
2020/21
2014
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bahrain
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bangladesh
MoF
2020/21
. . .
CG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
Barbados
MoF
2021/22
2001
BCG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Belarus
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Belgium
CB
2021
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Belize
MoF
2021
1986
CG,MPC
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Benin
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bhutan
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
Bolivia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS,NMPC, 
NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Botswana
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Brazil
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Brunei Darussalam
MoF
2021
1986
CG,BCG
C
NSO and MEP
2020
BPM 6
Bulgaria
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Burkina Faso
MoF
2021
2001
CG
CB
CB
2021
BPM 6
Burundi
MoF
2020
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Cabo Verde
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Cambodia
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Cameroon
MoF
2021
2001
CG,NFPC,NMPC
Mixed
MoF
2021
BPM 5
Canada
MoF and NSO
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Central African 
Republic
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 5
Chad
MoF
2021
1986
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2013
BPM 5
Chile
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
China
MoF
2020
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
GAD
2021
BPM 6
Colombia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
. . .
CB and NSO
2021
BPM 6
Comoros
MoF
2020
1986
CG
Mixed
CB and IMF staff
2019
BPM 5
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Republic of Congo
MoF
2021
2001
CG
A
CB
2019
BPM 6
Costa Rica
MoF and CB
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
111
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Côte d'Ivoire
CFA franc
NSO
2019
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Croatia
Croatian kuna
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
Cyprus
Euro
NSO
2021
2010
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Czech Republic
Czech koruna
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Denmark
Danish krone
NSO
2021
2010
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Djibouti
Djibouti franc
NSO
2020
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Dominica
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Dominican Republic
Dominican peso
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
From 2007
CB
2021
Ecuador
US dollar
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
NSO and CB
2021
Egypt
Egyptian pound
MEP
2020/21
2016/17
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
El Salvador
US dollar
CB
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Equatorial Guinea
CFA franc
MEP and CB
2021
2006
SNA 1993
MEP
2021
Eritrea
Eritrean nakfa
IMF staff
2019
2011
SNA 1993
NSO
2018
Estonia
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2021
Eswatini
Swazi lilangeni
NSO
2020
2011
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Ethiopia
Ethiopian birr
NSO
2020/21
2015/16
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Fiji
Fijian dollar
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Finland
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
France
Euro
NSO
2021
2014
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Gabon
CFA franc
MoF
2021
2001
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
The Gambia
Gambian dalasi
NSO
2020
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Georgia
Georgian lari
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1996
NSO
2021
Germany
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1991
NSO
2021
Ghana
Ghanaian cedi
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Greece
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Grenada
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2021
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Guatemala
Guatemalan 
quetzal
CB
2021
2013
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2021
Guinea
Guinean franc
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Guinea-Bissau
CFA franc
NSO
2018
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Guyana
Guyanese dollar
NSO
2021
20126
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Haiti
Haitian gourde
NSO
2020/21
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Honduras
Honduran lempira
CB
2021
2000
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong dollar
NSO
2021
2020
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Hungary
Hungarian forint
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
IEO
2021
Iceland
Icelandic króna
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1990
NSO
2020
India
Indian rupee
NSO
2021/22
2011/12
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
Indonesia
Indonesian rupiah
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Iran
Iranian rial
CB
2021/22
2016/17
SNA 2008
CB
2021/22
Iraq
Iraqi dinar 
NSO
2021
2007
. . .
NSO
2021
Ireland
Euro
NSO
2021
2020
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Israel
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2021
Italy
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Jamaica
Jamaican dollar
NSO
2020
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
112	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Côte d'Ivoire
MoF
2020
1986
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Croatia
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Cyprus
NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Czech Republic
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Denmark
NSO
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Djibouti
MoF
2021
2001
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 5
Dominica
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Dominican Republic
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ecuador
CB and MoF
2021
1986
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Egypt
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
El Salvador
MoF and CB
2021
1986
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Equatorial Guinea
MoF and MEP
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2017
BPM 5
Eritrea
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2018
BPM 5
Estonia
MoF
2021
1986/2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Eswatini
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ethiopia
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
Fiji
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Finland
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
France
NSO
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Gabon
IMF staff
2021
2001
CG
A
CB
2019
BPM 5
The Gambia
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2020
BPM 6
Georgia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Germany
NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ghana
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Greece
NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Grenada
MoF
2020
2014
CG
CB
CB
2020
BPM 6
Guatemala
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Guinea
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB and MEP
2021
BPM 6
Guinea-Bissau
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Guyana
MoF
2021
1986
CG,SS,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Haiti
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
Honduras
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS,other
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Hong Kong SAR
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Hungary
MEP and NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Iceland
NSO
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
India
MoF and IMF staff
2019/20
1986
CG,SG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
Indonesia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Iran
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 5
Iraq
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ireland
MoF and NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Israel
MoF and NSO
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
. . .
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Italy
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Jamaica
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
113
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Japan
Japanese yen
GAD
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1980
GAD
2021
Jordan
Jordanian dinar
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Kazakhstan
Kazakhstani tenge
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 1994
CB
2021
Kenya
Kenyan shilling
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Kiribati
Australian dollar
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 2008
IMF staff
2020
Korea
South Korean won
CB
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Kosovo
Euro
NSO
2021
2016
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
Kuwait
Kuwaiti dinar
MEP and NSO
2020
2010
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2021
Kyrgyz Republic
Kyrgyz som
NSO
2021
2005
SNA 1993
From 2010
NSO
2021
Lao P.D.R.
Lao kip
NSO
2020
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Latvia
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Lebanon
Lebanese pound
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2021
Lesotho
Lesotho loti
NSO
2020/21
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Liberia
US dollar
IMF staff
2016
2018
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Libya
Libyan dinar
MEP
2021
2013
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Lithuania
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2005
NSO
2021
Luxembourg
Euro
NSO
2020
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2020
Macao SAR
Macanese pataca
NSO
2021
2020
SNA 2008
From 2001
NSO
2021
Madagascar
Malagasy ariary
NSO
2018
2007
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Malawi
Malawian kwacha
NSO
2020
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Malaysia
Malaysian ringgit
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Maldives
Maldivian rufiyaa
MoF and NSO
2020
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Mali
CFA franc
NSO
2020
1999
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Malta
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2021
Marshall Islands
US dollar
NSO
2020/21
2014/15
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Mauritania
New Mauritanian 
ouguiya
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
From 2014
NSO
2021
Mauritius
Mauritian rupee
NSO
2021
2006
SNA 2008
From 1999
NSO
2021
Mexico
Mexican peso
NSO
2021
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Micronesia
US dollar
NSO
2017/18
2003/04
SNA 2008
NSO
2019/20
Moldova
Moldovan leu
NSO
2021
1995
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Mongolia
Mongolian tögrög
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Montenegro
Euro
NSO
2021
2006
ESA 2010
NSO
2020
Morocco
Moroccan dirham
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2021
Mozambique
Mozambican metical
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Myanmar
Myanmar kyat
MEP
2019/20
2015/16
. . .
NSO
2020/21
Namibia
Namibian dollar
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Nauru
Australian dollar
IMF staff
2018/19
2006/07
SNA 2008
NSO and IMF 
staff
2019/20
Nepal
Nepalese rupee
NSO
2019/20
2000/01
SNA 1993
CB
2020/21
The Netherlands
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
New Zealand
New Zealand dollar
NSO
2021
20096
SNA 2008
From 1987
NSO and IMF 
staff
2021
Nicaragua
Nicaraguan 
córdoba
CB
2021
2006
SNA 2008
From 1994
CB
2020
Niger
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
Nigeria
Nigerian naira
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2020
North Macedonia
Macedonian denar
NSO
2021
2005
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
Norway
Norwegian krone
NSO
2021
2019
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
114	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Japan
GAD
2020
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
MoF
2021
BPM 6
Jordan
MoF
2020
2001
CG,NFPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Kazakhstan
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kenya
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kiribati
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
NSO and IMF staff
2020
BPM 6
Korea
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kosovo
MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Kuwait
MoF
2020
2014
CG,SS
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
Kyrgyz Republic
MoF
2021
. . .
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Lao P.D.R.
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Latvia
MoF
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Lebanon
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2021
BPM 5
Lesotho
MoF
2021/22
2001
CG,LG
C
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
Liberia
MoF
2020
2001
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 5
Libya
CB
2021
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020
BPM 5
Lithuania
MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Luxembourg
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Macao SAR
MoF
2020
2014
CG,SS
C
NSO
2020
BPM 6
Madagascar
MoF
2021
1986
CG
CB
CB
2021
BPM 6
Malawi
MoF
2021
2014
CG
C
NSO and GAD
2020
BPM 6
Malaysia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Maldives
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Mali
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Malta
NSO
2021
2001
CG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Marshall Islands
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2020/21
BPM 6
Mauritania
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Mauritius
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,LG,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Mexico
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Micronesia
MoF
2017/18
2001
CG,SG
. . .
NSO
2017/18
BPM 6
Moldova
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Mongolia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Montenegro
MoF
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Morocco
MEP
2021
2001
CG
A
GAD
2021
BPM 6
Mozambique
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Myanmar
MoF
2019/20
2014
CG,NFPC
C
IMF staff
2020/21
BPM 6
Namibia
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Nauru
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2019/20
BPM 6
Nepal
MoF
2019/20
2001
CG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 5
The Netherlands
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
New Zealand
NSO
2020
2014
CG,LG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Nicaragua
MoF
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
IMF staff
2020
BPM 6
Niger
MoF
2021
1986
CG
A
CB
2020
BPM 6
Nigeria
MoF
2020
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
North Macedonia
MoF
2021
1986
CG,SG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Norway
NSO and MoF
2021
2014
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
115
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Oman
Omani rial
NSO
2021
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Pakistan
Pakistan rupee
NSO
2020/21
2015/166
SNA 2008
NSO
2020/21
Palau
US dollar
MoF
2020/21
2018/19
SNA 1993
MoF
2020/21
Panama
US dollar
NSO
2021
2007
SNA 1993
From 2007
NSO
2021
Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea 
kina
NSO and MoF
2019
2013
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Paraguay
Paraguayan 
guaraní
CB
2020
2014
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Peru
Peruvian sol
CB
2021
2007
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Philippines
Philippine peso
NSO
2021
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Poland
Polish złoty
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2015
NSO
2021
Portugal
Euro
NSO
2021
2016
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Puerto Rico
US dollar
NSO
2019/20
1954
. . .
NSO
2021
Qatar
Qatari riyal
NSO and MEP
2020
2018
SNA 1993
NSO and MEP
2020
Romania
Romanian leu
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2021
Russia
Russian ruble
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
From 1995
NSO
2021
Rwanda
Rwandan franc
NSO
2021
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Samoa
Samoan taˉlaˉ
NSO
2020/21
2012/13
SNA 2008
NSO
2021/22
San Marino
Euro
NSO
2020
2007
ESA 2010
NSO
2021
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
São Tomé and 
Príncipe dobra
NSO
2020
2008
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Saudi Arabia
Saudi riyal
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Senegal
CFA franc
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Serbia
Serbian dinar
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 2010
NSO
2021
Seychelles
Seychelles rupee
NSO
2021
2014
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Sierra Leone
Sierra Leonean 
leone
NSO
2021
2006
SNA 2008
From 2010
NSO
2021
Singapore
Singapore dollar
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
From 2015
NSO
2021
Slovak Republic
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1997
NSO
2021
Slovenia
Euro
NSO
2021
2010
ESA 2010
From 2000
NSO
2021
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands 
dollar
CB
2020
2012
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Somalia
US dollar
NSO
2021
2017
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
South Africa
South African rand
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
South Sudan
South Sudanese 
pound
NSO and IMF 
staff
2018
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Spain
Euro
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1995
NSO
2021
Sri Lanka
Sri Lankan rupee
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
St. Kitts and Nevis
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
St. Lucia
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2021
2018
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
Eastern Caribbean 
dollar
NSO
2020
2018
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Sudan
Sudanese pound
NSO
2019
1982
. . .
NSO
2021
Suriname
Surinamese dollar
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
116	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Oman
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Pakistan
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2020/21
BPM 6
Palau
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
. . .
MoF
2020/21
BPM 6
Panama
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Papua New Guinea
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Paraguay
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Peru
CB and MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
Philippines
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Poland
MoF and NSO
2021
ESA 2010
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Portugal
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Puerto Rico
MEP
2019/20
2001
. . .
A
. . .
. . .
. . .
Qatar
MoF
2021
1986
CG,other
C
CB and IMF staff
2021
BPM 5
Romania
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Russia
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Rwanda
MoF
2021
2014
CG
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 6
Samoa
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG
A
CB
2021/22
BPM 6
San Marino
MoF
2020
. . .
CG
. . .
Other
2020
BPM 6
São Tomé and 
Príncipe
MoF and Customs
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Saudi Arabia
MoF
2021
2014
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Senegal
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB and IMF staff
2020
BPM 6
Serbia
MoF
2021
1986/2001
CG,SG,LG,SS,other
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Seychelles
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Sierra Leone
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Singapore
MoF and NSO
2021/22
2014
CG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Slovak Republic
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Slovenia
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Solomon Islands
MoF
2020
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Somalia
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
South Africa
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,SS,other
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
South Sudan
MoF and MEP
2019
. . .
CG
C
MoF, NSO, MEP, and 
IMF staff
2018
BPM 6
Spain
MoF and NSO
2020
ESA 2010
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Sri Lanka
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
St. Kitts and Nevis
MoF
2020
1986
CG,SG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
St. Lucia
MoF
2021/22
1986
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Sudan
MoF
2019
2001
CG
Mixed
CB
2019
BPM 6
Suriname
MoF
2021
1986
CG
Mixed
CB
2020
BPM 6
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
117
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Currency
National Accounts
Prices (CPI)
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Base Year2
System of 
National 
Accounts
Use of Chain-
Weighted 
Methodology3
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Sweden
Swedish krona
NSO
2021
2021
ESA 2010
From 1993
NSO
2021
Switzerland
Swiss franc
NSO
2021
2015
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
Syria
Syrian pound
NSO
2010
2000
SNA 1993
NSO
2011
Taiwan Province of 
China
New Taiwan dollar
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Tajikistan
Tajik somoni
NSO
2020
1995
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
Tanzania
Tanzanian shilling
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Thailand
Thai baht
MEP
2021
2002
SNA 1993
From 1993
MEP
2021
Timor-Leste
US dollar
NSO
2020
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Togo
CFA franc
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Tonga
Tongan pa’anga
CB
2020/21
2016/17
SNA 2008
CB
2020/21
Trinidad and Tobago
Trinidad and 
Tobago dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Tunisia
Tunisian dinar
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 1993
From 2009
NSO
2021
Türkiye
Turkish lira
NSO
2021
2009
ESA 2010
From 2009
NSO
2021
Turkmenistan
New Turkmen 
manat
IMF staff
2020
2006
SNA 2008
From 2007
NSO
2021
Tuvalu
Australian dollar
PFTAC advisors
2019
2016
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Uganda
Ugandan shilling
NSO
2021
2016
SNA 2008
CB
2021
Ukraine
Ukrainian hryvnia
NSO
2020
2016
SNA 2008
From 2005
NSO
2021
United Arab 
Emirates
U.A.E. dirham
NSO
2020
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
United Kingdom
British pound
NSO
2020
2019
ESA 2010
From 1980
NSO
2021
United States
US dollar
NSO
2021
2012
SNA 2008
From 1980
NSO
2021
Uruguay
Uruguayan peso
CB
2020
2016
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Uzbekistan
Uzbek som
NSO
2021
2020
SNA 1993
NSO and IMF 
staff
2021
Vanuatu
Vanuatu vatu
NSO
2019
2006
SNA 1993
NSO
2020
Venezuela
Venezuelan bolívar 
digital
CB
2018
1997
SNA 1993
CB
2021
Vietnam
Vietnamese dong
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 1993
NSO
2021
West Bank and Gaza
Israeli new shekel
NSO
2021
2015
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Yemen
Yemeni rial
IMF staff
2020
1990
SNA 1993
NSO, CB, and 
IMF staff
2020
Zambia
Zambian kwacha
NSO
2021
2010
SNA 2008
NSO
2021
Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe dollar
NSO
2019
2012
SNA 2008
NSO
2019
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
118	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Country
Government Finance
Balance of Payments
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Subsectors 
Coverage4
Accounting 
Practice5
Historical Data 
Source1
Latest Actual 
Annual Data
Statistics 
Manual in 
Use at Source
Sweden
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG,SS
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Switzerland
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Syria
MoF
2009
1986
CG
C
CB
2009
BPM 5
Taiwan Province of 
China
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Tajikistan
MoF
2020
1986
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Tanzania
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Thailand
MoF
2020/21
2001
CG,BCG,LG,SS
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Timor-Leste
MoF
2019
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Togo
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Tonga
MoF
2020/21
2014
CG
C
CB and NSO
2020/21
BPM 6
Trinidad and Tobago
MoF
2020/21
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Tunisia
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
Türkiye
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS,other
A
CB
2021
BPM 6
Turkmenistan
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG
C
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Tuvalu
MoF
2019
…
CG
Mixed
IMF staff
2019
BPM 6
Uganda
MoF
2021
2001
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Ukraine
MoF
2021
2001
CG,LG,SS
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
United Arab 
Emirates
MoF
2021
2001
CG,BCG,SG,SS
Mixed
CB
2021
BPM 5
United Kingdom
NSO
2021
2001
CG,LG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
United States
MEP
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG
A
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Uruguay
MoF
2021
1986
CG,LG,SS,NFPC, 
NMPC
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Uzbekistan
MoF
2021
2014
CG,SG,LG,SS
C
CB and MEP
2021
BPM 6
Vanuatu
MoF
2020
2001
CG
C
CB
2020
BPM 6
Venezuela
MoF
2017
2001
BCG,NFPC,SS,other
C
CB
2018
BPM 6
Vietnam
MoF
2021
2001
CG,SG,LG
C
CB
2021
BPM 5
West Bank and Gaza
MoF
2021
2001
CG
Mixed
NSO
2021
BPM 6
Yemen
MoF
2020
2001
CG,LG
C
IMF staff
2020
BPM 5
Zambia
MoF
2021
1986
CG
C
CB
2021
BPM 6
Zimbabwe
MoF
2019
1986
CG
C
CB and MoF
2020
BPM 6
Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National Accounts; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = central bank; Customs = Customs Authority; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = international economic organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, 
Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to 
calculate the index. 
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers 
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4BCG = budgetary central government; CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public 
corporation; NMPC = nonmonetary financial public corporation; SG = state government; SS = social security fund; TG = territorial governments.
5Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitment basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.
6Base year deflator is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
119
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in 
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally 
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for 
differences between the national authorities and the 
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions 
and projected fiscal outturns. When no official bud-
get has been announced, projections incorporate 
policy measures judged likely to be implemented. 
The medium-term fiscal projections are similarly 
based on a judgment about policies’ most likely 
path. For cases in which the IMF staff has insuf-
ficient information to assess the authorities’ budget 
intentions and prospects for policy implementation, 
an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed 
unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions 
used in regard to some of the advanced economies 
follow. (See also Tables B5–B9 in the online section 
of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net 
lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the 
available information regarding budget outturn, 
budget plans, and IMF-supported program targets 
for the federal government; on fiscal measures 
announced by the authorities; and on IMF staff 
macroeconomic projections. 
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on data 
from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the fis-
cal year FY2022/23 budget published by the 
Commonwealth government in March 2022, the 
FY2022/23 budget published by the respective 
1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a 
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed 
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the 
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output 
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors, 
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition 
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include 
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in 
interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluc-
tuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of struc-
tural balances are based on the IMF staff’s estimates of potential 
GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of 
the October 1993 WEO.) Estimates of the output gap and of 
the structural balance are subject to significant margins of uncer-
tainty. Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus financial assets 
corresponding to debt instruments.
state/territory governments (as of August 30, 2022), 
and the IMF staff’s estimates and projections.
Austria: Fiscal projections are based on the 2022 
budget, the Austrian Stability Programme, Austria’s 
National Reform Programme, the NextGeneration 
European Union recovery funds, and the latest 
announcement on fiscal measures.
Belgium: Projections are based on the Belgian 
Stability Program 2022–25, the 2022 Budget-
ary Plan, and other available information on the 
authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the 
IMF staff’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections for 2022 reflect the lat-
est policy announcements.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts 
from the Government of Canada’s Budget 2022 and 
the latest provincial budgets. The IMF staff makes 
some adjustments to these forecasts, including 
those for differences in macroeconomic projec-
tions. The IMF staff’s forecast also incorporates the 
most recent data releases from Statistics Canada’s 
National Economic Accounts, including quar-
terly federal, provincial, and territorial budgetary 
outturns.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’ 
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF 
staff’s projections for GDP, copper prices, deprecia-
tion, and inflation. 
China: After a significant fiscal tightening in 
2021, fiscal policy is projected to loosen consider-
ably in 2022 based on the annual budget document 
released in March, subsequent announcements of 
additional fiscal support for the economy, and the 
fiscal outturn for the first seven months of 2022.
Denmark: Estimates for the current year are 
aligned with the latest official budget numbers, 
adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff’s 
macroeconomic assumptions. Beyond the current 
year, the projections incorporate key features of 
the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the 
authorities’ latest budget. Structural balances are 
net of temporary fluctuations in some revenues 
(for example, North Sea revenue, pension yield tax 
revenue) and one-offs (COVID-19–related one-offs 
are, however, included).
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
120	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
France: Projections for 2022 onward are based 
on the 2018–22 budget laws, Stability Program 
2022–27, and other available information on the 
authorities’ fiscal plans, adjusted for differences in 
revenue projections and assumptions on macroeco-
nomic and financial variables.
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2022 
and beyond are based on the 2022 budget, the 
2022 Stability Programme, the draft 2023 fed-
eral budget, the federal government’s medium-
term budget plan, and the data updates from the 
national statistical agency (Destatis) and the minis-
try of finance, adjusted for differences in the IMF 
staff’s macroeconomic framework and assumptions 
concerning revenue elasticities.
Greece: Data since 2010 reflect adjustments in 
line with the primary balance definition under the 
enhanced surveillance framework for Greece.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projec-
tions are based on the authorities’ medium-term 
fiscal projections for expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF staff’s 
projections for the macroeconomic framework and 
fiscal policy plans announced in the 2022 budget.
India: Projections are based on available informa-
tion on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions. Subnational 
data are incorporated with a lag of up to one year; 
general government data are thus finalized well after 
central government data. IMF and Indian presenta-
tions differ, particularly regarding disinvestment and 
license-auction proceeds, net versus gross recording 
of revenues in certain minor categories, and some 
public sector lending. Starting with FY2020/21 data, 
expenditure also includes the off-budget compo-
nent of food subsidies, consistent with the revised 
treatment of food subsidies in the budget. The IMF 
staff adjusts expenditure to take out payments for 
previous years’ food subsidies, which are included as 
expenditure in budget estimates for FY2020/21.
Indonesia: The IMF staff’s projections are based 
on moderate tax policy and administration reforms, 
some expenditure realization, and a gradual increase 
in capital spending over the medium term in line 
with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the coun-
try’s Budget 2022. 
Israel: Projections assume spending will be below 
budget in 2022 given current trends but also assume 
more modest spending cuts over the medium term 
relative to the authorities’ medium-term framework.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the fiscal plans included in the 
government’s 2022 budget and amendments. The 
stock of maturing postal bonds is included in the 
debt projections.
Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures the 
government has already announced, with adjust-
ments for the IMF staff’s assumptions.
Korea: The forecast incorporates the overall fiscal 
balance in the 2022 annual budget and two supple-
mentary budgets, the medium-term fiscal plan 
announced with the 2022 budget, and the IMF 
staff’s adjustments.
Mexico: The 2020 public sector borrowing 
requirements estimated by the IMF staff adjust for 
some statistical discrepancies between above-the-
line and below-the-line numbers. Fiscal projections 
for 2022 and 2023 are informed by the estimates 
in Criterios 2023; projections for 2024 onward 
assume continued compliance with rules established 
in the Fiscal Responsibility Law.
The Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2022–27 
are based on the IMF staff’s forecast framework and 
are also informed by the authorities’ draft budget 
plan and Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
projections.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the 
FY2022/23 budget (May 2022) and the IMF staff’s 
estimates. 
Portugal: The projections for the current year are 
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted 
to reflect the IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast. 
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption 
of unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are informed by 
the Certified Fiscal Plan for the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, which was prepared in January 2022, 
certified by the Financial Oversight & Management 
Board.
Box A1 (continued)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
121
Russia: The fiscal rule has been suspended by 
the government in response to the sanctions 
imposed after the invasion of Ukraine. The projec-
tion assumes an increase in discretionary spending 
by the amount that would otherwise have been 
saved according to the fiscal rule, some borrow-
ing, and a decline in revenues due to the projected 
recession.
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff’s baseline fiscal 
projections are primarily based on its understand-
ing of government policies as outlined in the 2022 
budget. Export oil revenues are based on WEO 
baseline oil price assumptions and the IMF staff’s 
understanding of current oil policy under the 
OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC 
oil exporters) agreement.
Singapore: FY2020 figures are based on budget 
execution. FY2021 projections are based on 
revised figures based on budget execution through 
the end of 2021. FY2022 projections are based 
on the initial budget of February 18, 2022. The 
IMF staff assumes gradual withdrawal of the 
remaining pandemic-related measures and the 
implementation of various revenue measures 
announced in the FY2022 budget for the remain-
der of the projection period. These include (1) an 
increase in the Goods and Services Tax from 
7 percent to 8 percent on January 1, 2023, and 
to 9 percent on January 1, 2024; (2) an increase 
in property taxes in 2023 for non–owner-occupied 
properties (from 10–20 percent to 12–36 percent) 
and for owner-occupied properties with an annual 
value in excess of $30,000 (from 4–16 percent to 
6–32 percent); and (3) an increase of the carbon 
tax from S$5 per tonne to S$25 per tonne in 
2024 and 2025 and S$45 per tonne in 2026 
and 2027.
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions draw on the 
2022 budget. Nontax revenue excludes transactions 
in financial assets and liabilities, as they involve 
primarily revenues associated with realized exchange 
rate valuation gains from the holding of foreign 
currency deposits, sale of assets, and conceptually 
similar items.
Spain: Fiscal projections for 2022 include 
COVID-19– and energy-related support measures, 
a legislated increase in pensions, and legislated 
revenue measures. Fiscal projections from 2023 
onward assume no policy changes. Projections 
for 2021–24 reflect disbursements under the 
EU Recovery and Resilience Facility.
Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2021 and 2022 
are based on the authorities’ Spring Fiscal Policy 
Bill and the Spring Amending Budget for 2022 
and have been updated with the authorities’ latest 
interim forecast. The impact of cyclical develop-
ments on the fiscal accounts is calculated using the 
2014 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development elasticity2 to take into account output 
and employment gaps.
Switzerland: The authorities’ announced discre-
tionary stimulus—as reflected in the fiscal projec-
tions for 2022—is permitted within the context 
of the debt brake rule in the event of “exceptional 
circumstances.”
Türkiye: The basis for the projections is the IMF-
defined fiscal balance, which excludes some revenue 
and expenditure items that are included in the 
authorities’ headline balance. 
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based 
on the latest GDP data published by the Office of 
National Statistics on August 12, 2022, and the 
forecasts by the Office for Budget Responsibility 
from March 23, 2022. Revenue projections are 
adjusted for differences between the IMF staff’s 
forecasts for macroeconomic variables (such as 
GDP growth and inflation) and the forecasts for 
these variables assumed in the authorities’ fis-
cal projections. Projections assume some addi-
tional fiscal consolidation relative to the policies 
announced to date starting in FY2023/24 with 
the goal of complying with the new fiscal rules 
announced at the time of the Autumn Budget 
and Spending Review on October 27, 2021, and 
2 Robert W. R. Price, Thai-Thanh Dang, and Yvan 
­Guillemette, “New Tax and Expenditure Elasticity Estimates 
for EU Budget Surveillance,” OECD Economics Department 
­Working Paper 1174, Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, Paris, 2014.
Box A1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
122	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
securing public debt sustainability. The IMF staff’s 
data exclude public sector banks and the effect of 
transferring assets from the Royal Mail Pension 
Plan to the public sector in April 2012. Real gov-
ernment consumption and investment are part of 
the real GDP path, which, according to the IMF 
staff, may or may not be the same as projected 
by the Office for Budget Responsibility. Data are 
presented on a calendar year basis.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the 
July 2022 Congressional Budget Office baseline, 
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeco-
nomic assumptions. Projections incorporate the 
effects of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and 
the Inflation Reduction Act. Fiscal projections are 
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s forecasts for key 
macroeconomic and financial variables and differ-
ent accounting treatment of financial sector support 
and of defined-benefit pension plans and are con-
verted to a general government basis.
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the 
established policy framework in each country. In 
most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative stance 
over the business cycle: official interest rates will 
increase when economic indicators suggest that 
inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or range; 
they will decrease when indicators suggest inflation 
will not exceed the acceptable rate or range, that 
output growth is below its potential rate, and 
that the margin of slack in the economy is signifi-
cant. With regard to interest rates, please refer to 
the Assumptions section at the beginning of the 
Statistical Appendix.
Argentina: Monetary projections are consistent 
with the overall macroeconomic framework, the 
fiscal and financing plans, and the monetary and 
foreign exchange policies under the crawling-peg 
regime.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the IMF staff’s analysis and the expected infla-
tion path.
Austria: Monetary growth projections are in 
proportion to nominal GDP growth.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with the convergence of inflation toward the 
middle of the target range by the end of 2024.
Canada: Projections reflect monetary policy 
tightening by the Bank of Canada and increased 
long-term yields, in response to inflation signifi-
cantly overshooting its target. It is expected that the 
Bank of Canada will continue to increase its key 
policy rate during 2022 and 2023. The economy 
is in excess demand, and the policy tightening is 
appropriate despite the worsening medium-term 
outlook.
Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with attaining the inflation target.
China: The overall monetary policy stance was 
moderately tight in 2021, but it is expected to be 
moderately accommodative in 2022.
Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg 
to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro 
area member countries are in line with market 
expectations.
Greece: Broad money projections are based on 
monetary financial institution balance sheets and 
deposit flow assumptions.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The 
IMF staff assumes that the currency board system 
will remain intact.
India: Monetary policy projections are consis-
tent with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s 
inflation target over the medium term, despite a 
recent uptick in inflation that exceeded the upper 
target band.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in 
line with inflation within the central bank’s target 
band over the medium term.
Israel: Monetary policy assumptions are based on 
gradual normalization of monetary policy.
Italy: The IMF staff’s estimates and projections 
are informed by the actual outturn from and 
policy plans by the Bank of Italy and the European 
Central Bank’s monetary policy stance forecast from 
the IMF’s euro area team. 
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line 
with market expectations.
Box A1 (continued)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
123
Korea: Projections assume that the policy rate 
evolves in line with market expectations.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consis-
tent with attaining the inflation target.
The Netherlands: Monetary projections are based 
on the IMF staff’s estimated six-month euro Lon-
don interbank offered rate projections.
New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on 
the IMF staff’s analysis and expected inflation path.
Portugal: Monetary policy assumptions are based 
on the IMF staff’s spreadsheets, given input projec-
tions for the real and fiscal sectors.
Russia: Monetary projections assume that the 
Central Bank of the Russian Federation is adopting 
a tight monetary policy stance. The IMF staff team 
regards this as the right policy stance given the hike 
in inflation. 
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are 
based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg 
to the US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in 
line with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are 
consistent with maintaining inflation within the 
3–6 percent target band in the medium term.
Spain: Monetary growth projections are in pro-
portion to nominal GDP growth.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with 
Riksbank projections.
Switzerland: Projections assume no change in the 
policy rate in 2022–23.
Türkiye: The baseline assumes that the mon-
etary policy stance remains in line with market 
expectations.
United Kingdom: The short-term interest rate 
path is based on market interest rate expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal 
Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the 
federal funds target rate in line with the broader 
macroeconomic outlook.
Box A1 (continued)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
124	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
List of Tables1
Output
A1.	 Summary of World Output
A2.	 Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3.	 Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
A4.	 Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Inflation
A5. Summary of Inflation
A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Financial Policies
A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt
Foreign Trade
A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
1 When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
125
Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
World
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.8
3.6
2.8
–3.0
6.0
3.2
2.7
3.2
Advanced Economies
1.6
2.0
2.3
1.8
2.5
2.3
1.7
–4.4
5.2
2.4
1.1
1.7
United States
1.8
2.3
2.7
1.7
2.3
2.9
2.3
–3.4
5.7
1.6
1.0
1.9
Euro Area
0.9
1.4
2.0
1.9
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.1
5.2
3.1
0.5
1.5
Japan
0.7
0.3
1.6
0.8
1.7
0.6
–0.4
–4.6
1.7
1.7
1.6
0.4
Other Advanced Economies2
2.7
3.0
2.2
2.3
2.9
2.5
1.9
–3.8
5.7
3.1
1.8
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.4
4.7
4.3
4.4
4.8
4.6
3.6
–1.9
6.6
3.7
3.7
4.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.5
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.6
6.4
5.2
–0.6
7.2
4.4
4.9
5.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.3
1.8
1.0
1.9
4.1
3.4
2.5
–1.7
6.8
0.0
0.6
2.2
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.0
1.3
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.2
–7.0
6.9
3.5
1.7
2.4
Middle East and Central Asia
5.0
3.4
3.0
4.2
2.6
2.6
1.7
–2.7
4.5
5.0
3.6
3.7
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.6
5.0
3.2
1.5
3.0
3.3
3.2
–1.6
4.7
3.6
3.7
4.4
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.4
3.1
1.4
1.6
0.5
0.7
–0.1
–4.3
4.1
4.5
3.5
2.8
Nonfuel
6.6
5.0
4.7
4.8
5.3
5.1
4.0
–1.6
6.9
3.6
3.8
4.4
Of Which, Primary Products
4.8
2.2
2.9
1.9
2.9
1.9
1.2
–5.2
8.0
3.5
2.7
3.3
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
5.4
4.5
4.2
4.1
4.8
4.5
3.3
–3.5
6.4
4.6
3.9
4.6
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
4.6
3.1
2.1
3.4
4.0
3.7
3.6
–0.8
3.4
0.9
4.2
5.4
Other Groups
European Union
1.2
1.7
2.5
2.1
3.0
2.2
2.0
–5.6
5.4
3.2
0.7
1.7
Middle East and North Africa
4.7
3.2
2.9
4.6
2.1
2.0
1.0
–3.1
4.1
5.0
3.6
3.6
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
6.4
4.6
4.3
4.5
4.8
4.6
3.5
–2.2
6.8
3.6
3.6
4.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
6.1
6.1
4.8
3.9
4.9
5.1
4.9
1.1
4.1
4.8
4.9
5.7
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
1.9
2.3
2.2
2.2
3.0
2.8
2.0
–4.2
5.3
3.1
1.5
1.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.8
3.3
3.4
3.7
3.5
3.1
–3.5
4.3
3.7
3.5
3.5
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
4.1
3.4
3.0
3.0
2.9
2.9
2.4
–5.9
4.7
3.7
3.3
3.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
5.3
5.0
4.3
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.5
–0.5
3.7
3.7
4.4
5.0
Output per Capita3
Advanced Economies
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.3
2.0
1.8
1.3
–4.9
5.1
2.2
0.9
1.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.7
3.2
2.8
2.9
3.3
3.3
2.3
–3.2
5.9
2.7
2.6
3.1
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
5.0
3.3
3.0
3.2
3.6
3.6
2.5
–3.2
6.1
3.1
2.9
3.4
Low-Income Developing Countries
3.6
3.8
2.3
1.5
2.5
2.7
2.6
–1.2
2.5
2.5
2.6
3.4
World Growth Rate Based on Market 
Exchange Rates
2.7
2.8
2.8
2.6
3.3
3.2
2.5
–3.4
5.8
2.9
2.1
2.8
Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
61,996
79,429
74,944
76,211
81,036
86,210
87,654
85,441
97,076
101,561
106,182
131,631
At Purchasing Power Parities
84,757
109,595 111,857 116,169 122,351 129,709 135,641 132,936
146,608
161,450
171,549
210,591
1Real GDP.
2Excludes euro area countries, Japan, and the United States.
3Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
126	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Q4 over Q42
Average
Projections
Projections 
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021:Q4
2022:Q4 2023:Q4
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
1.6
2.0
2.3
1.8
2.5
2.3
1.7
–4.4
5.2
2.4
1.1
1.7
4.7
0.9
1.3
United States
1.8
2.3
2.7
1.7
2.3
2.9
2.3
–3.4
5.7
1.6
1.0
1.9
5.5
0.0
1.0
Euro Area
0.9
1.4
2.0
1.9
2.6
1.8
1.6
–6.1
5.2
3.1
0.5
1.5
4.6
1.0
1.4
Germany
1.3
2.2
1.5
2.2
2.7
1.0
1.1
–3.7
2.6
1.5
–0.3
1.3
1.2
0.6
0.5
France
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.0
2.4
1.8
1.9
–7.9
6.8
2.5
0.7
1.4
5.0
0.4
0.9
Italy
–0.3
0.0
0.8
1.3
1.7
0.9
0.5
–9.0
6.7
3.2
–0.2
0.7
6.6
0.6
0.5
Spain
0.6
1.4
3.8
3.0
3.0
2.3
2.1 –10.8
5.1
4.3
1.2
1.7
5.5
1.3
2.0
The Netherlands
1.1
1.4
2.0
2.2
2.9
2.4
2.0
–3.9
4.9
4.5
0.8
1.5
6.2
2.6
1.2
Belgium
1.6
1.6
2.0
1.3
1.6
1.8
2.1
–5.7
6.2
2.4
0.4
1.2
5.7
0.5
1.2
Ireland
1.6
8.6
24.4
2.0
9.0
8.5
5.4
6.2
13.6
9.0
4.0
3.0
13.9
8.3
6.6
Austria
1.5
0.7
1.0
2.0
2.3
2.5
1.5
–6.7
4.6
4.7
1.0
1.7
6.4
1.9
3.7
Portugal
–0.1
0.8
1.8
2.0
3.5
2.8
2.7
–8.4
4.9
6.2
0.7
1.9
5.9
2.3
1.8
Greece
–1.7
0.5
–0.2
–0.5
1.1
1.7
1.8
–9.0
8.3
5.2
1.8
1.4
8.3
0.7
7.5
Finland
1.2
–0.4
0.5
2.8
3.2
1.1
1.2
–2.2
3.0
2.1
0.5
1.4
3.1
0.4
1.5
Slovak Republic
4.1
2.7
5.2
1.9
3.0
3.8
2.6
–4.4
3.0
1.8
1.5
2.8
1.2
1.1
2.4
Lithuania
3.3
3.5
2.0
2.5
4.3
4.0
4.6
–0.1
5.0
1.8
1.1
2.3
5.4
–0.7
3.4
Slovenia
1.5
2.8
2.2
3.2
4.8
4.5
3.5
–4.3
8.2
5.7
1.7
3.0
10.4
–0.4
3.7
Luxembourg
2.6
2.6
2.3
5.0
1.3
2.0
3.3
–1.8
6.9
1.6
1.1
2.5
4.9
–0.3
2.8
Latvia
2.7
1.9
3.9
2.4
3.3
4.0
2.5
–3.8
4.5
2.5
1.6
3.4
2.8
2.9
1.0
Estonia
2.6
3.0
1.9
3.2
5.8
3.8
3.7
–0.6
8.0
1.0
1.8
3.3
7.2
–0.1
1.8
Cyprus 
1.3
–1.8
3.4
6.5
5.9
5.7
5.3
–5.0
5.6
3.5
2.5
2.9
6.2
–0.9
9.8
Malta
2.9
7.6
9.6
3.4
10.9
6.2
5.9
–8.3
10.3
6.2
3.3
3.4
11.6
2.4
5.6
Japan
0.7
0.3
1.6
0.8
1.7
0.6
–0.4
–4.6
1.7
1.7
1.6
0.4
0.5
2.1
0.9
United Kingdom
1.2
3.0
2.6
2.3
2.1
1.7
1.7
–9.3
7.4
3.6
0.3
1.5
6.6
1.0
0.2
Korea
4.0
3.2
2.8
2.9
3.2
2.9
2.2
–0.7
4.1
2.6
2.0
2.3
4.2
1.7
2.6
Canada
1.9
2.9
0.7
1.0
3.0
2.8
1.9
–5.2
4.5
3.3
1.5
1.7
3.2
2.2
1.3
Taiwan Province of China
4.2
4.7
1.5
2.2
3.3
2.8
3.1
3.4
6.6
3.3
2.8
2.0
4.9
2.5
2.2
Australia
3.0
2.6
2.3
2.7
2.4
2.8
2.0
–2.1
4.9
3.8
1.9
2.3
4.5
2.3
1.9
Switzerland
2.2
2.3
1.6
2.1
1.4
2.9
1.2
–2.5
4.2
2.2
0.8
1.2
3.9
0.4
1.5
Sweden
2.0
2.7
4.5
2.1
2.6
2.0
2.0
–2.2
5.1
2.6
–0.1
2.0
5.7
0.1
1.3
Singapore
6.7
3.9
3.0
3.6
4.7
3.7
1.1
–4.1
7.6
3.0
2.3
2.5
6.1
1.0
3.3
Hong Kong SAR
4.5
2.8
2.4
2.2
3.8
2.8
–1.7
–6.5
6.3
–0.8
3.9
2.8
4.7
2.1
1.5
Czech Republic
2.5
2.3
5.4
2.5
5.2
3.2
3.0
–5.5
3.5
1.9
1.5
2.5
3.5
–1.3
5.0
Israel
4.3
3.9
2.5
4.5
4.3
4.1
4.2
–1.9
8.6
6.1
3.0
3.5
10.4
1.6
3.4
Norway
1.6
2.0
2.0
1.1
2.3
1.1
0.7
–0.7
3.9
3.6
2.6
1.3
4.7
3.0
1.5
Denmark
0.9
1.6
2.3
3.2
2.8
2.0
1.5
–2.0
4.9
2.6
0.6
1.8
6.7
–0.4
1.0
New Zealand
2.1
3.8
3.7
4.0
3.5
3.4
2.9
–2.1
5.6
2.3
1.9
2.4
3.0
2.6
1.5
Puerto Rico
–0.7
–1.2
–1.0
–1.3
–2.9
–4.2
1.5
–3.9
2.7
4.8
0.4
0.0
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
13.1
–2.0 –21.5
–0.7
10.0
6.5
–2.5 –54.0
18.0 –22.4
56.7
3.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Iceland
2.7
1.7
4.4
6.3
4.2
4.9
2.4
–6.8
4.4
5.1
2.9
2.2
4.9
2.1
3.0
Andorra
–0.3
2.5
1.4
3.7
0.3
1.6
2.0 –11.2
8.9
6.6
2.0
1.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
San Marino
–1.7
–0.6
2.7
2.3
0.3
1.5
2.1
–6.7
5.4
3.1
0.8
1.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.3
1.8
2.1
1.5
2.2
2.1
1.6
–4.8
5.1
2.0
0.8
1.5
4.4
0.6
0.9
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.4
2.0
2.6
2.0
2.5
2.3
2.0
–4.3
5.3
2.9
1.0
1.7
5.1
0.7
1.7
United States
1.5
2.5
3.4
1.8
2.4
3.1
2.4
–3.0
6.9
2.3
0.6
1.8
6.2
0.3
0.7
Euro Area
0.5
1.3
2.3
2.4
2.3
1.8
2.4
–5.8
4.1
3.2
0.7
1.5
4.9
0.3
1.9
Germany
0.9
1.7
1.4
3.1
2.6
1.6
1.7
–3.0
1.9
3.2
0.0
1.4
2.4
1.6
1.2
France
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.4
2.5
1.4
2.1
–6.7
6.6
2.6
0.7
1.4
5.6
0.3
0.9
Italy
–0.7
0.1
1.2
1.8
1.8
1.3
–0.2
–8.5
6.8
3.6
–0.1
0.9
7.9
–0.9
1.5
Spain
0.1
1.9
4.1
2.1
3.3
3.0
1.6
–8.9
4.7
3.0
1.5
1.6
3.8
1.7
2.1
Japan
0.6
0.3
1.1
0.3
1.1
0.6
0.1
–3.8
0.6
1.9
1.3
0.4
0.5
1.9
1.1
United Kingdom
1.2
3.5
3.2
3.1
1.9
1.2
1.6 –10.1
8.5
4.6
0.3
1.5
4.8
–0.6
3.8
Canada
2.9
1.7
–0.2
0.4
4.1
2.5
1.2
–6.4
6.1
5.5
1.8
1.4
4.7
4.9
0.5
Other Advanced Economies3
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.9
3.6
2.7
1.5
–2.5
5.2
3.2
2.3
2.4
5.6
1.1
3.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.2
1.9
2.4
1.7
2.2
2.2
1.7
–4.4
5.6
2.7
0.6
1.5
4.9
0.7
1.1
1In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
127
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
1.5
1.6
1.8
2.5
2.1
2.2
2.2
1.6
–5.8
5.3
3.5
1.2
United States
1.8
2.3
2.7
3.3
2.5
2.4
2.9
2.2
–3.8
7.9
2.4
0.6
Euro Area
0.6
0.9
0.9
1.9
2.0
1.8
1.5
1.4
–7.7
3.7
3.8
0.8
Germany
0.7
0.9
1.1
1.9
2.4
1.4
1.5
1.6
–5.6
0.4
4.5
0.6
France
1.2
1.0
0.9
1.4
1.6
1.6
1.0
1.8
–6.8
5.3
2.7
1.3
Italy
–0.3
0.2
0.1
1.9
1.2
1.5
1.0
0.2
–10.6
5.2
2.8
–0.4
Spain
0.2
0.9
1.7
2.9
2.7
3.0
1.7
1.0
–12.0
4.6
3.0
1.7
Japan
0.9
–0.1
–0.9
–0.2
–0.4
1.1
0.2
–0.5
–5.2
1.3
2.8
1.1
United Kingdom
1.2
1.6
2.6
3.6
3.7
1.6
2.4
1.3
–10.6
6.2
5.5
0.7
Canada
2.9
2.5
2.6
2.3
2.1
3.7
2.6
1.4
–6.1
4.9
8.7
3.2
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.1
2.5
2.9
2.6
2.8
2.8
1.8
–5.5
4.0
4.3
2.8
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.4
1.6
1.7
2.4
2.0
2.0
2.1
1.5
–5.4
5.6
3.3
0.8
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
1.3
1.6
0.6
1.7
2.0
0.8
1.5
2.3
1.8
3.4
0.9
0.7
United States
0.5
0.9
–0.8
1.6
1.9
0.0
1.2
2.0
2.0
1.0
–0.9
0.9
Euro Area
1.3
1.5
0.8
1.3
1.9
1.1
1.0
1.7
1.1
4.2
1.8
0.2
Germany
1.5
2.4
1.7
2.9
4.0
1.7
0.8
2.6
4.0
3.8
3.3
–0.6
France
1.6
1.0
1.3
1.0
1.4
1.4
0.8
1.0
–4.0
6.4
1.6
–0.1
Italy
–0.2
0.1
–0.6
–0.6
0.7
–0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.5
0.6
1.3
–0.5
Spain
2.8
1.5
–0.7
2.0
1.0
1.0
2.3
2.0
3.3
3.1
–0.2
1.2
Japan
1.3
1.4
1.0
1.9
1.6
0.1
1.0
1.9
2.3
2.1
1.5
0.8
United Kingdom
1.6
1.7
2.0
1.3
0.5
0.6
0.4
4.2
–5.9
14.3
1.4
–0.8
Canada
1.8
2.0
0.6
1.4
1.8
2.1
3.2
1.7
0.0
5.8
1.7
1.6
Other Advanced Economies1
2.8
3.2
2.7
2.8
3.5
2.4
3.5
3.8
4.7
4.5
2.9
1.1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.9
1.2
0.2
1.6
1.8
0.4
1.0
2.0
1.1
3.1
0.5
0.5
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
1.0
2.4
3.4
3.6
2.6
3.8
3.0
3.0
–3.5
5.6
1.7
1.3
United States
1.3
2.7
5.1
3.7
2.1
3.8
4.4
3.1
–1.5
6.1
0.5
–0.1
Euro Area
–0.2
2.6
1.4
4.7
4.0
3.9
3.1
6.9
–6.4
4.1
3.4
1.6
Germany
1.4
1.7
3.2
1.7
3.8
2.6
3.3
1.9
–2.3
1.2
0.8
0.9
France
1.0
1.9
0.0
0.9
2.5
5.0
3.2
4.2
–8.4
11.3
1.5
0.1
Italy
–2.5
3.0
–2.2
1.8
4.0
3.2
3.1
1.2
–9.1
17.0
10.3
3.1
Spain
–2.6
3.2
4.1
4.9
2.4
6.8
6.3
4.5
–9.5
4.3
7.5
2.2
Japan
–0.5
0.3
2.2
2.3
1.2
1.6
0.6
0.5
–4.9
–1.4
–1.2
2.7
United Kingdom
0.5
2.1
6.8
6.3
4.7
3.3
–0.1
0.5
–9.5
5.9
4.5
–0.6
Canada
3.8
0.6
2.3
–5.2
–4.7
3.3
2.5
0.0
–2.8
7.1
1.5
2.9
Other Advanced Economies1
3.4
2.6
2.6
2.3
3.0
4.9
2.0
0.7
–1.2
7.5
1.4
3.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.8
2.1
3.7
2.8
2.2
3.4
3.2
2.3
–3.7
5.7
1.4
0.7
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
128	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
1.4
1.8
1.9
2.6
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.1
–3.9
5.0
2.6
1.1
United States
1.5
2.2
2.7
3.1
2.3
2.4
3.0
2.4
–2.5
6.5
1.6
0.5
Euro Area
0.6
1.4
1.0
2.3
2.4
2.1
1.7
2.6
–5.6
3.9
3.2
0.9
Germany
1.0
1.4
1.7
2.1
3.1
1.7
1.8
1.9
–2.8
1.4
3.3
0.4
France
1.3
1.2
0.8
1.2
1.7
2.3
1.4
2.1
–6.5
6.9
2.1
0.7
Italy
–0.7
0.8
–0.4
1.4
1.6
1.5
1.2
0.3
–8.2
6.4
4.1
0.4
Spain
0.1
1.5
1.6
3.1
2.3
3.3
2.7
1.9
–8.5
4.2
3.2
1.7
Japan
0.6
0.3
0.1
0.8
0.3
1.0
0.5
0.2
–3.7
0.8
1.8
1.7
United Kingdom
1.1
1.7
3.2
3.6
3.3
1.7
1.6
1.7
–9.5
7.7
4.5
0.1
Canada
2.9
1.8
2.1
0.3
0.5
3.3
2.7
1.2
–4.1
5.6
4.9
2.2
Other Advanced Economies1
2.9
2.4
2.6
2.7
2.9
3.4
2.4
1.8
–2.5
4.9
3.1
2.6
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
1.2
1.6
1.9
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.1
1.8
–3.9
5.3
2.3
0.7
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
–0.2
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.3
0.3
–0.1
United States
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.3
–0.5
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.5
0.3
0.7
0.1
Euro Area
–0.1
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.2
0.0
–0.2
Germany
–0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.7
0.0
0.9
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.5
–0.1
–0.3
France
0.1
0.1
0.7
0.2
–0.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.3
0.5
0.0
Italy
0.0
0.0
0.5
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
–0.5
–0.3
0.4
–0.4
–0.5
Spain
–0.1
–0.2
0.2
–1.5
–0.1
0.0
0.3
–0.2
–0.5
0.6
–0.4
–0.3
Japan
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3
–0.1
0.1
0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.3
–0.1
United Kingdom
0.1
0.0
0.4
–0.1
–0.2
0.2
–0.5
0.2
–0.7
0.4
0.3
–0.2
Canada
0.1
0.0
–0.4
–0.5
0.0
0.9
–0.1
0.1
–1.3
0.9
0.9
–0.4
Other Advanced Economies1
0.0
0.1
0.3
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.3
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
–0.3
0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.5
0.3
0.5
–0.1
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
0.2
–0.1
0.0
–0.3
–0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.4
0.2
United States
0.2
–0.4
–0.3
–0.8
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
–0.3
–1.4
–0.7
0.4
Euro Area
0.4
0.0
0.1
–0.2
–0.4
0.4
0.0
–0.7
–0.5
1.3
0.0
–0.2
Germany
0.4
–0.2
0.7
0.3
–0.6
0.2
–0.6
–0.6
–0.8
0.8
–1.4
–0.2
France
–0.1
–0.3
–0.5
–0.4
–0.4
–0.1
0.4
–0.3
–1.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
Italy
0.4
–0.2
–0.1
–0.4
–0.5
0.0
–0.3
0.7
–0.7
0.0
–0.3
–0.1
Spain
0.6
–0.1
–0.5
–0.1
1.0
–0.2
–0.6
0.5
–2.2
0.5
1.3
–0.3
Japan
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.0
–0.5
–0.9
1.1
–0.1
0.3
United Kingdom
0.0
–0.2
–1.1
–0.4
–0.1
0.7
–0.1
0.1
1.0
–1.5
–1.1
0.0
Canada
–1.0
–0.2
1.2
0.8
0.4
–1.1
0.2
0.6
0.5
–2.0
–2.2
–0.4
Other Advanced Economies1
0.6
0.2
0.5
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.2
0.6
0.7
0.5
–0.2
0.3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
0.1
–0.3
–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
–0.4
–0.7
–0.7
0.2
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
129
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Average 
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Emerging and Developing Asia
8.5
6.9
6.8
6.8
6.6
6.4
5.2
–0.6
7.2
4.4
4.9
5.1
Bangladesh
6.1
6.1
6.6
7.1
6.6
7.3
7.9
3.4
6.9
7.2
6.0
6.9
Bhutan
7.9
4.0
6.2
7.4
6.3
3.8
4.4
–2.3
–3.3
4.0
4.3
5.8
Brunei Darussalam
0.7
–2.5
–0.4
–2.5
1.3
0.1
3.9
1.1
–1.6
1.2
3.3
3.4
Cambodia
7.9
7.1
7.0
6.9
7.0
7.5
7.1
–3.1
3.0
5.1
6.2
6.6
China
10.3
7.4
7.0
6.9
6.9
6.8
6.0
2.2
8.1
3.2
4.4
4.6
Fiji
1.6
5.6
4.5
2.4
5.4
3.8
–0.6
–17.0
–5.1
12.5
6.9
3.5
India1
7.7
7.4
8.0
8.3
6.8
6.5
3.7
–6.6
8.7
6.8
6.1
6.2
Indonesia
5.9
5.0
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.2
5.0
–2.1
3.7
5.3
5.0
5.1
Kiribati
1.4
–1.1
9.9
–0.5
–0.2
5.3
–0.5
–0.5
1.5
1.0
2.4
2.0
Lao P.D.R.
7.8
7.6
7.3
7.0
6.9
6.3
4.7
–0.4
2.1
2.2
3.1
4.3
Malaysia
5.0
6.0
5.0
4.4
5.8
4.8
4.4
–5.5
3.1
5.4
4.4
3.9
Maldives
5.0
7.3
2.9
6.3
7.2
8.1
6.9
–33.5
37.0
8.7
6.1
5.6
Marshall Islands
0.9
–1.0
1.6
1.4
3.3
3.1
6.8
–1.6
1.7
1.5
3.2
1.5
Micronesia
–0.5
–2.3
4.6
0.9
2.7
0.2
1.2
–1.8
–3.2
–0.6
2.9
0.6
Mongolia
8.6
7.9
2.4
1.5
5.6
7.7
5.6
–4.6
1.6
2.5
5.0
5.0
Myanmar
9.1
8.2
7.5
6.4
5.8
6.4
6.8
3.2
–17.9
2.0
3.3
3.6
Nauru
. . .
27.2
3.4
3.0
–5.5
5.7
1.0
0.7
1.6
0.9
2.0
1.8
Nepal
4.2
6.0
4.0
0.4
9.0
7.6
6.7
–2.4
4.2
4.2
5.0
5.3
Palau
0.0
4.7
8.4
0.4
–3.4
0.1
0.4
–8.9
–13.4
–2.8
12.3
3.2
Papua New Guinea
4.1
13.5
6.6
5.5
3.5
–0.3
4.5
–3.5
1.2
3.8
5.1
3.0
Philippines
5.4
6.3
6.3
7.1
6.9
6.3
6.1
–9.5
5.7
6.5
5.0
6.0
Samoa
1.8
0.7
3.9
8.0
1.4
–0.6
4.5
–3.1
–7.1
–5.0
4.0
2.6
Solomon Islands
5.2
1.2
1.7
5.6
3.1
2.7
1.7
–3.4
–0.2
–4.5
2.6
3.0
Sri Lanka
6.5
6.4
4.2
5.1
6.5
2.3
–0.2
–3.5
3.3
–8.7
–3.0
3.1
Thailand
4.0
1.0
3.1
3.4
4.2
4.2
2.2
–6.2
1.5
2.8
3.7
3.0
Timor-Leste2
5.3
4.5
2.8
3.4
–3.1
–0.7
2.1
–8.6
1.5
3.3
4.2
3.0
Tonga
0.1
2.0
1.2
6.6
3.3
0.2
0.7
0.5
–2.7
–2.0
2.9
1.8
Tuvalu
0.8
1.7
9.4
4.7
3.4
1.6
13.9
1.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
3.5
Vanuatu
3.5
3.1
0.4
4.7
6.3
2.9
3.2
–5.4
0.4
1.7
3.1
3.0
Vietnam
6.4
6.4
7.0
6.7
6.9
7.2
7.2
2.9
2.6
7.0
6.2
6.8
Emerging and Developing Europe
4.3
1.8
1.0
1.9
4.1
3.4
2.5
–1.7
6.8
0.0
0.6
2.2
Albania1
4.2
1.8
2.2
3.3
3.8
4.0
2.1
–3.5
8.5
4.0
2.5
3.4
Belarus
6.5
1.7
–3.8
–2.5
2.5
3.1
1.4
–0.7
2.3
–7.0
0.2
0.8
Bosnia and Herzegovina
3.0
1.1
3.1
3.1
3.2
3.7
2.8
–3.1
7.5
2.4
2.0
3.0
Bulgaria
3.3
1.0
3.4
3.0
2.8
2.7
4.0
–4.4
4.2
3.9
3.0
2.8
Croatia
0.8
–0.3
2.5
3.5
3.4
2.9
3.5
–8.1
10.2
5.9
3.5
2.5
Hungary
1.1
4.2
3.8
2.3
4.3
5.4
4.6
–4.5
7.1
5.7
1.8
3.2
Kosovo
4.2
3.3
5.9
5.6
4.8
3.4
4.8
–5.3
9.5
2.7
3.5
3.5
Moldova
4.5
5.0
–0.3
4.4
4.2
4.1
3.6
–8.3
13.9
0.0
2.3
5.0
Montenegro
3.1
1.8
3.4
2.9
4.7
5.1
4.1
–15.3
13.0
7.2
2.5
3.0
North Macedonia
3.4
3.6
3.9
2.8
1.1
2.9
3.9
–6.1
4.0
2.7
3.0
3.8
Poland
4.0
3.4
4.2
3.1
4.8
5.4
4.7
–2.2
5.9
3.8
0.5
3.1
Romania
3.7
3.6
3.0
4.7
7.3
4.5
4.2
–3.7
5.9
4.8
3.1
3.5
Russia 
4.2
0.7
–2.0
0.2
1.8
2.8
2.2
–2.7
4.7
–3.4
–2.3
0.7
Serbia
3.8
–1.6
1.8
3.3
2.1
4.5
4.3
–0.9
7.4
3.5
2.7
4.0
Türkiye
5.9
4.9
6.1
3.3
7.5
3.0
0.8
1.9
11.4
5.0
3.0
3.0
Ukraine1
2.5
–6.6
–9.8
2.4
2.4
3.5
3.2
–3.8
3.4
–35.0
. . .
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.0
1.3
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.2
–7.0
6.9
3.5
1.7
2.4
Antigua and Barbuda
1.3
3.8
3.8
5.5
3.1
6.9
4.9
–20.2
5.3
6.0
5.6
2.7
Argentina
4.9
–2.5
2.7
–2.1
2.8
–2.6
–2.0
–9.9
10.4
4.0
2.0
2.0
Aruba
0.6
0.0
3.6
2.1
5.5
5.3
0.6
–18.6
17.2
4.0
2.0
1.2
The Bahamas
0.4
1.8
1.0
–0.9
3.1
1.8
1.9
–23.8
13.7
8.0
4.1
1.5
Barbados
0.4
–0.1
2.4
2.5
0.5
–0.6
–1.3
–13.7
0.7
10.5
5.0
1.8
Belize
2.5
3.9
2.6
–2.3
–1.0
0.3
4.5
–13.7
16.3
3.5
2.0
2.0
Bolivia
4.9
5.5
4.9
4.3
4.2
4.2
2.2
–8.7
6.1
3.8
3.2
2.5
Brazil
4.0
0.5
–3.5
–3.3
1.3
1.8
1.2
–3.9
4.6
2.8
1.0
2.0
Chile
4.8
1.8
2.2
1.7
1.3
3.9
0.9
–6.1
11.7
2.0
–1.0
2.5
Colombia
4.8
4.5
3.0
2.1
1.4
2.6
3.2
–7.0
10.7
7.6
2.2
3.3
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
130	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Average 
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
4.0
1.3
0.4
–0.6
1.4
1.2
0.2
–7.0
6.9
3.5
1.7
2.4
Costa Rica
4.5
3.5
3.7
4.2
4.2
2.6
2.4
–4.1
7.8
3.8
2.9
3.2
Dominica
1.9
4.8
–2.7
2.8
–6.6
3.5
5.5
–16.6
4.8
6.0
4.9
2.5
Dominican Republic
5.1
7.1
6.9
6.7
4.7
7.0
5.1
–6.7
12.3
5.3
4.5
5.0
Ecuador
4.9
3.8
0.1
–1.2
2.4
1.3
0.0
–7.8
4.2
2.9
2.7
2.8
El Salvador
2.1
1.7
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.4
2.4
–8.2
10.3
2.6
1.7
2.0
Grenada
0.9
7.3
6.4
3.7
4.4
4.4
0.7
–13.8
5.6
3.6
3.6
2.8
Guatemala
3.6
4.4
4.1
2.7
3.1
3.4
4.0
–1.8
8.0
3.4
3.2
3.5
Guyana
3.5
1.7
0.7
3.8
3.7
4.4
5.4
43.5
23.8
57.8
25.2
3.3
Haiti
2.0
1.7
2.6
1.8
2.5
1.7
–1.7
–3.3
–1.8
–1.2
0.5
1.5
Honduras1
4.1
3.1
3.8
3.9
4.8
3.8
2.7
–9.0
12.5
3.4
3.5
3.9
Jamaica
0.2
0.6
0.9
1.5
0.7
1.8
1.0
–10.0
4.6
2.8
3.0
1.6
Mexico
2.2
2.8
3.3
2.6
2.1
2.2
–0.2
–8.1
4.8
2.1
1.2
2.1
Nicaragua
4.0
4.8
4.8
4.6
4.6
–3.4
–3.8
–1.8
10.3
4.0
3.0
3.8
Panama
8.0
5.1
5.7
5.0
5.6
3.7
3.0
–17.9
15.3
7.5
4.0
4.5
Paraguay
4.5
5.3
3.0
4.3
4.8
3.2
–0.4
–0.8
4.2
0.2
4.3
3.5
Peru
6.4
2.4
3.3
4.0
2.5
4.0
2.2
–11.0
13.6
2.7
2.6
3.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.1
7.6
0.7
3.9
0.9
2.7
4.8
–14.0
–3.6
9.8
4.8
2.7
St. Lucia
2.0
1.3
–0.2
3.8
3.4
2.9
–0.7
–24.4
12.2
9.1
5.8
1.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
1.3
1.1
2.8
4.1
1.7
3.1
0.4
–5.3
0.5
5.0
6.0
2.7
Suriname
4.7
0.3
–3.4
–4.9
1.6
4.9
1.1
–15.9
–3.5
1.3
2.3
3.0
Trinidad and Tobago
3.4
–0.9
1.8
–6.3
–2.7
–0.7
–0.2
–7.4
–0.7
4.0
3.5
1.6
Uruguay1
5.6
3.2
0.4
1.7
1.6
0.5
0.4
–6.1
4.4
5.3
3.6
2.2
Venezuela
5.7
–3.9
–6.2
–17.0
–15.7
–19.7
–27.7
–30.0
0.5
6.0
6.5
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
5.0
3.4
3.0
4.2
2.6
2.6
1.7
–2.7
4.5
5.0
3.6
3.7
Afghanistan1
8.9
2.7
1.0
2.2
2.6
1.2
3.9
–2.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
3.2
3.8
3.7
3.2
1.4
1.2
1.0
–5.1
3.5
4.7
2.6
1.7
Armenia
5.9
3.6
3.3
0.2
7.5
5.2
7.6
–7.4
5.7
7.0
3.5
4.5
Azerbaijan
12.3
2.8
1.0
–3.1
0.2
1.5
2.5
–4.2
5.6
3.7
2.5
2.5
Bahrain
5.3
4.4
2.5
3.6
4.3
2.1
2.2
–4.9
2.2
3.4
3.0
3.0
Djibouti
4.4
7.1
7.5
7.1
5.5
4.8
5.5
1.2
4.8
3.6
5.0
6.0
Egypt
4.7
4.3
5.8
5.8
5.4
5.0
5.5
3.5
3.3
6.6
4.4
5.9
Georgia
5.9
4.4
3.0
2.9
4.8
4.8
5.0
–6.8
10.4
9.0
4.0
5.2
Iran
2.5
5.0
–1.4
8.8
2.8
–1.8
–3.1
3.3
4.7
3.0
2.0
2.0
Iraq
10.2
0.7
2.5
15.2
–3.4
4.7
5.8
–15.7
7.7
9.3
4.0
2.7
Jordan
5.5
3.4
2.5
2.0
2.1
1.9
2.0
–1.6
2.2
2.4
2.7
3.3
Kazakhstan
6.9
4.3
1.0
0.9
3.9
4.1
4.5
–2.6
4.1
2.5
4.4
2.7
Kuwait
4.3
0.5
0.6
2.9
–4.7
2.4
–0.6
–8.9
1.3
8.7
2.6
2.7
Kyrgyz Republic
4.5
4.0
3.9
4.3
4.7
3.5
4.6
–8.6
3.7
3.8
3.2
4.0
Lebanon1
5.3
2.5
0.5
1.6
0.9
–1.9
–6.9
–25.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya1
–0.5
–23.0
–0.8
–1.5
32.5
7.9
–11.2
–29.5
28.3
–18.5
17.9
4.1
Mauritania
4.3
4.3
5.4
1.3
6.3
4.8
5.4
–0.9
2.4
4.0
4.8
4.8
Morocco
4.6
2.7
4.3
0.5
5.1
3.1
2.9
–7.2
7.9
0.8
3.1
3.4
Oman
4.9
1.3
5.0
5.0
0.3
1.3
–1.1
–3.2
3.0
4.4
4.1
2.7
Pakistan1
4.7
4.1
4.1
4.6
4.6
6.1
3.1
–0.9
5.7
6.0
3.5
5.0
Qatar
14.1
5.3
4.8
3.1
–1.5
1.2
0.7
–3.6
1.6
3.4
2.4
3.8
Saudi Arabia
4.5
3.7
4.1
1.7
–0.7
2.5
0.3
–4.1
3.2
7.6
3.7
3.0
Somalia
. . .
2.7
4.6
4.7
2.2
3.7
2.7
–0.3
2.9
1.9
3.1
4.1
Sudan3
0.7
4.7
4.9
4.7
0.8
–2.3
–2.5
–3.6
0.5
–0.3
2.6
6.0
Syria4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
7.3
6.7
6.0
6.9
7.1
7.6
7.4
4.4
9.2
5.5
4.0
4.0
Tunisia
3.7
3.1
1.0
1.1
2.2
2.5
1.4
–8.7
3.3
2.2
1.6
2.6
Turkmenistan
10.4
3.8
3.0
–1.0
4.7
0.9
–3.4
–3.0
4.6
1.2
2.3
1.7
United Arab Emirates
4.3
4.4
5.1
3.0
2.4
1.2
3.4
–4.8
3.8
5.1
4.2
4.2
Uzbekistan
7.7
6.9
7.2
5.9
4.4
5.4
5.7
1.9
7.4
5.2
4.7
5.0
West Bank and Gaza
7.7
–0.2
3.7
8.9
1.4
1.2
1.4
–11.3
7.1
4.0
3.5
2.0
Yemen
2.4
–0.2
–28.0
–9.4
–5.1
0.8
1.4
–8.5
–1.0
2.0
3.2
5.5
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
131
Average 
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Sub-Saharan Africa
5.6
5.0
3.2
1.5
3.0
3.3
3.2
–1.6
4.7
3.6
3.7
4.4
Angola
8.4
4.8
0.9
–2.6
–0.2
–1.3
–0.7
–5.8
0.8
2.9
3.4
3.9
Benin
4.0
6.4
1.8
3.3
5.7
6.7
6.9
3.8
7.2
5.7
6.2
6.0
Botswana
3.3
5.7
–4.9
7.2
4.1
4.2
3.0
–8.7
11.4
4.1
4.0
4.0
Burkina Faso
5.9
4.3
3.9
6.0
6.2
6.7
5.7
1.9
6.9
3.6
4.8
5.3
Burundi
4.4
4.2
–3.9
–0.6
0.5
1.6
1.8
0.3
3.1
3.3
4.1
4.6
Cabo Verde
4.1
0.6
1.0
4.7
3.7
14.6
5.7
–14.8
7.0
4.0
4.8
4.5
Cameroon 
3.7
5.8
5.6
4.5
3.5
4.0
3.4
0.5
3.6
3.8
4.6
4.9
Central African Republic
–1.5
0.1
4.3
4.7
4.5
3.8
3.0
1.0
1.0
1.5
3.0
3.7
Chad
7.8
6.9
1.8
–5.6
–2.4
2.4
3.4
–2.2
–1.1
3.3
3.4
3.5
Comoros
3.0
2.1
1.3
3.5
4.2
3.6
1.8
–0.3
2.2
3.0
3.4
4.4
Democratic Republic of the Congo
6.3
9.5
6.9
2.4
3.7
5.8
4.4
1.7
6.2
6.1
6.7
6.3
Republic of Congo
4.8
6.7
–3.6
–10.7
–4.4
–4.8
–0.4
–8.1
–0.6
4.3
4.6
3.3
Côte d’Ivoire
2.8
8.8
8.8
7.2
7.4
6.9
6.2
2.0
7.0
5.5
6.5
6.0
Equatorial Guinea
7.6
0.4
–9.1
–8.8
–5.7
–6.2
–5.5
–4.2
–3.2
5.8
–3.1
–1.1
Eritrea
1.8
30.9
–20.6
7.4
–10.0
13.0
3.8
–0.5
2.9
2.6
2.8
2.9
Eswatini
3.8
0.9
2.2
1.1
2.0
2.4
2.7
–1.6
7.9
2.4
1.8
2.3
Ethiopia
10.9
10.3
10.4
8.0
10.2
7.7
9.0
6.1
6.3
3.8
5.3
7.0
Gabon
2.8
4.4
3.9
2.1
0.5
0.8
3.9
–1.9
1.5
2.7
3.7
3.8
The Gambia
2.5
–1.4
4.1
1.9
4.8
7.2
6.2
0.6
4.3
5.0
6.0
5.0
Ghana
7.3
2.9
2.1
3.4
8.1
6.2
6.5
0.5
5.4
3.6
2.8
6.8
Guinea
3.6
3.7
3.8
10.8
10.3
6.4
5.6
4.9
3.8
4.6
5.1
5.2
Guinea-Bissau
3.5
1.0
6.1
5.3
4.8
3.8
4.5
1.5
5.0
3.8
4.5
5.0
Kenya
4.8
5.0
5.0
4.2
3.8
5.7
5.1
–0.3
7.5
5.3
5.1
5.5
Lesotho
3.6
2.1
3.3
1.9
–2.7
–0.3
0.0
–6.0
2.1
2.1
1.6
0.1
Liberia
7.4
0.7
0.0
–1.6
2.5
1.2
–2.5
–3.0
5.0
3.7
4.2
6.0
Madagascar
3.1
3.3
3.1
4.0
3.9
3.2
4.4
–7.1
4.3
4.2
5.2
5.0
Malawi
5.8
5.7
3.0
2.3
4.0
4.4
5.4
0.9
2.2
0.9
2.5
4.5
Mali
3.6
7.1
6.2
5.9
5.3
4.7
4.8
–1.2
3.1
2.5
5.3
5.0
Mauritius
4.0
3.7
3.6
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.0
–14.9
4.0
6.1
5.4
3.3
Mozambique
7.4
7.4
6.7
3.8
3.7
3.4
2.3
–1.2
2.3
3.7
4.9
13.2
Namibia
4.3
6.1
4.3
0.0
–1.0
1.1
–0.8
–8.0
2.7
3.0
3.2
2.5
Niger
5.3
6.6
4.4
5.7
5.0
7.2
5.9
3.6
1.3
6.7
7.3
6.0
Nigeria
7.3
6.3
2.7
–1.6
0.8
1.9
2.2
–1.8
3.6
3.2
3.0
2.9
Rwanda
8.0
6.2
8.9
6.0
4.0
8.6
9.5
–3.4
10.9
6.0
6.7
6.1
São Tomé and Príncipe
5.3
6.5
3.8
4.2
3.9
3.0
2.2
3.0
1.9
1.4
2.6
4.0
Senegal
3.2
6.2
6.4
6.4
7.4
6.2
4.6
1.3
6.1
4.7
8.1
5.2
Seychelles
4.4
4.7
5.6
5.4
4.5
3.2
3.1
–7.7
7.9
10.9
5.2
3.9
Sierra Leone
7.8
4.6
–20.5
6.4
3.8
3.5
5.3
–2.0
4.1
2.4
3.3
4.3
South Africa
3.3
1.4
1.3
0.7
1.2
1.5
0.3
–6.3
4.9
2.1
1.1
1.4
South Sudan
. . .
1.8
–0.2
–13.3
–5.8
–2.1
0.9
–6.5
5.3
6.5
5.6
4.4
Tanzania
6.5
6.7
6.2
6.9
6.8
7.0
7.0
4.8
4.9
4.5
5.2
7.0
Togo
3.0
5.9
5.7
5.6
4.3
5.0
5.5
1.8
5.3
5.4
6.2
6.5
Uganda
7.1
5.7
8.0
0.2
6.8
5.5
7.8
–1.4
6.7
4.4
5.9
6.8
Zambia
7.6
4.7
2.9
3.8
3.5
4.0
1.4
–2.8
4.6
2.9
4.0
5.0
Zimbabwe1
1.7
2.4
1.8
0.5
5.0
4.7
–6.1
–5.2
7.2
3.0
2.8
3.0
1See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Albania, Honduras, India, Lebanon, Libya, Pakistan, Ukraine, Uruguay, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
2Data for Timor-Leste exclude projections for oil exports from the Joint Petroleum Development Area.
3Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
4Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
132	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.4
1.3
1.0
1.5
1.7
1.5
1.5
2.9
5.5
3.7
1.8
United States
2.1
1.9
1.0
1.0
1.9
2.4
1.8
1.2
4.2
7.1
3.6
1.9
Euro Area
1.6
0.9
1.4
0.9
1.1
1.5
1.7
1.7
2.1
4.3
4.4
1.9
Japan
–1.0
1.7
2.1
0.4
–0.1
0.0
0.6
0.9
–0.9
0.3
0.6
0.3
Other Advanced Economies1
2.0
1.3
1.1
1.2
1.9
1.7
1.2
1.8
3.4
6.3
4.3
1.9
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.4
0.3
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.2
4.4
1.9
United States
2.4
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.2
4.7
8.1
3.5
2.0
Euro Area2
2.0
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.3
5.7
1.8
Japan
–0.1
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.0
1.4
1.0
Other Advanced Economies1
2.3
1.5
0.5
0.9
1.8
1.9
1.4
0.6
2.5
6.5
5.1
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
6.3
4.7
4.7
4.4
4.5
5.0
5.1
5.1
5.9
9.9
8.1
4.3
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.0
3.5
2.7
2.8
2.5
2.7
3.3
3.1
2.2
4.1
3.6
2.8
Emerging and Developing Europe
8.1
6.5
10.6
5.5
5.6
6.4
6.6
5.3
9.5
27.8
19.4
6.7
Latin America and the Caribbean
4.9
4.9
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
14.1
11.4
5.7
Middle East and Central Asia
8.4
6.5
5.6
5.9
7.1
10.0
7.7
10.5
12.9
13.8
13.1
6.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.6
6.4
6.7
10.2
10.7
8.3
8.2
10.2
11.1
14.4
11.9
6.9
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
8.4
5.6
5.6
7.8
6.6
9.0
6.9
9.4
12.0
13.4
11.8
7.6
Nonfuel
5.9
4.6
4.6
3.9
4.2
4.5
4.9
4.7
5.2
9.5
7.6
3.9
Of Which, Primary Products4
6.6
7.3
5.7
6.6
11.6
13.8
16.8
18.3
22.0
26.9
23.4
9.8
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
7.2
5.8
5.7
5.4
5.8
5.8
5.6
6.1
7.7
13.3
10.7
4.8
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
9.9
9.1
13.4
11.0
16.8
15.8
12.7
15.3
19.4
20.5
16.9
6.5
Other Groups
European Union
2.3
0.4
0.1
0.2
1.6
1.9
1.4
0.7
2.9
9.2
6.8
2.0
Middle East and North Africa
8.1
6.3
5.7
5.8
7.3
11.3
8.1
10.9
14.2
14.2
12.4
7.1
Emerging Market and Middle-Income 
Economies
6.0
4.5
4.6
4.0
4.1
4.6
4.8
4.6
5.3
9.5
7.7
4.1
Low-Income Developing Countries
9.7
7.2
6.5
8.3
9.2
8.8
8.3
11.3
13.0
14.2
12.0
6.1
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
2.3
0.7
0.1
0.5
1.6
1.8
1.4
0.4
2.5
7.5
4.5
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
5.2
3.1
2.5
2.7
3.3
3.1
2.7
2.8
3.8
8.0
5.7
3.0
1Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
133
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average 
Projections
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Advanced Economies
2.0
1.4
0.3
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.4
0.7
3.1
7.2
4.4
1.9
5.2
7.0
3.2
United States
2.4
1.6
0.1
1.3
2.1
2.4
1.8
1.2
4.7
8.1
3.5
2.0
7.4
6.4
2.3
Euro Area3
2.0
0.4
0.2
0.2
1.5
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.6
8.3
5.7
1.8
5.0
8.8
4.5
Germany
1.8
0.8
0.7
0.4
1.7
1.9
1.4
0.4
3.2
8.5
7.2
2.0
5.7
10.2
5.4
France
1.8
0.6
0.1
0.3
1.2
2.1
1.3
0.5
2.1
5.8
4.6
1.6
3.3
6.3
3.9
Italy
2.2
0.2
0.1
–0.1
1.3
1.2
0.6
–0.1
1.9
8.7
5.2
2.0
4.2
8.7
5.2
Spain
2.5
–0.2
–0.5
–0.2
2.0
1.7
0.7
–0.3
3.1
8.8
4.9
1.7
6.5
7.7
4.1
The Netherlands
1.8
0.3
0.2
0.1
1.3
1.6
2.7
1.1
2.8
12.0
8.0
2.0
6.3
12.8
3.4
Belgium
2.3
0.5
0.6
1.8
2.2
2.3
1.2
0.4
3.2
9.5
4.9
1.7
6.6
7.9
3.6
Ireland
1.3
0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.3
0.7
0.9
–0.5
2.4
8.4
6.5
2.0
5.6
10.0
4.2
Austria
2.1
1.5
0.8
1.0
2.2
2.1
1.5
1.4
2.8
7.7
5.1
2.0
3.8
7.0
3.2
Portugal
2.0
–0.2
0.5
0.6
1.6
1.2
0.3
–0.1
0.9
7.9
4.7
2.0
0.0
12.5
4.0
Greece
2.6
–1.4
–1.1
0.0
1.1
0.8
0.5
–1.3
0.6
9.2
3.2
1.9
4.4
8.2
1.6
Finland
2.0
1.2
–0.2
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.1
0.4
2.1
6.5
3.5
1.8
3.2
6.6
3.5
Slovak Republic
3.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.5
1.4
2.5
2.8
2.0
2.8
11.9
10.1
2.0
5.0
13.5
8.6
Lithuania
3.8
0.2
–0.7
0.7
3.7
2.5
2.2
1.1
4.6
17.6
8.4
2.3
10.7
16.5
5.0
Slovenia
2.7
0.2
–0.5
–0.1
1.4
1.7
1.6
–0.1
1.9
8.9
5.1
2.4
4.9
8.8
3.0
Luxembourg
2.8
0.7
0.1
0.0
2.1
2.0
1.7
0.0
3.5
8.4
3.7
2.0
5.4
7.5
3.0
Latvia
5.3
0.7
0.2
0.1
2.9
2.6
2.7
0.1
3.2
16.5
8.0
2.5
7.9
18.9
3.4
Estonia
4.4
0.5
0.1
0.8
3.7
3.4
2.3
–0.6
4.5
21.0
9.5
2.4
12.0
21.8
3.7
Cyprus
2.2
–0.3
–1.5
–1.2
0.7
0.8
0.5
–1.1
2.2
8.0
3.8
2.0
4.7
6.6
2.4
Malta
2.4
0.8
1.2
0.9
1.3
1.7
1.5
0.8
0.7
5.9
4.6
2.1
2.6
6.5
3.7
Japan
–0.1
2.8
0.8
–0.1
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.2
2.0
1.4
1.0
0.5
2.4
1.2
United Kingdom 
2.7
1.5
0.0
0.7
2.7
2.5
1.8
0.9
2.6
9.1
9.0
2.0
5.4
11.3
6.3
Korea
2.9
1.3
0.7
1.0
1.9
1.5
0.4
0.5
2.5
5.5
3.8
2.0
3.7
6.2
2.6
Canada
1.8
1.9
1.1
1.4
1.6
2.3
1.9
0.7
3.4
6.9
4.2
2.0
4.7
6.9
3.2
Taiwan Province of China
1.4
1.2
–0.3
1.4
0.6
1.3
0.6
–0.2
2.0
3.1
2.2
1.4
2.6
3.1
2.2
Australia
2.7
2.5
1.5
1.3
2.0
1.9
1.6
0.9
2.8
6.5
4.8
2.5
3.6
7.7
3.1
Switzerland
0.6
0.0
–1.1
–0.4
0.5
0.9
0.4
–0.7
0.6
3.1
2.4
1.0
1.5
3.8
1.6
Sweden
1.5
0.2
0.7
1.1
1.9
2.0
1.7
0.7
2.7
7.2
8.4
2.0
3.3
8.2
8.0
Singapore
2.7
1.0
–0.5
–0.5
0.6
0.4
0.6
–0.2
2.3
5.5
3.0
1.5
4.0
5.6
3.0
Hong Kong SAR
2.5
4.4
3.0
2.4
1.5
2.4
2.9
0.3
1.6
1.9
2.4
2.5
2.4
1.9
2.2
Czech Republic
2.5
0.3
0.3
0.7
2.5
2.1
2.8
3.2
3.8
16.3
8.6
2.0
6.6
20.0
4.0
Israel
2.1
0.5
–0.6
–0.5
0.2
0.8
0.8
–0.6
1.5
4.5
3.6
1.9
2.8
5.3
2.7
Norway
1.7
2.0
2.2
3.6
1.9
2.8
2.2
1.3
3.5
4.7
3.8
2.0
5.3
4.7
3.5
Denmark
1.9
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.1
0.7
0.7
0.3
1.9
7.2
3.8
2.0
3.4
7.2
3.8
New Zealand
2.6
1.2
0.3
0.6
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.7
3.9
6.3
3.9
2.1
5.9
5.1
2.9
Puerto Rico
3.1
0.6
–0.8
–0.3
1.8
1.3
0.1
–0.5
2.4
4.4
3.5
2.3
4.2
4.8
2.3
Macao SAR
4.6
6.0
4.6
2.4
1.2
3.0
2.8
0.8
0.0
2.5
2.4
2.2
1.0
2.5
2.4
Iceland
6.2
2.0
1.6
1.7
1.8
2.7
3.0
2.8
4.5
8.4
6.7
2.5
5.1
9.9
5.1
Andorra
2.2
–0.1
–1.1
–0.4
2.6
1.3
0.7
0.3
1.7
5.3
2.8
1.7
3.3
4.5
2.5
San Marino
2.3
1.1
0.1
0.6
1.0
1.8
1.0
0.2
2.1
6.9
4.5
1.8
2.1
6.9
4.5
Memorandum
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Major Advanced Economies
1.9
1.5
0.3
0.8
1.8
2.1
1.5
0.8
3.3
7.2
4.3
1.9
5.6
6.8
3.2
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
134	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.0
3.5
2.7
2.8
2.5
2.7
3.3
3.1
2.2
4.1
3.6
2.8
3.0
4.7
3.0
Bangladesh
7.7
7.3
6.4
5.9
5.4
5.8
5.5
5.6
5.6
6.1
9.1
5.5
5.6
7.6
8.5
Bhutan
6.3
9.6
6.7
3.3
4.3
3.7
2.8
3.0
12.6
7.7
6.6
4.0
9.2
6.2
7.0
Brunei Darussalam
0.7
–0.2
–0.5
–0.3
–1.3
1.0
–0.4
1.9
1.7
2.5
2.0
1.0
2.2
2.5
2.0
Cambodia
6.2
3.9
1.2
3.0
2.9
2.5
1.9
2.9
2.9
5.2
3.8
3.0
3.7
5.2
3.8
China
3.1
2.0
1.4
2.0
1.6
2.1
2.9
2.4
0.9
2.2
2.2
2.0
1.8
2.7
1.8
Fiji
4.1
0.5
1.4
3.9
3.3
4.1
1.8
–2.6
0.2
4.7
3.5
2.5
3.0
5.0
3.0
India
8.2
5.8
4.9
4.5
3.6
3.4
4.8
6.2
5.5
6.9
5.1
4.0
6.3
6.4
4.9
Indonesia
7.1
6.4
6.4
3.5
3.8
3.3
2.8
2.0
1.6
4.6
5.5
3.0
1.9
7.2
3.3
Kiribati
1.7
2.1
0.6
1.9
0.4
0.6
–1.8
2.5
3.0
5.6
3.3
1.6
3.2
5.4
3.1
Lao P.D.R.
6.0
4.1
1.3
1.6
0.8
2.0
3.3
5.1
3.8
15.0
9.0
3.0
5.3
15.0
9.0
Malaysia
2.5
3.1
2.1
2.1
3.8
1.0
0.7
–1.1
2.5
3.2
2.8
2.5
3.2
3.2
2.8
Maldives
6.7
2.4
1.4
0.8
2.3
1.4
1.3
–1.6
0.2
4.3
4.4
2.0
0.2
6.2
3.0
Marshall Islands
4.1
1.1
–2.2
–1.5
0.1
0.8
–0.1
–0.7
2.6
6.4
2.2
2.0
2.9
0.0
2.2
Micronesia
4.4
0.7
0.0
–0.9
0.1
1.1
2.2
0.9
2.1
5.8
3.0
2.0
2.1
5.8
3.0
Mongolia
11.2
12.3
5.7
0.7
4.3
6.8
7.3
3.7
7.1
14.8
12.1
6.5
13.5
14.2
10.1
Myanmar
10.6
5.7
7.3
9.1
4.6
5.9
8.6
5.7
3.6
16.2
13.3
7.8
7.3
19.4
11.1
Nauru
. . .
0.3
9.8
8.2
5.1
0.5
4.3
–6.6
1.2
2.0
2.0
2.0
1.2
2.6
1.7
Nepal
7.9
9.0
7.2
9.9
4.5
4.1
4.6
6.1
3.6
6.3
7.7
5.4
4.2
8.1
7.2
Palau
3.8
4.0
2.2
–1.3
1.1
2.0
0.6
0.7
0.4
12.2
8.1
0.9
4.6
15.0
6.2
Papua New Guinea
4.4
5.2
6.0
6.7
5.4
4.4
3.9
4.9
4.5
6.6
5.4
4.5
5.7
6.2
5.2
Philippines
4.6
3.6
0.7
1.2
2.9
5.3
2.4
2.4
3.9
5.3
4.3
3.0
3.1
5.8
3.7
Samoa
5.2
–1.2
1.9
0.1
1.3
3.7
2.2
1.5
–3.0
8.7
6.3
3.0
4.1
10.9
2.3
Solomon Islands
7.7
5.3
–0.6
0.5
0.5
3.5
1.6
3.0
–0.1
3.7
3.6
3.4
3.5
4.3
3.0
Sri Lanka
8.6
2.8
2.2
4.0
6.6
4.3
4.3
4.6
6.0
48.2
29.5
5.0
12.1
69.8
9.1
Thailand
3.1
1.9
–0.9
0.2
0.7
1.1
0.7
–0.8
1.2
6.3
2.8
2.0
2.2
7.3
0.3
Timor-Leste
6.3
0.8
0.6
–1.5
0.5
2.3
0.9
0.5
3.8
7.0
4.0
2.0
5.3
7.0
4.0
Tonga
6.0
2.3
0.1
–0.6
7.2
6.8
3.3
0.4
1.4
8.5
8.9
2.5
6.9
11.3
5.1
Tuvalu
2.4
1.1
3.1
3.5
4.1
2.2
3.5
1.6
2.9
5.7
4.0
2.9
2.9
5.7
4.0
Vanuatu
2.4
0.8
2.5
0.8
3.1
2.4
2.7
5.3
2.3
4.6
3.4
3.1
0.7
4.9
3.6
Vietnam
10.4
4.1
0.6
2.7
3.5
3.5
2.8
3.2
1.8
3.8
3.9
3.5
1.8
4.4
3.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
8.1
6.5
10.6
5.5
5.6
6.4
6.6
5.3
9.5
27.8
19.4
6.7
15.0
28.3
13.9
Albania4
2.7
1.6
1.9
1.3
2.0
2.0
1.4
1.6
2.0
6.2
4.3
3.0
3.7
5.8
3.3
Belarus
19.8
18.1
13.5
11.8
6.0
4.9
5.6
5.5
9.5
16.5
13.1
5.0
10.0
18.9
12.4
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2.6
–0.9
–1.0
–1.6
0.8
1.4
0.6
–1.1
2.0
10.5
4.5
2.1
1.8
9.5
4.1
Bulgaria3
5.0
–1.6
–1.1
–1.3
1.2
2.6
2.5
1.2
2.8
12.4
5.2
2.0
6.6
12.7
2.4
Croatia
2.9
–0.2
–0.5
–1.1
1.1
1.5
0.8
0.1
2.6
9.8
5.5
1.9
5.5
9.2
4.9
Hungary
4.8
–0.2
–0.1
0.4
2.4
2.8
3.4
3.3
5.1
13.9
13.3
3.2
7.4
20.1
6.7
Kosovo
2.4
0.4
–0.5
0.2
1.5
1.1
2.7
0.2
3.3
12.0
5.0
2.0
6.7
12.5
1.8
Moldova
8.5
5.1
9.6
6.4
6.5
3.6
4.8
3.8
5.1
28.5
13.8
5.0
13.9
30.0
8.0
Montenegro
3.5
–0.7
1.5
–0.3
2.4
2.6
0.4
–0.2
2.4
12.8
9.2
1.9
4.7
16.3
7.0
North Macedonia
2.4
–0.3
–0.3
–0.2
1.4
1.5
0.8
1.2
3.2
10.6
4.5
2.0
4.9
9.3
4.0
Poland
2.9
0.1
–0.9
–0.7
2.0
1.8
2.2
3.4
5.1
13.8
14.3
2.5
8.6
15.8
9.0
Romania
6.5
1.1
–0.6
–1.6
1.3
4.6
3.8
2.6
5.0
13.3
11.0
2.5
8.2
14.7
7.7
Russia 
9.5
7.8
15.5
7.0
3.7
2.9
4.5
3.4
6.7
13.8
5.0
4.0
8.4
12.5
4.0
Serbia
9.6
2.1
1.4
1.1
3.1
2.0
1.9
1.6
4.1
11.5
8.3
3.0
7.9
12.5
6.0
Türkiye
8.3
8.9
7.7
7.8
11.1
16.3
15.2
12.3
19.6
73.1
51.2
15.0
36.1
73.5
36.9
Ukraine4
10.1
12.1
48.7
13.9
14.4
10.9
7.9
2.7
9.4
20.6
. . .
. . .
10.0
30.0
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean5
4.9
4.9
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
14.1
11.4
5.7
11.6
14.6
9.5
Antigua and Barbuda
2.3
1.1
1.0
–0.5
2.4
1.2
1.4
1.1
1.6
8.5
4.5
2.0
1.2
10.5
2.7
Argentina4
8.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
25.7
34.3
53.5
42.0
48.4
72.4
76.1
32.2
50.9
95.0
60.0
Aruba
2.6
0.4
0.5
–0.9
–1.0
3.6
3.9
–1.3
0.7
6.0
5.5
2.8
3.6
7.7
3.0
The Bahamas
2.0
1.2
1.9
–0.3
1.5
2.3
2.5
0.0
2.9
5.7
5.3
2.4
4.1
7.2
3.4
Barbados
5.2
1.8
–1.1
1.5
4.4
3.7
4.1
2.9
3.1
9.9
8.2
2.4
5.2
10.0
6.7
Belize
2.3
1.2
–0.9
0.7
1.1
0.3
0.2
0.1
3.2
6.6
4.7
2.0
4.9
8.0
2.5
Bolivia
6.0
5.8
4.1
3.6
2.8
2.3
1.8
0.9
0.7
3.2
3.6
3.5
0.9
4.2
3.6
Brazil
5.5
6.3
9.0
8.7
3.4
3.7
3.7
3.2
8.3
9.4
4.7
3.0
10.1
6.0
4.7
Chile
3.1
4.7
4.3
3.8
2.2
2.3
2.3
3.0
4.5
11.6
8.7
3.0
7.1
12.2
6.2
Colombia
4.3
2.9
5.0
7.5
4.3
3.2
3.5
2.5
3.5
9.7
7.1
3.0
5.6
11.0
6.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
135
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
(continued)5
4.9
4.9
5.4
5.5
6.3
6.6
7.7
6.4
9.8
14.1
11.4
5.7
11.6
14.6
9.5
Costa Rica
8.8
4.5
0.8
0.0
1.6
2.2
2.1
0.7
1.7
8.9
6.4
3.0
3.3
9.5
4.8
Dominica
2.1
0.8
–0.9
0.1
0.3
1.0
1.5
–0.7
1.6
5.3
4.7
2.0
3.5
3.5
4.9
Dominican Republic
9.7
3.0
0.8
1.6
3.3
3.6
1.8
3.8
8.2
9.0
5.7
4.0
8.5
8.0
4.9
Ecuador
4.0
3.6
4.0
1.7
0.4
–0.2
0.3
–0.3
0.1
3.2
2.4
1.0
1.9
3.8
1.4
El Salvador
3.4
1.1
–0.7
0.6
1.0
1.1
0.1
–0.4
3.5
7.3
2.7
1.2
6.1
6.0
2.0
Grenada
3.0
–1.0
–0.6
1.7
0.9
0.8
0.6
–0.7
1.2
4.5
3.5
2.0
1.9
5.4
2.3
Guatemala
6.1
3.4
2.4
4.4
4.4
3.8
3.7
3.2
4.3
6.4
5.6
4.0
3.1
8.0
4.6
Guyana
5.4
0.7
–0.9
0.8
1.9
1.3
2.1
1.2
3.3
7.6
7.6
3.5
5.7
9.4
6.0
Haiti
9.5
3.2
5.3
11.4
10.6
11.4
17.3
22.9
15.9
26.8
21.2
9.7
13.1
31.5
14.8
Honduras4
6.8
6.1
3.2
2.7
3.9
4.3
4.4
3.5
4.5
8.6
8.5
4.0
5.3
11.0
6.2
Jamaica
11.4
8.3
3.7
2.3
4.4
3.7
3.9
5.2
5.9
9.0
7.0
5.0
7.3
9.5
5.5
Mexico
4.2
4.0
2.7
2.8
6.0
4.9
3.6
3.4
5.7
8.0
6.3
3.0
7.4
8.5
4.8
Nicaragua
8.9
6.0
4.0
3.5
3.9
4.9
5.4
3.7
4.9
9.9
7.0
3.5
7.2
10.0
5.5
Panama
4.0
2.6
0.1
0.7
0.9
0.8
–0.4
–1.6
1.6
3.9
3.3
2.0
2.6
4.4
3.0
Paraguay
6.1
5.0
3.1
4.1
3.6
4.0
2.8
1.8
4.8
9.5
4.5
4.0
6.8
8.2
4.2
Peru
2.9
3.2
3.5
3.6
2.8
1.3
2.1
1.8
4.0
7.5
4.4
2.0
6.4
6.8
3.0
St. Kitts and Nevis
3.4
0.2
–2.3
–0.7
0.7
–1.0
–0.3
–0.6
0.2
3.8
2.8
2.0
1.9
3.4
2.2
St. Lucia
2.9
3.5
–1.0
–3.1
0.1
2.6
0.5
–1.8
2.4
6.4
2.7
2.0
4.1
5.5
2.3
St. Vincent and the 
Grenadines
3.4
0.2
–1.7
–0.2
2.2
2.3
0.9
–0.6
1.6
5.8
4.6
2.0
3.4
8.0
2.1
Suriname
8.5
3.4
6.9
55.5
22.0
6.9
4.4
34.9
59.1
47.6
27.2
5.0
60.7
35.2
22.9
Trinidad and Tobago
7.6
5.7
4.7
3.1
1.9
1.0
1.0
0.6
1.5
5.0
4.6
2.1
3.5
6.5
3.8
Uruguay
7.5
8.9
8.7
9.6
6.2
7.6
7.9
9.8
7.7
9.1
7.8
4.5
8.0
8.9
7.2
Venezuela4
24.1
62.2
121.7
254.9
438.1
65,374.1
19,906.0
2,355.1
1,588.5
210.0
195.0
. . .
686.4
220.0
150.0
Middle East and 
Central Asia
8.4
6.5
5.6
5.9
7.1
10.0
7.7
10.5
12.9
13.8
13.1
6.8
12.7
15.6
10.8
Afghanistan4
8.7
4.7
–0.7
4.4
5.0
0.6
2.3
5.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
4.2
2.9
4.8
6.4
5.6
4.3
2.0
2.4
7.2
9.7
8.7
9.5
8.5
11.1
7.5
Armenia
5.1
3.0
3.7
–1.4
1.2
2.5
1.4
1.2
7.2
8.5
7.0
4.1
7.7
8.5
6.0
Azerbaijan
7.8
1.4
4.0
12.4
12.8
2.3
2.7
2.8
6.7
12.2
10.8
4.0
12.0
12.5
9.0
Bahrain
2.4
2.6
1.8
2.8
1.4
2.1
1.0
–2.3
–0.6
3.5
3.4
1.9
–0.4
3.0
1.8
Djibouti
4.2
1.3
–0.8
2.7
0.6
0.1
3.3
1.8
1.2
6.6
1.9
2.5
2.5
5.5
3.5
Egypt
9.8
10.1
11.0
10.2
23.5
20.9
13.9
5.7
4.5
8.5
12.0
7.0
4.9
13.1
9.2
Georgia
5.7
3.1
4.0
2.1
6.0
2.6
4.9
5.2
9.6
11.6
6.0
3.0
13.9
9.0
3.8
Iran
18.8
15.6
11.9
9.1
9.6
30.2
34.6
36.4
40.1
40.0
40.0
25.0
34.7
45.0
35.0
Iraq
. . .
2.2
1.4
0.5
0.2
0.4
–0.2
0.6
6.0
6.5
4.5
2.0
5.3
5.8
3.7
Jordan
4.7
3.0
–1.1
–0.6
3.6
4.5
0.7
0.4
1.3
3.8
3.0
2.5
2.3
4.4
3.0
Kazakhstan
8.4
6.7
6.7
14.6
7.4
6.0
5.2
6.8
8.0
14.0
11.3
5.3
8.4
16.4
9.0
Kuwait
4.0
3.1
3.7
3.5
1.5
0.6
1.1
2.1
3.4
4.3
2.4
2.5
4.1
3.2
2.6
Kyrgyz Republic
8.8
7.5
6.5
0.4
3.2
1.5
1.1
6.3
11.9
13.5
12.4
4.8
11.2
15.4
10.0
Lebanon4
4.1
1.1
–3.8
–0.8
4.5
6.1
2.9
84.9
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya4
5.1
2.4
10.0
25.9
25.9
14.0
–2.9
1.5
2.8
5.5
4.0
3.1
3.7
5.8
2.6
Mauritania
6.6
3.8
0.5
1.5
2.3
3.1
2.3
2.3
3.8
7.1
7.8
5.7
5.7
8.5
7.0
Morocco
1.8
0.4
1.4
1.5
0.7
1.6
0.2
0.6
1.4
6.2
4.1
2.0
3.2
6.0
3.7
Oman
3.9
1.0
0.1
1.1
1.6
0.9
0.1
–0.9
1.5
3.1
1.9
1.9
3.8
1.7
0.8
Pakistan4
10.3
8.6
4.5
2.9
4.1
3.9
6.7
10.7
8.9
12.1
19.9
6.5
9.7
21.3
15.0
Qatar
5.4
4.2
0.9
2.7
0.4
0.3
–0.7
–2.7
2.3
4.5
3.3
1.5
5.9
3.1
3.5
Saudi Arabia
3.2
2.2
1.2
2.1
–0.8
2.5
–2.1
3.4
3.1
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.2
2.7
2.2
Somalia
. . .
1.3
0.9
0.0
4.0
4.3
4.5
4.3
4.6
9.0
3.9
3.2
5.7
8.3
3.8
Sudan6
16.5
36.9
16.9
17.8
32.4
63.3
51.0
163.3
359.1
154.9
76.9
8.1
318.2
129.5
49.4
Syria7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
9.3
6.1
5.8
5.9
7.3
3.8
7.8
8.6
9.0
8.3
8.1
6.5
8.0
8.5
7.6
Tunisia
3.9
4.6
4.4
3.6
5.3
7.3
6.7
5.6
5.7
8.1
8.5
4.8
6.6
9.4
8.2
Turkmenistan
6.4
6.0
7.4
3.6
8.0
13.3
5.1
7.6
15.0
17.5
10.5
8.0
21.0
14.0
7.0
United Arab Emirates
4.8
2.3
4.1
1.6
2.0
3.1
–1.9
–2.1
0.2
5.2
3.6
2.0
0.2
5.2
3.6
Uzbekistan
11.6
9.1
8.5
8.8
13.9
17.5
14.5
12.9
10.8
11.2
10.8
5.1
10.0
11.5
11.4
West Bank and Gaza
3.8
1.7
1.4
–0.2
0.2
–0.2
1.6
–0.7
1.2
4.9
3.4
2.0
1.3
5.7
3.8
Yemen
11.4
8.2
22.0
21.3
30.4
27.6
12.0
23.1
45.7
43.8
17.1
5.0
58.5
29.2
7.7
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
136	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)
End of Period2
Average
Projections
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
2021
2022
2023
Sub-Saharan Africa
8.6
6.4
6.7
10.2
10.7
8.3
8.2
10.2
11.1
14.4
11.9
6.9
11.5
15.5
10.2
Angola
16.2
7.3
9.2
30.7
29.8
19.6
17.1
22.3
25.8
21.7
11.8
6.4
27.0
15.0
11.0
Benin
3.3
–1.1
0.2
–0.8
1.8
0.8
–0.9
3.0
1.7
5.0
1.8
1.6
1.7
5.0
1.8
Botswana
8.4
4.4
3.1
2.8
3.3
3.2
2.7
1.9
6.7
11.2
5.8
4.6
8.7
11.2
5.8
Burkina Faso
2.6
–0.3
1.7
0.4
1.5
2.0
–3.2
1.9
3.9
14.2
1.5
2.0
8.0
13.7
–3.5
Burundi
10.8
4.4
5.6
5.5
16.6
–2.8
–0.7
7.3
8.3
17.3
8.5
4.0
10.1
19.7
0.1
Cabo Verde
2.6
–0.2
0.1
–1.4
0.8
1.3
1.1
0.6
1.9
6.5
3.5
2.0
5.4
6.5
3.5
Cameroon
2.5
1.9
2.7
0.9
0.6
1.1
2.5
2.5
2.3
4.6
2.8
2.0
3.5
4.1
2.9
Central African Republic
3.3
17.8
1.4
4.9
4.2
1.6
2.8
0.9
4.3
6.5
6.3
2.5
2.7
11.0
3.3
Chad
2.6
1.7
4.8
–1.6
–0.9
4.0
–1.0
4.5
–0.8
4.9
3.1
3.0
1.0
5.2
2.5
Comoros
3.7
0.0
0.9
0.8
0.1
1.7
3.7
0.8
–0.2
11.4
8.4
1.9
7.1
16.3
0.9
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
15.3
1.2
0.7
3.2
35.7
29.3
4.7
11.4
9.0
8.4
9.8
6.3
5.3
11.0
6.8
Republic of Congo
3.5
0.9
3.2
3.2
0.4
1.2
0.4
1.4
2.0
3.5
3.2
3.0
1.5
3.5
3.2
Côte d’Ivoire
2.2
0.5
1.2
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.8
2.4
4.2
5.5
4.0
2.0
5.6
6.4
2.7
Equatorial Guinea
4.4
4.3
1.7
1.4
0.7
1.3
1.2
4.8
–0.1
5.1
5.7
3.5
2.9
6.0
5.5
Eritrea
13.6
8.4
28.5
–5.6
–13.3
–14.4
1.3
5.6
6.6
7.4
6.4
5.0
6.7
8.2
4.5
Eswatini
6.7
5.7
5.0
7.8
6.2
4.8
2.6
3.9
3.7
4.9
4.2
4.4
3.5
4.9
4.2
Ethiopia
16.6
7.4
9.6
6.6
10.7
13.8
15.8
20.4
26.8
33.6
28.6
14.4
35.1
32.5
26.0
Gabon
1.2
4.5
–0.1
2.1
2.7
4.8
2.0
1.3
1.1
3.5
3.2
2.2
1.7
4.6
2.0
The Gambia
5.5
6.3
6.8
7.2
8.0
6.5
7.1
5.9
7.4
11.3
11.1
5.0
7.6
12.4
9.7
Ghana
11.2
15.5
17.2
17.5
12.4
9.8
7.1
9.9
10.0
27.2
20.9
6.5
12.6
31.7
17.4
Guinea
19.0
9.7
8.2
8.2
8.9
9.8
9.5
10.6
12.6
12.7
12.2
7.8
12.5
12.9
11.5
Guinea-Bissau
2.8
–1.0
1.5
2.7
–0.2
0.4
0.3
1.5
3.3
5.5
4.0
2.0
5.8
1.0
4.0
Kenya
9.0
6.9
6.6
6.3
8.0
4.7
5.2
5.3
6.1
7.4
6.6
5.0
5.7
8.1
6.0
Lesotho
6.0
5.4
3.2
6.6
4.4
4.8
5.2
5.0
6.0
8.1
6.2
5.5
7.2
7.4
5.0
Liberia
8.6
9.9
7.7
8.8
12.4
23.5
27.0
17.0
7.8
6.9
8.7
5.0
5.5
11.0
6.5
Madagascar
10.1
6.1
7.4
6.1
8.6
8.6
5.6
4.2
5.8
9.8
8.0
5.8
6.2
12.0
9.7
Malawi
12.9
23.8
21.9
21.7
11.5
9.2
9.4
8.6
9.3
18.4
16.5
6.5
11.5
20.6
15.2
Mali
2.6
0.9
1.4
–1.8
2.4
1.9
–3.0
0.5
3.8
8.0
3.0
2.0
8.8
4.0
3.0
Mauritius
5.6
3.2
1.3
1.0
3.7
3.2
0.5
2.5
4.0
10.2
6.1
3.6
6.8
9.7
6.4
Mozambique
9.1
2.6
3.6
17.4
15.1
3.9
2.8
3.1
5.7
11.3
8.6
5.5
6.7
15.4
8.2
Namibia
5.8
5.3
3.4
6.7
6.1
4.3
3.7
2.2
3.6
6.4
4.9
4.5
–0.8
6.9
4.4
Niger
2.6
–0.9
1.0
0.2
0.2
2.8
–2.5
2.9
3.8
4.5
3.0
2.0
4.9
4.8
3.0
Nigeria
11.5
8.0
9.0
15.7
16.5
12.1
11.4
13.2
17.0
18.9
17.3
11.5
15.6
21.0
15.1
Rwanda
8.3
1.8
2.5
5.7
4.8
1.4
2.4
7.7
0.8
9.5
8.0
5.0
1.9
8.7
6.5
São Tomé and Príncipe
16.6
7.0
6.1
5.4
5.7
7.9
7.7
9.8
8.1
15.0
11.2
5.0
9.5
16.7
6.8
Senegal
2.1
–1.1
0.9
1.2
1.1
0.5
1.0
2.5
2.2
7.5
3.1
2.0
3.8
7.0
0.6
Seychelles
8.1
1.4
4.0
–1.0
2.9
3.7
1.8
1.2
9.8
4.1
3.3
3.0
7.9
5.7
1.0
Sierra Leone
9.5
4.6
6.7
10.9
18.2
16.0
14.8
13.4
11.9
25.9
26.8
10.3
17.9
29.4
23.7
South Africa
5.5
6.1
4.6
6.3
5.3
4.6
4.1
3.3
4.6
6.7
5.1
4.5
5.4
7.0
4.5
South Sudan
. . .
1.7
52.8
322.7
213.0
83.4
49.3
24.0
30.2
17.6
21.7
8.0
2.4
28.4
15.0
Tanzania
8.8
6.1
5.6
5.2
5.3
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.7
4.0
5.3
4.1
4.2
4.4
5.4
Togo
2.7
0.2
1.8
0.9
–0.2
0.9
0.7
1.8
4.3
5.6
2.1
1.7
6.2
1.3
3.9
Uganda
9.2
4.3
3.7
5.2
5.6
2.5
2.1
2.8
2.2
6.4
6.4
5.0
2.9
8.4
6.8
Zambia
11.2
7.8
10.1
17.9
6.6
7.5
9.2
15.7
22.0
12.5
9.5
7.0
16.4
12.7
8.0
Zimbabwe4
5.0
–0.2
–2.4
–1.6
0.9
10.6
255.3
557.2
98.5
284.9
204.6
10.0
60.7
547.3
100.0
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
4See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Honduras, Lebanon, Libya, Pakistan, Ukraine, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
7Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
137
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
Average
Projections
2004–13
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.3
–3.6
–3.0
–3.3
–3.2
–3.3
–3.6
–11.9
–8.7
–4.4
–4.6
–4.9
Output Gap2
–2.3
–2.8
–2.0
–1.7
–0.8
–0.1
0.2
–3.4
–0.6
–0.3
–0.9
–0.1
Structural Balance2
–4.2
–2.5
–2.2
–2.7
–2.9
–3.2
–3.6
–8.2
–7.2
–4.3
–4.2
–4.7
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
–6.5
–4.0
–3.5
–4.4
–4.6
–5.3
–5.5
–14.5
–10.9
–4.0
–5.7
–7.1
Output Gap2
–3.7
–4.0
–2.5
–2.1
–1.3
0.0
0.7
–3.2
0.5
0.0
–0.8
–0.3
Structural Balance2
–4.5
–2.7
–2.5
–3.6
–4.1
–5.1
–5.7
–10.8
–9.5
–4.0
–5.3
–6.8
Net Debt 
60.6
81.1
80.9
81.9
80.3
81.2
83.0
99.1
99.6
94.7
96.9
112.0
Gross Debt 
82.3
104.6
105.2
107.2
106.2
107.5
108.8
134.5
128.1
122.1
122.9
134.9
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.3
–2.5
–2.0
–1.5
–0.9
–0.4
–0.7
–7.0
–5.1
–3.8
–3.3
–2.5
Output Gap2
–0.5
–2.9
–2.3
–1.7
–0.6
–0.1
0.0
–4.5
–1.9
–0.3
–0.8
0.1
Structural Balance2
–3.0
–0.7
–0.5
–0.5
–0.5
–0.3
–0.5
–4.3
–3.8
–3.5
–2.9
–2.6
Net Debt
62.8
76.3
75.1
74.6
72.5
70.7
69.1
79.4
78.6
76.7
76.2
75.2
Gross Debt
78.2
93.1
91.2
90.4
87.9
85.9
83.8
96.9
95.3
93.0
91.3
87.8
Germany 
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.7
0.6
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.9
1.5
–4.3
–3.7
–3.3
–2.5
–0.5
Output Gap2
–0.2
–0.4
–0.4
0.1
1.0
0.8
0.4
–3.0
–1.3
–0.5
–1.3
0.0
Structural Balance2
–1.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.6
1.3
–2.9
–3.0
–3.0
–1.8
–0.6
Net Debt
57.5
54.9
52.2
49.3
45.4
42.6
40.4
45.8
47.0
47.7
47.8
44.1
Gross Debt
72.3
75.3
71.9
69.0
64.6
61.3
58.9
68.0
69.6
71.1
68.3
59.7
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
–4.4
–3.9
–3.6
–3.6
–3.0
–2.3
–3.1
–8.9
–6.4
–5.1
–5.6
–5.0
Output Gap2
–0.4
–2.2
–2.4
–2.7
–1.5
–0.8
0.0
–4.7
–1.9
–0.8
–1.2
–0.1
Structural Balance2
–4.1
–2.5
–2.1
–1.9
–1.9
–1.5
–2.1
–5.7
–5.1
–4.5
–4.8
–4.9
Net Debt
67.4
85.5
86.3
89.2
89.4
89.2
88.9
102.3
101.1
100.3
101.0
106.9
Gross Debt
77.1
94.9
95.6
98.0
98.1
97.8
97.4
114.7
112.6
111.8
112.5
118.5
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
–3.4
–3.0
–2.6
–2.4
–2.4
–2.2
–1.5
–9.6
–7.2
–5.4
–3.9
–3.0
Output Gap2
–0.6
–4.1
–3.5
–2.7
–1.7
–1.2
–1.2
–6.2
–3.3
0.4
–0.6
0.6
Structural Balance2
–3.4
–1.0
–0.6
–1.2
–1.5
–1.6
–0.9
–6.0
–5.1
–5.7
–3.6
–3.3
Net Debt
104.3
121.4
122.2
121.6
121.3
121.8
121.7
141.8
138.3
135.4
135.6
132.3
Gross Debt
114.3
135.4
135.3
134.8
134.2
134.4
134.1
155.3
150.9
147.2
147.1
142.5
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
–6.3
–5.6
–3.7
–3.6
–3.1
–2.5
–3.0
–9.0
–6.7
–7.9
–3.6
–2.6
Output Gap2
–2.1
–1.9
–1.5
–1.8
–0.3
–0.7
–1.2
–2.6
–2.5
–2.0
–1.1
0.0
Structural Balance2
–5.7
–5.5
–4.2
–4.0
–3.4
–2.5
–2.6
–8.2
–6.3
–7.3
–3.2
–2.6
Net Debt
115.7
145.1
144.6
149.6
148.1
151.0
151.5
162.6
168.1
172.6
172.4
175.1
Gross Debt4
195.1
233.5
228.4
232.5
231.4
232.3
236.3
259.4
262.5
263.9
261.1
263.4
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
–5.6
–5.5
–4.5
–3.3
–2.4
–2.2
–2.2
–12.8
–8.0
–4.3
–2.3
–1.0
Output Gap2
–1.1
–1.8
–1.0
–0.5
0.1
0.3
0.6
–3.5
–0.1
0.4
–1.0
0.0
Structural Balance2
–4.8
–3.9
–3.6
–2.8
–2.3
–2.4
–2.7
0.5
–3.2
–4.3
–1.7
–1.0
Net Debt
52.9
77.3
77.6
76.9
75.7
74.8
74.1
90.2
84.3
75.3
68.5
56.5
Gross Debt
59.1
85.5
86.0
85.8
85.1
84.5
83.9
102.6
95.3
87.0
79.9
68.0
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
–1.0
0.2
–0.1
–0.5
–0.1
0.4
0.0
–11.4
–5.0
–2.2
–1.2
–0.5
Output Gap2
0.0
1.0
–0.1
–0.9
0.4
0.6
0.4
–3.4
–1.4
0.6
–0.1
0.0
Structural Balance2
–0.9
–0.6
0.0
0.1
–0.3
0.0
–0.2
–8.6
–4.0
–2.7
–1.2
–0.5
Net Debt5
26.5
28.5
28.6
28.5
25.8
25.7
23.1
33.6
31.6
30.5
30.3
27.3
Gross Debt
76.1
85.6
91.2
91.8
88.9
88.9
87.2
117.8
112.9
102.2
98.7
88.7
Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the 
relevant individual countries. 
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the 
System of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong SAR, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’ defined-benefit pension 
plans.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Nonconsolidated basis.
5Includes equity shares.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
138	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
5.4
2.8
3.8
2.9
2.3
5.7
4.1
0.9
–7.8
10.1
4.3
2.5
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
4.1
0.4
–1.8
–13.3
–4.0
4.3
5.4
–2.4
–2.2
12.7
7.0
0.3
In SDRs
3.2
1.7
–1.7
–5.9
–3.4
4.5
3.2
0.0
–3.0
10.2
13.3
1.5
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.5
2.5
3.8
3.7
2.0
5.1
3.6
1.2
–9.0
8.7
4.2
2.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.4
3.2
3.4
1.9
2.8
6.4
4.3
0.5
–4.8
11.8
3.3
2.9
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.7
3.0
4.0
4.7
2.5
4.8
3.8
2.1
–8.4
9.5
6.0
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
2.5
4.3
–0.6
1.6
7.5
5.2
–1.0
–7.8
11.8
2.4
3.0
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.3
0.3
1.8
1.1
–0.3
–0.4
0.3
0.9
0.6
–1.5
0.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.5
–0.6
–0.7
–4.4
–1.6
1.6
1.1
–1.5
–1.1
1.7
0.8
–1.7
Trade in Goods 
World Trade1
Volume
5.3
2.7
3.0
2.3
2.1
5.7
3.9
0.2
–5.0
10.8
2.9
2.0
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
4.2
0.3
–2.4
–14.6
–4.8
4.8
5.7
–3.0
–2.6
14.4
8.5
–0.4
In SDRs
3.4
1.6
–2.4
–7.3
–4.2
5.1
3.6
–0.7
–3.4
11.8
14.8
0.7
World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
2.6
1.1
–0.5
–3.0
–5.2
0.1
2.0
0.4
–3.2
6.8
10.2
3.9
Oil
13.6
–1.9
–9.2
–46.0
–15.0
22.3
25.1
–7.5
–31.7
65.9
41.4
–12.9
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
8.3
1.4
–5.8
–17.0
–0.3
6.4
1.3
0.6
6.5
26.3
7.3
–6.2
Food
5.8
1.3
–1.6
–16.9
1.5
3.8
–1.2
–3.1
1.7
26.1
14.2
–5.8
Beverages
6.7
2.4
20.6
–7.4
–3.0
–3.8
–9.2
–5.7
2.4
22.4
16.5
–2.7
Agricultural Raw Materials
4.7
–1.2
–7.6
–11.3
–0.2
5.4
2.0
–5.4
–3.4
15.4
2.5
–6.9
Metal
13.1
0.3
–12.2
–27.3
–5.3
22.2
6.6
3.9
3.5
46.7
–5.5
–12.0
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
1.8
2.4
–0.4
5.3
–4.6
0.3
–0.1
2.9
–3.9
4.4
16.6
5.1
Oil
12.7
–0.6
–9.1
–41.3
–14.4
22.6
22.6
–5.2
–32.2
62.2
49.8
–11.9
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
7.5
2.7
–5.7
–10.0
0.4
6.7
–0.8
3.1
5.7
23.5
13.6
–5.1
Food
4.9
2.7
–1.5
–9.8
2.2
4.1
–3.3
–0.7
0.9
23.3
20.9
–4.7
Beverages
5.8
3.8
20.7
0.5
–2.3
–3.5
–11.1
–3.4
1.6
19.7
23.3
–1.5
Agricultural Raw Materials
3.9
0.1
–7.6
–3.7
0.5
5.7
–0.1
–3.1
–4.1
12.8
8.5
–5.8
Metal
12.2
1.7
–12.1
–21.1
–4.7
22.5
4.4
6.4
2.6
43.4
0.1
–11.0
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
1.0
3.7
–0.5
16.2
–5.0
–1.9
–2.5
6.0
–5.0
3.0
23.3
7.2
Oil
11.8
0.7
–9.2
–35.3
–14.7
19.8
19.6
–2.3
–33.0
60.0
58.4
–10.2
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
6.6
4.0
–5.8
–0.7
0.0
4.3
–3.2
6.2
4.5
21.8
20.1
–3.3
Food
4.1
4.0
–1.6
–0.5
1.8
1.7
–5.6
2.3
–0.3
21.6
27.9
–2.9
Beverages
5.0
5.1
20.5
10.9
–2.7
–5.7
–13.2
–0.5
0.5
18.1
30.4
0.4
Agricultural Raw Materials
3.0
1.4
–7.7
6.3
0.1
3.3
–2.5
–0.2
–5.2
11.3
14.8
–4.0
Metal
11.3
3.0
–12.2
–12.9
–5.0
19.7
1.9
9.6
1.5
41.5
5.8
–9.3
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
139
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Averages
Projections
2004–13
2014–23
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Trade in Goods (continued)
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.3
2.3
3.0
3.0
1.7
5.1
3.0
0.3
–6.4
9.7
2.4
1.7
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.2
3.0
2.8
1.4
2.7
6.5
3.9
–0.4
–0.9
11.0
1.4
2.4
Fuel Exporters
4.9
0.3
–0.2
2.0
0.7
1.1
0.3
–4.3
–6.1
0.6
7.6
2.5
Nonfuel Exporters
7.9
3.5
3.7
1.3
3.1
7.5
4.6
0.4
0.0
12.4
0.5
2.3
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.8
2.9
3.4
3.7
2.2
4.8
3.8
0.6
–5.8
10.8
5.3
1.5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.0
2.7
2.7
–0.1
2.2
7.5
5.3
–0.1
–5.6
12.1
1.4
2.9
Fuel Exporters
10.0
–0.5
3.6
0.0
–6.8
–0.9
–3.0
2.4
–12.0
1.2
9.4
2.3
Nonfuel Exporters
8.9
3.2
2.5
–0.2
3.6
8.8
6.4
–0.3
–4.8
13.4
0.6
3.0
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
2.2
1.4
–1.8
–6.4
–2.2
4.1
2.7
–1.2
–2.2
10.1
11.5
1.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.2
1.8
–3.3
–9.1
–7.0
7.1
4.9
0.2
–5.8
15.9
19.2
0.3
Fuel Exporters
10.4
0.3
–7.9
–30.0
–10.7
15.5
13.9
–3.4
–22.0
38.8
37.4
–5.6
Nonfuel Exporters
5.0
2.3
–1.9
–3.6
–6.3
5.5
3.3
0.9
–2.9
12.8
16.4
1.5
Imports
Advanced Economies
2.7
1.1
–2.0
–8.1
–3.5
4.5
3.4
–1.5
–3.3
9.5
13.3
0.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
4.4
2.3
–2.8
–5.2
–5.5
5.7
3.6
0.6
–2.9
13.9
17.4
0.7
Fuel Exporters
4.3
2.6
–2.6
–2.4
–3.6
3.4
1.3
2.6
–0.8
11.1
16.0
2.4
Nonfuel Exporters
4.4
2.2
–2.8
–5.7
–5.9
6.0
3.9
0.3
–3.2
14.3
17.6
0.5
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.3
0.2
1.9
1.3
–0.4
–0.7
0.3
1.1
0.6
–1.6
0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.7
–0.4
–0.5
–4.1
–1.5
1.3
1.3
–0.4
–3.0
1.7
1.5
–0.4
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
–0.8
0.0
2.4
8.3
0.2
–3.2
–2.0
0.8
0.4
–5.6
–2.4
1.5
Emerging and Developing Europe
2.6
0.6
–0.4
–9.1
–5.4
3.3
4.2
0.4
–4.4
8.2
8.5
2.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
2.4
–0.8
–2.7
–9.0
0.9
4.4
–0.2
–0.6
0.6
4.2
–3.3
–1.9
Middle East and Central Asia
4.4
–1.7
–4.2
–24.1
–5.4
9.7
10.0
–4.6
–17.7
21.0
14.4
–6.5
Sub-Saharan Africa
4.6
–0.3
–3.6
–14.7
–1.5
9.4
4.8
–2.3
0.4
10.6
2.1
–5.5
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
5.8
–2.2
–5.5
–28.2
–7.3
11.7
12.5
–5.9
–21.4
24.9
18.5
–7.8
Nonfuel
0.6
0.1
1.0
2.2
–0.4
–0.4
–0.6
0.5
0.3
–1.3
–1.0
1.0
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
17,869
25,022
23,799
21,127
20,752
22,884
25,072
24,653
22,260
27,663
30,593 31,416
Goods
14,190
19,305
18,643
16,202
15,746
17,458
19,106
18,540
17,212
21,772
24,020 24,355
Average Oil Price3
13.6
–1.9
–9.2
–46.0
–15.0
22.3
25.1
–7.5
–31.7
65.9
41.4
–12.9
In US Dollars a Barrel
77.52
66.33
94.05
50.82
43.22
52.86
66.15
61.21
41.83
69.42
98.19
85.52
Export Unit Value of Manufactures4
2.6
1.1
–0.5
–3.0
–5.2
0.1
2.0
0.4
–3.2
6.8
10.2
3.9
1Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
2As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 82 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) 
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16 
shares in world commodity imports.
3Percent change of average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices. 
4Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies. 
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
140	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
225.5
273.0
369.3
489.3
398.6
379.3
179.9
339.4
–370.9
–170.2
236.6
United States
–370.1
–408.5
–396.2
–361.0
–439.8
–446.0
–619.7
–846.4
–985.3
–822.9
–701.4
Euro Area
316.9
313.5
364.0
402.1
398.0
311.1
247.7
356.9
137.3
194.7
424.8
Germany
280.3
288.8
295.1
288.9
316.3
294.3
272.5
313.6
168.7
216.6
301.1
France
–27.3
–9.0
–12.0
–19.9
–23.2
14.0
–47.4
10.6
–35.1
–42.3
–9.1
Italy
41.0
26.4
48.9
50.7
52.9
64.8
70.9
51.3
–3.3
5.6
57.1
Spain
23.3
24.2
39.1
36.4
26.7
29.3
10.6
13.2
–2.4
–3.5
25.3
Japan
36.8
136.4
197.8
203.5
177.8
176.3
146.9
142.2
58.1
94.4
165.6
United Kingdom
–157.9
–152.7
–145.6
–98.1
–112.6
–76.8
–69.0
–82.5
–153.9
–157.9
–155.9
Canada
–41.9
–54.4
–47.2
–46.2
–41.0
–35.5
–29.4
0.9
11.6
–5.3
–51.9
Other Advanced Economies1
351.0
350.3
330.2
333.0
330.6
345.6
401.0
591.7
484.5
448.5
462.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
161.4
–76.1
–99.4
–21.9
–55.4
–3.4
157.8
343.8
598.0
492.3
–108.2
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
227.4
296.1
212.3
166.4
–51.3
93.2
319.8
250.2
191.6
166.9
–25.2
Emerging and Developing Europe
–10.9
34.2
–8.4
–19.9
66.1
50.1
0.4
71.0
131.9
131.5
–13.5
Latin America and the Caribbean
–189.9
–172.7
–102.3
–94.7
–142.1
–106.6
–8.7
–79.3
–97.6
–83.7
–98.2
Middle East and Central Asia
199.7
–140.8
–146.4
–39.0
111.8
17.3
–105.7
121.8
406.5
333.0
89.8
Sub-Saharan Africa
–64.9
–92.9
–54.6
–34.6
–40.0
–57.4
–48.0
–19.9
–34.6
–55.4
–61.2
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
252.0
–144.7
–99.4
41.0
201.3
72.9
–89.8
180.8
498.3
406.6
152.1
Nonfuel
–88.8
70.6
2.2
–60.7
–254.5
–74.5
249.4
164.5
101.6
87.4
–257.7
Of Which, Primary Products
–57.7
–65.0
–45.1
–57.7
–76.3
–48.5
–4.5
–19.0
–37.6
–36.7
–35.8
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–384.4
–353.3
–271.6
–306.0
–382.1
–299.2
–114.0
–294.5
–459.0
–430.2
–508.5
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
–59.2
–72.7
–65.9
–59.5
–52.0
–52.5
–35.6
–40.0
–41.2
–51.1
–45.4
Memorandum
World
386.8
196.9
269.8
467.4
343.2
375.9
337.7
683.3
227.1
322.2
128.4
European Union
451.8
443.2
472.3
502.2
509.1
467.7
418.7
571.6
190.5
262.3
541.2
Middle East and North Africa
191.5
–122.2
–121.1
–19.3
127.5
36.5
–90.2
128.9
399.4
321.3
112.8
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
204.3
–1.0
–58.8
11.4
–0.7
54.2
209.2
418.9
690.8
583.7
–16.5
Low-Income Developing Countries
–42.9
–75.1
–40.6
–33.3
–54.7
–57.6
–51.4
–75.0
–92.8
–91.3
–91.7
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
141
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.6
–0.6
–0.3
0.3
United States
–2.1
–2.2
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–3.0
–3.7
–3.9
–3.1
–2.3
Euro Area
2.3
2.7
3.0
3.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.5
1.0
1.4
2.5
Germany
7.2
8.6
8.5
7.8
8.0
7.6
7.0
7.4
4.2
5.3
6.1
France
–1.0
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
0.5
–1.8
0.4
–1.3
–1.5
–0.3
Italy
1.9
1.4
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.2
3.7
2.4
–0.2
0.3
2.5
Spain
1.7
2.0
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.9
–0.2
–0.2
1.5
Japan
0.8
3.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.9
1.4
2.2
3.2
United Kingdom
–5.1
–5.2
–5.3
–3.6
–3.9
–2.7
–2.5
–2.6
–4.8
–4.5
–3.5
Canada
–2.3
–3.5
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.0
0.5
–0.2
–1.9
Other Advanced Economies1
5.0
5.4
5.0
4.7
4.4
4.7
5.5
7.1
5.7
5.1
4.4
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
0.5
–0.3
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.5
0.8
1.3
1.0
–0.2
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
1.5
1.9
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.7
0.6
–0.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.3
1.0
–0.3
–0.5
1.7
1.3
0.0
1.7
2.9
2.8
–0.2
Latin America and the Caribbean
–3.2
–3.4
–2.1
–1.7
–2.7
–2.0
–0.2
–1.6
–1.7
–1.4
–1.4
Middle East and Central Asia
4.9
–3.9
–4.1
–1.1
2.8
0.4
–2.5
2.3
6.5
5.2
1.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
–3.6
–5.7
–3.6
–2.1
–2.3
–3.3
–2.9
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
–2.0
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
6.0
–4.2
–3.1
1.2
5.3
1.9
–2.4
3.8
8.4
6.7
2.1
Nonfuel
–0.3
0.3
0.0
–0.2
–0.8
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.3
0.2
–0.5
Of Which, Primary Products
–2.8
–3.2
–2.3
–2.7
–3.6
–2.4
–0.2
–0.9
–1.6
–1.5
–1.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–2.7
–2.8
–2.1
–2.2
–2.6
–2.0
–0.8
–1.9
–2.7
–2.4
–2.1
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
–4.8
–6.2
–5.7
–5.4
–4.5
–4.3
–2.9
–2.9
–3.1
–3.6
–2.4
Memorandum
World
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.7
0.2
0.3
0.1
European Union
2.9
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.2
3.0
2.7
3.3
1.1
1.5
2.6
Middle East and North Africa
5.8
–4.2
–4.1
–0.6
3.9
1.1
–2.6
2.9
7.4
5.9
1.7
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
0.7
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.6
1.1
1.6
1.3
0.0
Low-Income Developing Countries
–2.1
–3.8
–2.1
–1.7
–2.5
–2.5
–2.2
–3.0
–3.4
–3.1
–2.1
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
142	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
1.5
2.0
2.7
3.4
2.5
2.4
1.3
2.0
–2.0
–0.9
1.0
United States
–15.5
–17.9
–17.7
–15.1
–17.3
–17.5
–28.7
–33.1
–32.7
–26.3
–19.1
Euro Area
8.9
9.7
11.2
11.3
10.3
8.1
7.1
8.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
15.8
18.3
18.5
16.6
16.8
16.2
16.3
15.6
8.9
11.3
13.1
France
–3.1
–1.2
–1.5
–2.4
–2.5
1.6
–6.3
1.1
–3.2
–3.8
–0.7
Italy
6.5
4.8
8.9
8.4
8.1
10.2
12.7
7.5
–0.4
0.7
6.0
Spain
5.1
6.0
9.4
7.9
5.3
6.0
2.7
2.6
–0.4
–0.6
3.3
Japan
4.3
17.4
24.4
23.2
19.1
19.5
18.5
15.5
6.2
9.7
14.4
United Kingdom
–18.2
–19.0
–18.9
–12.1
–12.7
–8.6
–8.8
–9.6
–16.7
–15.7
–12.1
Canada
–7.3
–11.0
–9.8
–8.9
–7.4
–6.3
–6.1
0.1
1.6
–0.7
–6.5
Other Advanced Economies1
8.4
9.4
9.0
8.3
7.6
8.2
10.3
12.1
9.1
8.3
7.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.0
–0.9
–1.3
–0.3
–0.7
–0.1
2.0
3.1
4.8
3.9
–0.8
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
5.7
7.8
5.8
4.1
–1.1
2.1
7.3
4.5
3.1
2.6
–0.3
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.7
2.9
–0.7
–1.5
4.3
3.3
0.0
4.0
7.0
6.7
–0.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
–15.3
–16.0
–9.7
–8.1
–11.2
–8.6
–0.8
–5.8
–6.2
–5.2
–5.3
Middle East and Central Asia
12.8
–10.5
–12.1
–3.3
6.5
0.9
–9.1
7.6
19.2
15.8
3.9
Sub-Saharan Africa
–14.3
–27.0
–17.1
–9.4
–9.4
–13.9
–14.2
–4.5
–6.6
–10.6
–9.8
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
14.8
–10.9
–8.3
2.8
12.3
4.8
–8.2
11.8
24.1
20.2
7.6
Nonfuel
–1.3
1.1
0.0
–0.9
–3.3
–1.0
3.5
1.8
1.0
0.8
–2.0
Of Which, Primary Products
–11.7
–15.3
–10.7
–12.2
–15.1
–9.7
–1.0
–3.2
–5.6
–5.3
–4.2
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
–10.5
–11.0
–8.5
–8.4
–9.5
–7.4
–3.1
–6.4
–8.9
–8.0
–7.4
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
–17.5
–27.4
–27.3
–21.7
–16.7
–16.7
–13.3
–11.9
–13.0
–16.0
–10.8
Memorandum
World
1.7
1.0
1.3
2.0
1.3
1.5
1.5
2.4
0.7
1.0
0.3
European Union
6.3
6.9
7.2
7.0
6.4
6.0
5.8
6.6
2.1
2.8
4.6
Middle East and North Africa
13.9
–10.1
–11.0
–2.0
8.4
2.4
–8.8
9.0
21.2
17.3
5.7
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
2.7
0.1
–0.8
0.1
–0.1
0.6
2.8
4.1
6.0
5.0
–0.2
Low-Income Developing Countries
–8.1
–15.6
–8.4
–5.9
–8.6
–8.4
–8.1
–10.1
–10.7
–10.0
–7.2
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
143
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Advanced Economies
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.6
–0.6
–0.3
0.3
United States
–2.1
–2.2
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–3.0
–3.7
–3.9
–3.1
–2.3
Euro Area1
2.3
2.7
3.0
3.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.5
1.0
1.4
2.5
Germany
7.2
8.6
8.5
7.8
8.0
7.6
7.0
7.4
4.2
5.3
6.1
France
–1.0
–0.4
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
0.5
–1.8
0.4
–1.3
–1.5
–0.3
Italy
1.9
1.4
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.2
3.7
2.4
–0.2
0.3
2.5
Spain
1.7
2.0
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.9
–0.2
–0.2
1.5
The Netherlands
8.2
6.3
8.1
10.8
10.8
9.0
7.1
9.0
7.5
7.7
7.2
Belgium
0.8
1.4
0.6
0.7
–0.8
0.2
0.8
–0.4
–2.2
–0.9
0.7
Ireland
1.1
4.4
–4.2
0.5
4.9
–19.8
–6.8
14.2
12.2
9.8
7.1
Austria
2.5
1.7
2.7
1.4
0.9
2.1
1.9
–0.5
–2.6
–2.1
1.8
Portugal
0.2
0.2
1.2
1.3
0.6
0.4
–1.0
–1.2
–1.1
–0.4
–0.3
Greece
–2.4
–1.5
–2.4
–2.6
–3.6
–2.2
–7.3
–6.5
–6.7
–6.3
–3.9
Finland
–1.3
–0.9
–2.0
–0.8
–1.8
–0.3
0.6
0.9
–0.8
–0.2
–0.5
Slovak Republic
1.1
–2.1
–2.7
–1.9
–2.2
–3.4
0.3
–2.0
–3.7
–2.9
0.0
Lithuania
3.2
–2.8
–0.8
0.6
0.3
3.5
7.3
1.4
–1.6
–2.1
0.0
Slovenia
5.1
3.8
4.8
6.2
6.0
5.9
7.6
3.8
–0.1
0.4
0.6
Luxembourg
4.9
4.8
4.8
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.1
4.8
4.3
4.4
4.6
Latvia
–1.6
–0.6
1.6
1.3
–0.2
–0.7
2.9
–2.9
–3.3
–3.0
–1.0
Estonia
0.7
1.8
1.2
2.3
0.8
2.5
–0.3
–1.6
–0.2
0.1
0.6
Cyprus
–4.1
–0.4
–4.2
–5.1
–4.0
–5.7
–10.1
–7.2
–8.5
–7.2
–6.7
Malta
8.5
2.7
–0.6
5.9
6.4
5.0
–2.9
–4.9
–3.1
–2.2
2.0
Japan
0.8
3.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.9
1.4
2.2
3.2
United Kingdom
–5.1
–5.2
–5.3
–3.6
–3.9
–2.7
–2.5
–2.6
–4.8
–4.5
–3.5
Korea
5.6
7.2
6.5
4.6
4.5
3.6
4.6
4.9
3.2
3.5
4.4
Canada
–2.3
–3.5
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.0
0.5
–0.2
–1.9
Taiwan Province of China
11.3
13.6
13.1
14.1
11.6
10.6
14.2
14.8
14.8
12.7
9.9
Australia
–3.0
–4.6
–3.3
–2.6
–2.2
0.4
2.4
3.1
2.1
0.7
–0.5
Switzerland
7.6
9.6
8.1
6.3
6.2
5.5
2.9
9.4
6.2
6.4
7.0
Sweden
4.2
3.3
2.4
3.0
2.7
5.5
5.9
5.4
3.8
3.5
3.2
Singapore
18.0
18.7
17.6
17.3
15.2
14.5
16.8
18.1
12.8
12.5
11.5
Hong Kong SAR
1.4
3.3
4.0
4.6
3.7
5.9
7.0
11.3
8.6
5.9
3.6
Czech Republic
0.2
0.4
1.8
1.5
0.4
0.3
2.0
–0.9
–4.3
–2.2
1.0
Israel
4.1
5.1
3.5
3.5
2.8
3.3
5.3
4.2
2.5
3.7
3.3
Norway
10.8
8.0
4.5
5.5
8.0
2.9
1.1
15.0
19.4
14.5
6.3
Denmark
8.9
8.2
7.8
8.0
7.3
8.5
8.0
8.8
8.2
7.4
7.2
New Zealand
–3.1
–2.8
–2.0
–2.8
–4.2
–2.9
–0.8
–6.0
–7.7
–6.0
–5.3
Puerto Rico
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Macao SAR
32.7
23.3
26.5
30.8
33.0
33.8
15.2
13.8
–2.4
22.8
31.0
Iceland
4.4
5.6
8.1
4.2
4.1
6.5
1.9
–1.6
–2.0
–0.3
0.3
Andorra
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
18.0
14.6
15.9
16.7
17.3
19.1
San Marino
. . .
. . .
. . .
–0.4
–1.9
2.0
2.8
4.0
1.4
0.8
0.8
Memorandum
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Major Advanced Economies
–0.7
–0.5
–0.2
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.7
–1.0
–2.2
–1.6
–0.7
Euro Area2
3.0
3.4
3.6
3.6
3.5
3.1
2.7
3.7
1.5
1.9
3.1
1Data corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
2Data calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
144	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Emerging and Developing Asia
1.5
1.9
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.7
0.6
–0.1
Bangladesh
0.7
1.2
1.6
–0.5
–3.0
–1.3
–1.5
–1.1
–4.1
–3.8
–3.2
Bhutan
–27.1
–29.1
–30.1
–22.7
–18.4
–20.5
–15.8
–12.1
–24.5
–18.1
–3.7
Brunei Darussalam
30.7
16.7
12.9
16.4
6.9
6.6
4.3
4.6
11.2
9.7
13.6
Cambodia
–8.6
–8.7
–8.5
–7.9
–11.8
–15.0
–8.7
–47.9
–31.3
–17.0
–8.1
China
2.2
2.6
1.7
1.5
0.2
0.7
1.7
1.8
1.8
1.5
0.6
Fiji
–5.5
–4.3
–3.5
–6.6
–8.4
–12.6
–12.7
–13.7
–13.6
–13.6
–10.5
India
–1.3
–1.0
–0.6
–1.8
–2.1
–0.9
0.9
–1.2
–3.5
–2.9
–2.6
Indonesia
–3.1
–2.0
–1.8
–1.6
–2.9
–2.7
–0.4
0.3
2.2
1.1
–1.9
Kiribati
31.5
33.0
10.8
37.4
38.8
48.8
39.1
16.6
6.3
8.3
10.5
Lao P.D.R.
–23.3
–22.3
–11.0
–11.1
–13.0
–9.1
–4.5
–0.2
–2.5
–5.9
–7.9
Malaysia
4.3
3.0
2.4
2.8
2.2
3.5
4.2
3.8
1.6
2.2
2.0
Maldives
–3.7
–7.5
–23.6
–21.6
–28.4
–26.6
–35.5
–8.8
–15.0
–12.3
–6.9
Marshall Islands
2.0
15.6
13.5
5.0
4.0
–25.9
16.2
3.2
–4.0
–2.7
–3.9
Micronesia
6.1
4.5
7.2
10.3
21.0
14.5
3.7
1.0
0.4
–0.9
–5.5
Mongolia
–15.8
–8.2
–6.3
–10.1
–16.7
–15.2
–5.1
–12.8
–20.3
–17.5
–10.0
Myanmar
–4.5
–3.5
–4.2
–6.8
–4.7
–2.8
–3.4
–1.4
–1.7
–1.3
–1.9
Nauru
27.3
–19.1
4.1
12.3
8.0
4.9
2.8
4.1
–2.2
0.1
–0.1
Nepal
4.0
4.4
5.5
–0.3
–7.1
–6.9
–1.0
–7.9
–12.1
–6.3
–3.5
Palau
–19.4
–8.9
–13.4
–22.8
–19.4
–34.6
–41.7
–28.5
–43.2
–34.1
–15.4
Papua New Guinea
14.2
24.6
28.4
28.5
24.4
22.0
20.2
22.9
22.0
19.8
16.9
Philippines
3.6
2.4
–0.4
–0.7
–2.6
–0.8
3.2
–1.8
–4.4
–3.3
–1.8
Samoa
–8.6
–2.6
–4.2
–1.8
0.8
2.8
0.2
–14.5
–8.4
–7.4
–2.0
Solomon Islands
–3.8
–2.7
–3.5
–4.3
–3.0
–9.5
–1.6
–4.8
–10.1
–13.1
–9.4
Sri Lanka
–2.4
–2.2
–2.0
–2.4
–3.0
–2.1
–1.4
–3.8
–3.4
–2.0
–1.2
Thailand
2.9
6.9
10.5
9.6
5.6
7.0
4.2
–2.2
–0.5
1.9
3.3
Timor-Leste
75.6
12.8
–33.0
–17.5
–12.1
6.5
–16.2
1.8
–11.6
–39.4
–41.5
Tonga
–6.3
–10.1
–6.5
–6.4
–6.3
–0.9
–4.0
3.1
–6.0
–28.5
–10.9
Tuvalu
–3.7
–70.6
13.9
11.5
53.9
–16.9
–7.9
2.1
–5.9
0.5
–9.6
Vanuatu
7.8
0.3
3.4
–4.4
12.2
13.6
2.7
2.1
–9.0
–1.7
0.3
Vietnam
3.7
–0.9
0.2
–0.6
1.9
3.7
4.4
–2.0
0.3
1.0
0.6
Emerging and Developing Europe
–0.3
1.0
–0.3
–0.5
1.7
1.3
0.0
1.7
2.9
2.8
–0.2
Albania1
–10.8
–8.6
–7.6
–7.5
–6.8
–7.6
–8.7
–7.7
–8.6
–8.0
–7.4
Belarus
–6.6
–3.3
–3.4
–1.7
0.0
–1.9
–0.4
2.7
–1.5
–1.1
–0.2
Bosnia and Herzegovina
–7.4
–5.1
–4.8
–4.8
–3.3
–2.8
–3.8
–2.1
–4.3
–3.7
–3.2
Bulgaria
1.2
0.0
3.1
3.3
0.9
1.9
–0.1
–0.4
–0.9
–1.4
–0.1
Croatia
0.3
3.4
2.3
3.5
1.9
3.0
–0.1
3.4
2.2
2.0
2.5
Hungary
1.2
2.3
4.5
2.0
0.2
–0.7
–1.1
–3.2
–6.7
–3.0
0.7
Kosovo
–7.2
–8.8
–8.0
–5.5
–7.6
–5.7
–7.0
–8.8
–10.9
–8.7
–6.0
Moldova
–6.0
–6.0
–3.6
–5.8
–10.8
–9.5
–7.7
–11.6
–12.8
–12.4
–8.5
Montenegro
–12.4
–11.0
–16.2
–16.1
–17.0
–14.3
–26.0
–9.2
–13.8
–14.0
–12.9
North Macedonia
–0.5
–2.0
–2.9
–1.0
–0.1
–3.3
–3.4
–3.5
–6.7
–4.6
–3.9
Poland
–2.6
–0.9
–0.8
–0.4
–1.3
0.5
2.9
–0.7
–4.0
–3.3
–2.0
Romania
–0.3
–0.8
–1.6
–3.1
–4.6
–4.9
–5.0
–7.0
–8.4
–8.0
–6.1
Russia 
2.8
5.0
1.9
2.0
7.0
3.9
2.4
6.9
12.2
11.1
3.3
Serbia
–5.6
–3.5
–2.9
–5.2
–4.8
–6.9
–4.1
–4.4
–8.4
–7.0
–4.8
Türkiye
–4.1
–3.2
–3.1
–4.8
–2.8
0.7
–4.9
–1.7
–5.7
–3.9
–2.6
Ukraine1
–3.9
1.7
–1.5
–2.2
–3.3
–2.7
3.3
–1.6
. . .
. . .
. . .
Latin America and the Caribbean
–3.2
–3.4
–2.1
–1.7
–2.7
–2.0
–0.2
–1.6
–1.7
–1.4
–1.4
Antigua and Barbuda
0.3
2.2
–2.5
–8.0
–14.5
–7.5
–18.4
–15.0
–19.0
–14.7
–11.2
Argentina
–1.6
–2.7
–2.7
–4.8
–5.2
–0.8
0.8
1.4
–0.3
0.6
0.5
Aruba
–4.8
3.9
4.6
1.0
–0.5
2.6
–13.0
1.4
2.9
3.3
0.6
The Bahamas
–19.6
–12.5
–12.4
–13.4
–9.4
–2.6
–24.5
–23.1
–18.2
–14.1
–7.7
Barbados
–9.2
–6.1
–4.3
–3.8
–4.0
–3.1
–6.9
–11.5
–10.0
–8.7
–4.3
Belize
–6.4
–7.9
–7.3
–7.0
–6.6
–7.8
–6.3
–6.7
–7.3
–7.1
–6.8
Bolivia
1.7
–5.8
–5.6
–5.0
–4.3
–3.3
–0.7
2.0
–1.4
–2.1
–3.6
Brazil
–4.1
–3.0
–1.4
–1.1
–2.7
–3.5
–1.7
–1.7
–1.5
–1.6
–2.0
Chile
–3.5
–2.8
–2.6
–2.8
–4.5
–5.2
–1.7
–6.7
–6.7
–4.4
–2.5
Colombia
–5.2
–6.4
–4.5
–3.2
–4.2
–4.6
–3.4
–5.7
–5.1
–4.4
–4.0
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
145
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Latin America and the  
Caribbean (continued)
–3.2
–3.4
–2.1
–1.7
–2.7
–2.0
–0.2
–1.6
–1.7
–1.4
–1.4
Costa Rica
–4.7
–3.4
–2.1
–3.6
–3.0
–1.3
–1.0
–3.3
–4.8
–4.4
–3.0
Dominica
–5.4
–4.7
–7.7
–8.9
–43.7
–34.4
–29.3
–32.5
–30.6
–28.1
–12.1
Dominican Republic
–3.2
–1.8
–1.1
–0.2
–1.5
–1.3
–1.7
–2.8
–3.3
–2.7
–2.9
Ecuador
–0.7
–2.2
1.1
–0.2
–1.2
–0.1
2.7
2.9
2.4
2.1
1.9
El Salvador
–5.4
–3.2
–2.3
–1.9
–3.3
–0.4
0.8
–5.1
–8.9
–3.9
–4.8
Grenada
–11.6
–12.5
–11.0
–14.4
–16.1
–14.6
–21.0
–24.2
–24.5
–19.8
–11.6
Guatemala
–3.3
–1.2
1.0
1.2
0.9
2.4
4.9
2.5
1.1
0.8
0.6
Guyana
–6.7
–3.4
1.5
–4.9
–29.0
–53.3
–16.4
–25.5
43.5
30.4
26.6
Haiti
–7.3
–5.1
–1.8
–2.2
–2.9
–1.1
1.1
0.5
0.8
–0.5
–1.2
Honduras1
–6.9
–4.7
–3.1
–1.2
–6.6
–2.6
2.8
–4.3
–4.6
–4.3
–3.5
Jamaica
–8.0
–3.0
–0.3
–2.7
–1.6
–2.2
–0.4
0.9
–6.0
–5.2
–2.2
Mexico
–1.9
–2.6
–2.2
–1.7
–2.0
–0.3
2.5
–0.4
–1.2
–1.2
–0.9
Nicaragua
–8.0
–9.9
–8.5
–7.2
–1.8
6.0
3.9
–2.3
–3.2
–2.8
–3.2
Panama
–13.4
–9.0
–7.8
–6.0
–7.6
–5.0
2.0
–2.2
–3.7
–3.3
–2.5
Paraguay
–0.1
–0.2
4.3
3.0
–0.2
–0.5
2.7
0.8
–3.8
–0.1
0.3
Peru
–4.5
–5.0
–2.6
–1.3
–1.7
–1.0
0.8
–2.5
–3.0
–2.1
–1.4
St. Kitts and Nevis
0.3
–8.3
–12.3
–10.5
–5.5
–2.2
–8.0
–5.0
–5.3
–4.0
–1.5
St. Lucia
–2.5
–0.7
–6.5
–2.0
1.4
5.7
–15.7
–11.0
–6.0
–0.1
0.5
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
–24.7
–14.7
–12.7
–11.7
–10.2
–3.1
–15.1
–22.6
–26.5
–27.6
–9.0
Suriname
–7.4
–15.3
–4.8
1.9
–3.0
–11.3
9.1
5.8
–2.0
–0.9
–1.2
Trinidad and Tobago
15.0
8.2
–3.5
6.1
6.8
4.3
–6.3
10.4
14.3
15.9
12.9
Uruguay
–3.0
–0.3
0.8
0.0
–0.4
1.6
–0.8
–1.8
–1.2
–1.9
–1.9
Venezuela
2.3
–12.8
–3.4
7.5
8.4
6.6
–8.0
–2.1
4.0
6.0
. . .
Middle East and Central Asia
4.9
–3.9
–4.1
–1.1
2.8
0.4
–2.5
2.3
6.5
5.2
1.2
Afghanistan1
6.5
3.7
9.0
7.6
12.2
11.7
11.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Algeria
–4.4
–16.4
–16.5
–13.1
–9.6
–9.9
–12.9
–2.8
6.2
0.6
–3.8
Armenia
–7.8
–2.7
–1.0
–1.5
–7.0
–7.4
–3.8
–3.7
–5.5
–5.1
–4.9
Azerbaijan
13.9
–0.4
–3.6
4.1
12.8
9.1
–0.5
15.2
31.7
31.4
9.6
Bahrain
4.6
–2.4
–4.6
–4.1
–6.4
–2.1
–9.3
6.7
8.6
5.0
0.9
Djibouti
24.0
29.5
–1.0
–4.8
14.7
18.3
11.3
–0.7
–4.8
–3.2
1.7
Egypt
–0.9
–3.6
–5.7
–5.8
–2.3
–3.4
–2.9
–4.4
–3.6
–3.4
–1.6
Georgia
–10.1
–11.8
–12.5
–8.0
–6.8
–5.8
–12.5
–10.1
–7.2
–6.8
–5.3
Iran
2.9
0.3
2.9
3.1
5.1
–0.3
–0.1
0.7
1.6
1.5
0.3
Iraq
2.6
–6.4
–7.4
–4.7
3.0
0.4
–10.8
7.8
16.3
13.0
3.9
Jordan
–7.1
–9.0
–9.7
–10.6
–6.9
–1.7
–5.7
–8.8
–6.7
–4.8
–4.0
Kazakhstan
2.8
–3.3
–5.9
–3.1
–0.1
–4.0
–3.8
–2.9
3.0
1.8
–1.8
Kuwait
33.4
3.5
–4.6
8.0
14.4
12.5
3.2
16.3
29.1
23.0
16.1
Kyrgyz Republic
–17.0
–15.9
–11.6
–6.2
–12.1
–11.9
4.8
–8.7
–12.5
–9.6
–5.8
Lebanon1
–28.9
–19.9
–23.5
–26.4
–28.6
–28.2
–15.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Libya1
–33.1
–18.9
–9.4
6.6
14.7
6.7
–8.5
18.1
16.6
24.5
10.6
Mauritania
–22.2
–15.5
–11.0
–10.0
–13.1
–10.3
–6.7
–9.4
–11.6
–9.1
–4.8
Morocco
–5.5
–2.0
–3.8
–3.2
–4.9
–3.4
–1.2
–2.3
–4.3
–4.1
–3.1
Oman
4.5
–13.9
–16.7
–13.4
–4.2
–4.5
–17.0
–6.1
6.2
3.6
1.5
Pakistan1
–1.1
–0.9
–1.6
–3.6
–5.4
–4.2
–1.5
–0.8
–4.6
–2.5
–2.4
Qatar
24.0
8.5
–5.5
4.0
9.1
2.4
–2.0
14.7
21.2
22.1
8.2
Saudi Arabia
9.8
–8.7
–3.7
1.5
8.8
4.8
–3.2
5.3
16.0
12.3
3.5
Somalia
–6.6
–6.3
–7.1
–7.8
–6.2
–10.4
–10.8
–17.1
–15.8
–14.1
–15.2
Sudan 
–5.8
–8.5
–6.5
–9.4
–14.0
–15.6
–17.5
–7.4
–6.4
–7.5
–7.8
Syria2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Tajikistan
–3.4
–6.1
–4.2
2.1
–4.9
–2.2
4.1
8.4
3.8
0.0
–2.8
Tunisia
–9.3
–9.1
–8.8
–9.7
–10.4
–7.8
–5.9
–6.1
–9.1
–8.0
–5.2
Turkmenistan
–7.8
–17.3
–23.1
–11.1
4.9
2.8
–3.3
0.6
2.5
2.5
–1.6
United Arab Emirates
13.5
4.9
3.7
7.1
9.8
8.9
5.9
11.4
14.7
12.5
6.4
Uzbekistan
2.6
1.0
0.2
2.4
–6.8
–5.6
–5.0
–7.0
–3.3
–4.2
–5.0
West Bank and Gaza
–13.6
–13.9
–13.9
–13.2
–13.2
–10.4
–12.3
–8.2
–10.7
–8.9
–11.1
Yemen
–0.7
–6.2
–4.4
–1.4
–1.3
–3.8
–5.9
–5.1
–11.4
–8.2
0.0
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
146	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2027
Sub-Saharan Africa
–3.6
–5.7
–3.6
–2.1
–2.3
–3.3
–2.9
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
–2.0
Angola
–2.6
–8.8
–3.1
–0.5
7.3
6.1
1.5
11.2
11.3
5.4
–0.3
Benin
–6.7
–6.0
–3.0
–4.2
–4.6
–4.0
–1.7
–4.4
–6.0
–5.6
–5.5
Botswana
11.1
2.2
8.0
5.6
0.4
–7.0
–10.8
–0.5
2.0
2.5
4.9
Burkina Faso
–7.2
–7.6
–6.1
–5.0
–4.1
–3.3
4.3
0.2
–3.5
–3.4
–1.7
Burundi
–15.6
–11.5
–11.1
–11.7
–11.4
–11.6
–10.2
–13.4
–14.9
–14.1
–10.3
Cabo Verde
–9.1
–3.2
–3.8
–7.8
–4.9
0.2
–15.0
–11.2
–14.0
–6.2
–4.0
Cameroon
–3.9
–3.6
–3.1
–2.6
–3.5
–4.3
–3.7
–4.0
–2.3
–2.8
–3.0
Central African Republic
–13.3
–9.2
–5.5
–8.0
–7.9
–5.1
–8.6
–10.8
–14.1
–7.5
–5.6
Chad
–8.9
–13.8
–10.4
–7.1
–1.4
–4.4
–7.6
–4.5
0.8
–2.4
–6.7
Comoros
–3.8
–0.3
–4.4
–2.1
–2.9
–3.9
–3.0
–2.4
–10.5
–9.1
–5.5
Democratic Republic of the Congo
–4.8
–3.9
–4.1
–3.3
–3.5
–3.2
–2.2
–0.9
0.0
0.0
0.7
Republic of Congo
1.0
–39.0
–48.7
–6.0
–0.2
0.4
–0.1
12.6
19.1
11.1
1.5
Côte d'Ivoire 
1.0
–0.4
–0.9
–2.0
–3.9
–2.3
–3.2
–3.8
–5.2
–5.0
–3.6
Equatorial Guinea
–4.3
–17.7
–26.0
–7.8
–2.1
–0.9
–4.2
–3.4
–1.6
–2.1
–7.0
Eritrea
17.7
22.4
13.4
24.8
15.7
13.1
14.6
13.5
12.2
10.8
9.3
Eswatini
11.6
13.0
7.9
6.2
1.3
3.8
6.7
2.5
–0.8
0.1
1.3
Ethiopia
–7.9
–11.5
–10.9
–8.5
–6.5
–5.3
–4.6
–3.2
–4.3
–4.4
–3.3
Gabon
7.6
–5.6
–11.1
–8.7
–4.8
–5.0
–6.9
–5.7
–1.4
–2.9
–2.7
The Gambia
–7.3
–9.9
–9.2
–7.4
–9.5
–6.2
–2.9
–8.1
–13.7
–11.7
–8.6
Ghana
–6.8
–5.7
–5.1
–3.3
–3.0
–2.7
–3.0
–3.2
–5.2
–4.4
–3.7
Guinea
–14.4
–12.5
–30.7
–6.7
–19.2
–11.5
–13.6
–1.3
–7.0
–8.0
–1.4
Guinea-Bissau
0.5
1.8
1.4
0.3
–3.5
–8.5
–2.7
–3.2
–6.5
–4.7
–4.0
Kenya
–9.3
–6.3
–5.4
–7.0
–5.4
–5.2
–4.7
–5.2
–5.9
–5.6
–5.0
Lesotho
–5.2
–4.2
–7.8
–4.2
–3.5
–1.7
–1.6
–5.0
–8.5
–8.7
–5.6
Liberia
–34.3
–28.5
–23.0
–22.3
–21.3
–19.6
–16.4
–17.7
–16.3
–16.5
–15.8
Madagascar
–0.3
–1.6
0.5
–0.4
0.7
–2.3
–5.4
–4.9
–5.4
–5.1
–3.2
Malawi
–7.0
–12.2
–13.1
–15.5
–12.0
–12.6
–13.8
–12.2
–12.1
–12.9
–10.5
Mali
–4.7
–5.3
–7.2
–7.3
–4.9
–7.5
–2.2
–10.0
–7.9
–7.1
–5.8
Mauritius
–5.4
–3.6
–4.0
–4.6
–3.9
–5.1
–9.2
–13.6
–13.0
–8.1
–5.0
Mozambique
–36.3
–37.4
–32.2
–19.6
–30.3
–19.1
–27.3
–22.9
–45.9
–39.6
–10.9
Namibia
–9.4
–13.6
–16.5
–4.4
–3.5
–1.7
2.6
–9.1
–8.0
–4.2
–3.4
Niger
–12.1
–15.3
–11.4
–11.4
–12.6
–12.2
–13.5
–13.8
–15.6
–13.9
–8.0
Nigeria
0.2
–3.1
1.3
3.4
1.5
–3.3
–4.0
–0.4
–0.2
–0.6
–0.2
Rwanda
–11.3
–12.7
–15.3
–9.5
–10.1
–11.9
–12.1
–10.9
–12.6
–11.7
–7.3
São Tomé and Príncipe
–20.7
–12.0
–6.1
–13.2
–12.3
–12.1
–11.0
–11.3
–13.9
–11.0
–7.2
Senegal
–7.0
–5.7
–4.2
–7.3
–8.8
–7.9
–10.9
–13.2
–13.0
–9.5
–5.0
Seychelles
–22.4
–18.1
–19.7
–19.1
–2.6
–3.2
–13.7
–10.5
–6.6
–7.7
–8.2
Sierra Leone
–9.4
–23.6
–7.6
–18.3
–12.4
–14.3
–6.8
–14.9
–8.5
–7.7
–6.0
South Africa
–4.8
–4.3
–2.7
–2.4
–2.9
–2.6
2.0
3.7
1.2
–1.0
–2.0
South Sudan
–1.2
1.7
16.8
4.8
7.3
1.5
–13.8
–2.7
8.6
2.1
–1.9
Tanzania
–9.8
–7.7
–4.2
–2.6
–3.1
–2.6
–1.8
–3.3
–4.4
–3.9
–2.6
Togo
–6.8
–7.6
–7.2
–1.5
–2.6
–0.8
–0.3
–1.9
–4.8
–5.7
–1.5
Uganda
–6.5
–6.0
–2.8
–4.8
–6.1
–6.6
–9.5
–8.3
–8.0
–10.2
–7.3
Zambia
2.1
–2.7
–3.3
–1.7
–1.3
1.4
12.0
7.6
–1.8
–3.7
3.8
Zimbabwe1
–12.0
–8.0
–3.4
–1.3
–3.7
4.0
2.9
1.1
0.6
0.3
0.5
1See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Albania, Honduras, Lebanon, Libya, Pakistan, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
2Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
147
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
304.5
282.5
433.4
433.4
480.2
155.9
29.7
465.8
–307.8
–116.3
Direct Investment, Net
244.1
3.2
–246.5
355.4
–53.0
4.3
49.8
501.8
250.4
81.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
57.8
164.1
486.8
–10.1
506.7
57.3
183.2
288.5
–285.6
–198.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
1.8
–85.6
32.4
21.5
51.7
25.7
89.0
50.5
48.7
52.1
Other Investment, Net
–139.1
–25.6
–18.0
–178.6
–153.0
1.6
–650.0
–1,003.3
–342.8
–141.1
Change in Reserves
140.0
226.6
178.5
244.8
127.9
66.9
357.8
627.7
21.0
89.7
United States
Financial Account Balance 
–298.1
–386.4
–362.4
–373.2
–302.9
–565.5
–697.0
–740.6
–973.0
–825.2
Direct Investment, Net
135.7
–209.4
–174.6
28.6
–345.4
–209.1
122.9
–26.6
–47.3
–98.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
–115.9
–106.8
–193.8
–250.1
78.8
–244.9
–540.2
43.0
–245.7
–228.4
Financial Derivatives, Net
–54.3
–27.0
7.8
24.0
–20.4
–41.7
–5.1
–41.9
–6.4
–16.8
Other Investment, Net
–259.9
–37.0
–4.0
–174.1
–20.8
–74.5
–283.5
–829.1
–674.5
–482.0
Change in Reserves
–3.6
–6.3
2.1
–1.7
5.0
4.7
9.0
114.0
0.9
0.0
Euro Area 
Financial Account Balance 
372.6
338.5
313.2
392.8
330.3
273.6
222.2
404.7
. . .
. . .
Direct Investment, Net
89.3
244.3
150.8
74.1
121.2
96.4
–229.2
345.6
. . .
. . .
Portfolio Investment, Net
87.0
133.5
529.8
402.6
272.6
–117.5
614.4
505.7
. . .
. . .
Financial Derivatives, Net
49.7
126.5
11.2
12.9
46.7
8.6
33.9
82.5
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
142.2
–177.4
–395.7
–95.5
–140.0
279.3
–211.8
–683.1
. . .
. . .
Change in Reserves
4.4
11.6
17.1
–1.2
29.8
6.7
14.9
154.1
. . .
. . .
Germany
Financial Account Balance
319.3
260.1
289.0
312.5
291.7
208.6
247.1
372.5
168.7
216.6
Direct Investment, Net
87.3
68.5
48.0
37.9
25.1
84.6
–4.0
120.5
65.9
59.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
179.9
210.5
220.0
229.6
181.2
78.0
48.9
301.9
86.4
119.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
51.2
33.7
31.7
12.6
26.8
27.5
109.9
72.2
2.9
29.1
Other Investment, Net
4.3
–50.2
–12.5
33.9
58.2
19.1
92.3
–159.8
13.5
8.6
Change in Reserves
–3.4
–2.5
1.9
–1.4
0.5
–0.6
–0.1
37.7
0.0
0.0
France
Financial Account Balance
–10.3
–0.8
–18.6
–36.1
–28.4
–0.1
–61.9
3.6
–32.9
–40.2
Direct Investment, Net
47.2
7.9
41.8
11.1
60.2
30.7
6.3
–11.5
10.5
21.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
–23.8
43.2
0.2
30.3
19.3
–70.4
–37.8
–6.3
–25.7
–24.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
–31.8
14.5
–17.6
–1.4
–30.5
4.1
–27.2
21.0
6.8
0.3
Other Investment, Net
–2.9
–74.2
–45.4
–72.7
–89.7
32.3
–7.8
–26.7
–26.6
–40.7
Change in Reserves
1.0
8.0
2.5
–3.4
12.3
3.2
4.6
27.0
2.1
3.5
Italy
Financial Account Balance
78.4
42.9
37.4
61.2
38.8
60.8
71.5
30.4
9.1
22.9
Direct Investment, Net
3.1
2.0
–12.3
0.5
–6.1
1.6
21.7
3.3
0.3
0.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
3.2
111.7
157.1
102.0
156.5
–58.0
123.8
146.6
–32.6
–15.8
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.9
1.3
–3.6
–8.4
–3.3
2.9
–3.3
0.0
0.2
0.3
Other Investment, Net
75.2
–72.7
–102.5
–35.9
–111.5
110.6
–75.2
–144.0
41.2
37.6
Change in Reserves
–1.3
0.6
–1.3
3.0
3.1
3.6
4.6
24.5
0.0
0.0
Spain
Financial Account Balance
22.8
31.8
39.2
40.0
38.3
28.3
20.2
34.1
22.2
19.8
Direct Investment, Net
14.2
33.4
12.4
14.1
–19.9
7.4
22.4
–15.6
4.7
4.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–8.8
12.0
64.9
37.1
28.1
–53.5
90.9
38.8
15.0
11.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
1.3
4.2
2.8
8.7
–1.2
–8.5
–8.1
5.0
0.0
0.0
Other Investment, Net
10.9
–23.3
–50.1
–24.0
28.7
82.1
–84.6
–6.3
2.5
3.4
Change in Reserves
5.2
5.5
9.1
4.1
2.6
0.8
–0.4
12.2
0.0
0.0
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
148	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Japan
Financial Account Balance
58.9
180.9
266.5
168.3
183.9
228.3
129.2
99.3
55.4
91.5
Direct Investment, Net
118.7
133.3
137.5
155.0
134.6
218.9
84.5
122.6
122.8
122.2
Portfolio Investment, Net
–42.3
131.5
276.3
–50.6
92.2
87.4
38.5
–199.2
–68.6
–49.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
34.0
17.7
–16.1
30.4
0.9
3.2
7.8
22.1
22.1
22.1
Other Investment, Net
–60.0
–106.7
–125.6
10.0
–67.9
–106.7
–12.4
91.0
–40.9
–14.5
Change in Reserves
8.5
5.1
–5.7
23.6
24.0
25.5
10.9
62.8
20.0
11.5
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
–141.6
–165.9
–159.9
–84.4
–102.9
–89.7
–56.1
–60.9
–156.7
–161.0
Direct Investment, Net
–176.1
–106.0
–297.4
46.1
–4.9
–51.6
–83.6
80.2
25.6
7.0
Portfolio Investment, Net
16.3
–231.7
–200.1
–120.1
–361.1
38.2
–17.3
–349.4
–173.5
–188.8
Financial Derivatives, Net
31.2
–128.6
29.3
13.3
11.2
11.3
39.0
–39.4
5.6
6.1
Other Investment, Net
–24.7
268.2
299.5
–32.4
227.2
–86.6
9.2
223.4
–14.3
14.8
Change in Reserves
11.7
32.2
8.8
8.8
24.8
–1.1
–3.3
24.4
0.0
0.0
Canada
Financial Account Balance
–43.1
–51.8
–45.4
–44.2
–35.8
–38.3
–29.3
4.3
11.5
–5.3
Direct Investment, Net
1.3
23.6
33.5
53.4
20.4
29.2
23.4
38.0
36.3
39.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
–32.8
–36.2
–103.6
–74.9
3.4
–1.6
–67.8
–41.6
–29.2
–43.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–16.9
–47.8
19.1
–23.5
–58.2
–66.0
13.8
–12.2
4.4
–1.2
Change in Reserves
5.3
8.6
5.6
0.8
–1.5
0.1
1.3
20.2
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
297.2
295.2
325.4
309.4
355.0
337.4
383.1
562.0
496.5
461.1
Direct Investment, Net
–6.1
–102.5
–79.7
–158.3
34.0
–42.5
60.6
–77.5
–88.8
–186.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
174.0
324.7
247.6
151.4
371.6
307.0
278.0
477.9
344.3
371.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
–22.4
–12.0
3.2
–5.6
31.9
20.0
–9.0
–20.7
–8.1
–15.6
Other Investment, Net
40.3
–90.9
3.9
108.4
–132.1
22.5
–269.3
–74.4
258.3
220.6
Change in Reserves
111.5
176.0
150.2
213.1
49.5
30.3
322.8
256.2
–9.8
70.2
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Financial Account Balance
–1.8
–313.0
–424.2
–284.3
–258.7
–146.0
57.7
152.2
653.8
522.3
Direct Investment, Net
–433.4
–345.2
–261.6
–311.4
–376.8
–367.0
–327.4
–514.9
–354.5
–351.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–88.4
124.6
–57.4
–209.3
–102.0
–62.4
4.8
114.6
389.9
47.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
408.0
479.5
384.8
62.3
104.1
119.8
275.4
36.0
719.5
467.1
Change in Reserves
94.2
–583.1
–481.1
189.9
127.0
169.0
83.3
523.6
–101.6
363.4
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
149
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
142.2
61.2
–37.8
–68.9
–270.6
–62.6
145.4
62.2
203.6
176.7
Direct Investment, Net
–201.0
–139.7
–26.2
–108.5
–170.5
–144.7
–164.8
–296.7
–217.8
–156.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
–124.6
81.6
31.1
–70.1
–100.3
–72.9
–107.5
–23.1
208.3
–45.6
Financial Derivatives, Net
0.7
0.7
–4.6
2.3
4.6
–2.6
15.9
18.1
17.8
18.3
Other Investment, Net
281.4
460.6
357.0
–80.3
–16.6
70.9
243.0
117.9
454.3
216.6
Change in Reserves
196.3
–333.0
–384.6
199.2
22.2
97.0
167.4
257.1
–246.6
156.1
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
–26.2
68.6
10.5
–23.0
109.9
63.1
11.7
95.7
170.2
150.5
Direct Investment, Net
0.5
–22.0
–45.4
–28.9
–25.4
–53.5
–37.8
–39.6
7.3
–29.4
Portfolio Investment, Net
23.8
53.5
–9.4
–34.5
11.1
–1.6
21.1
39.2
74.1
50.3
Financial Derivatives, Net
5.8
5.0
0.4
–2.5
–2.8
1.4
0.1
–6.2
–2.1
–2.5
Other Investment, Net
66.3
40.1
29.4
26.9
79.5
23.6
32.0
–32.7
160.8
139.0
Change in Reserves
–122.7
–7.9
35.5
16.2
47.6
93.3
–3.2
136.3
–69.6
–6.6
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
–196.2
–188.7
–106.5
–108.6
–160.5
–119.8
0.5
–93.3
–98.1
–85.4
Direct Investment, Net
–140.9
–133.4
–124.8
–121.2
–148.6
–114.7
–90.9
–97.8
–106.9
–116.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–108.2
–50.8
–50.5
–39.3
–14.1
1.7
2.5
–1.7
–1.4
–1.7
Financial Derivatives, Net
6.8
1.4
–2.9
3.9
4.1
4.9
5.7
0.8
3.5
2.5
Other Investment, Net
6.5
22.8
50.6
30.6
–15.8
21.2
66.8
–43.7
–3.8
16.5
Change in Reserves
39.7
–28.8
21.0
17.1
13.8
–32.7
16.4
49.1
10.5
13.8
Middle East and Central Asia
Financial Account Balance
156.9
–186.2
–225.5
–38.9
103.8
27.7
–78.8
98.4
401.2
326.0
Direct Investment, Net
–43.7
–12.4
–31.0
–15.4
–11.4
–23.5
–23.3
–11.2
–5.3
–8.8
Portfolio Investment, Net
129.3
61.8
–12.1
–41.5
5.8
29.2
86.4
55.5
103.5
40.0
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
64.3
–52.6
–42.7
84.5
76.9
15.4
–63.8
6.3
95.3
104.7
Change in Reserves
–10.1
–196.8
–148.3
–58.4
38.6
5.2
–87.7
54.5
213.1
199.2
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
–78.5
–68.0
–64.8
–44.9
–41.3
–54.4
–21.1
–10.8
–23.2
–45.5
Direct Investment, Net
–48.2
–37.8
–34.3
–37.4
–20.9
–30.5
–10.6
–69.5
–31.8
–40.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–8.6
–21.5
–16.6
–24.0
–4.5
–18.7
2.4
44.7
5.5
4.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
–1.5
–0.4
1.0
0.2
–0.5
0.3
0.7
–0.2
–0.3
–0.3
Other Investment, Net
–10.5
8.6
–9.4
0.5
–19.8
–11.3
–2.4
–11.7
13.1
–9.7
Change in Reserves
–9.1
–16.5
–4.6
15.9
4.7
6.2
–9.6
26.6
–9.0
1.0
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
150	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Projections
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
180.0
–182.6
–189.7
12.0
173.9
67.9
–51.5
151.6
484.1
388.7
Direct Investment, Net
–29.5
–11.5
–20.6
11.4
12.1
–8.5
–11.2
1.6
12.9
9.7
Portfolio Investment, Net
137.2
67.7
–9.8
–35.9
7.1
28.0
86.1
71.9
85.8
55.5
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
90.6
–18.5
–3.4
111.4
110.7
39.1
–46.7
28.3
154.9
148.4
Change in Reserves
–35.5
–234.4
–164.5
–66.9
49.9
7.8
–89.2
55.8
236.7
184.5
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
–181.8
–130.4
–234.5
–296.3
–432.6
–213.9
109.2
0.7
169.7
133.6
Direct Investment, Net
–403.8
–333.8
–241.0
–322.8
–388.9
–358.5
–316.2
–516.5
–367.4
–361.5
Portfolio Investment, Net
–225.6
56.9
–47.5
–173.4
–109.1
–90.3
–81.3
42.7
304.1
–7.9
Financial Derivatives, Net
11.8
6.8
–6.1
4.0
5.4
4.0
22.3
12.4
19.0
18.2
Other Investment, Net
317.3
498.0
388.2
–49.1
–6.6
80.7
322.2
7.7
564.7
318.7
Change in Reserves
129.7
–348.7
–316.5
256.8
77.0
161.2
172.5
467.9
–338.2
178.9
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
–388.9
–315.7
–277.2
–339.6
–367.9
–300.1
–92.9
–308.6
–413.8
–404.0
Direct Investment, Net
–284.4
–281.3
–292.1
–272.2
–313.3
–301.5
–249.2
–288.9
–298.9
–327.3
Portfolio Investment, Net
–211.3
–52.7
–63.5
–123.8
–35.9
–32.8
–44.2
–19.2
37.8
–36.1
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–11.3
38.5
25.3
–28.9
–14.1
–59.4
49.6
–204.3
–57.9
–94.7
Change in Reserves
120.6
–9.4
77.1
93.2
4.9
105.0
152.5
215.9
–89.3
60.7
Net Debtor Economies by  
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears  
and/or Rescheduling  
during 2017–21
Financial Account Balance
–49.9
–66.1
–70.3
–53.1
–46.1
–43.4
–21.1
–29.6
–30.0
–41.4
Direct Investment, Net
–22.9
–35.5
–27.8
–21.6
–25.9
–30.4
–20.1
–27.5
–23.4
–30.9
Portfolio Investment, Net
–6.1
–0.5
–10.3
–30.6
–18.7
–12.6
7.3
–21.6
15.0
–10.8
Financial Derivatives, Net
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Other Investment, Net
–8.1
–26.1
–36.1
–11.0
–6.5
2.6
4.9
6.7
–11.3
–18.5
Change in Reserves
–12.9
–3.8
3.9
10.3
5.2
–3.0
–12.7
13.6
–10.9
18.6
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance
302.7
–30.5
9.2
149.1
221.5
9.8
87.4
618.0
346.0
405.9
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available 
because of data constraints.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
151
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Projections
Averages
Average
2004–13
2008–15
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024–27
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.5
0.0
0.8
1.0
0.7
0.6
0.3
0.7
–0.6
–0.2
0.2
Current Account Balance
–0.5
0.0
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.6
–0.6
–0.3
0.2
Savings
21.7
21.5
22.6
23.3
23.4
23.4
23.1
24.3
23.8
23.7
24.0
Investment
22.2
21.5
21.6
22.1
22.4
22.7
22.3
22.7
23.0
22.6
22.6
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.0
–2.8
–2.2
–1.8
–2.2
–2.1
–3.0
–3.7
–4.0
–3.2
–2.5
Current Account Balance
–4.0
–2.8
–2.1
–1.9
–2.1
–2.1
–3.0
–3.7
–3.9
–3.1
–2.5
Savings
16.9
17.2
18.9
19.5
19.6
19.4
19.2
20.1
21.1
21.5
21.9
Investment
20.9
19.8
20.6
20.8
21.1
21.4
21.2
21.4
22.0
21.8
21.8
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Euro Area 
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.2
0.8
3.1
3.0
2.6
2.1
1.9
2.8
. . .
. . .
. . .
Current Account Balance
0.1
0.7
3.0
3.2
2.9
2.3
1.9
2.5
1.0
1.4
2.3
Savings
22.7
22.5
24.3
24.9
25.4
25.9
25.0
26.6
24.7
24.5
25.0
Investment
21.8
20.8
20.7
21.3
21.9
22.9
22.3
23.0
23.2
22.5
22.2
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.3
–0.2
0.0
0.3
. . .
. . .
. . .
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
5.9
6.6
8.6
7.7
8.0
7.5
6.8
7.3
4.2
5.3
6.2
Current Account Balance
5.9
6.6
8.5
7.8
8.0
7.6
7.0
7.4
4.2
5.3
6.2
Savings
26.2
26.8
28.5
28.8
29.9
29.7
29.1
30.6
26.9
26.6
27.2
Investment
20.3
20.2
20.0
21.0
21.9
22.1
22.1
23.3
22.7
21.3
21.0
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.3
–0.7
–0.4
–0.8
–0.7
0.6
–1.7
0.8
–1.2
–1.4
–0.6
Current Account Balance
–0.3
–0.7
–0.5
–0.8
–0.8
0.5
–1.8
0.4
–1.3
–1.5
–0.7
Savings
22.4
21.9
22.1
22.7
23.0
24.9
21.8
24.9
23.6
22.1
22.2
Investment
22.7
22.6
22.6
23.4
23.9
24.4
23.6
24.6
24.9
23.6
22.9
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.4
–0.7
2.4
2.7
2.5
3.1
3.7
2.3
0.5
1.1
2.2
Current Account Balance
–1.4
–0.8
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.2
3.7
2.4
–0.2
0.3
1.7
Savings
19.0
18.2
20.0
20.7
21.0
21.4
21.4
22.3
22.4
23.1
23.1
Investment
20.4
18.9
17.6
18.1
18.5
18.2
17.7
20.0
21.9
22.0
20.9
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.6
0.9
0.5
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
–4.3
–1.2
3.4
3.0
2.4
2.4
1.2
1.9
1.6
1.4
1.4
Current Account Balance
–4.8
–1.7
3.2
2.8
1.9
2.1
0.8
0.9
–0.2
–0.2
0.8
Savings
20.1
19.2
21.9
22.2
22.4
23.0
21.5
22.4
22.6
21.9
22.3
Investment
24.9
20.9
18.8
19.4
20.5
20.9
20.7
21.5
22.7
22.1
21.5
Capital Account Balance
0.5
0.5
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.9
1.8
1.6
0.6
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.8
2.1
3.8
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.8
1.3
2.1
3.0
Current Account Balance
2.9
2.1
4.0
4.1
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.9
1.4
2.2
3.1
Savings
27.6
26.3
28.8
29.3
29.2
29.2
28.2
28.1
27.0
27.6
28.5
Investment
24.7
24.2
24.8
25.2
25.6
25.8
25.3
25.2
25.7
25.5
25.4
Capital Account Balance
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
–3.1
–3.9
–5.4
–3.7
–4.0
–2.7
–2.6
–2.7
–4.9
–4.6
–3.8
Current Account Balance
–3.1
–3.8
–5.3
–3.6
–3.9
–2.7
–2.5
–2.6
–4.8
–4.5
–3.7
Savings
13.6
12.5
12.4
14.6
14.0
15.3
14.2
14.5
12.6
12.4
13.5
Investment
16.7
16.4
17.7
18.2
17.9
18.0
16.7
17.1
17.4
16.9
17.2
Capital Account Balance
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
152	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Projections
Averages
Average
2004–13
2008–15
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024–27
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.9
–2.7
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.0
0.5
–0.2
–1.2
Current Account Balance
–0.9
–2.7
–3.1
–2.8
–2.4
–2.0
–1.8
0.0
0.5
–0.2
–1.2
Savings
22.6
21.3
19.7
20.7
21.0
21.0
20.5
23.8
23.8
22.8
22.6
Investment
23.5
24.0
22.8
23.6
23.4
23.1
22.3
23.7
23.3
23.0
23.8
Capital Account Balance
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
4.0
4.2
5.0
4.8
4.6
4.7
5.6
7.1
5.7
5.1
4.6
Current Account Balance
4.0
4.3
5.0
4.7
4.4
4.7
5.5
7.1
5.7
5.1
4.6
Savings
30.5
30.5
30.6
30.9
30.4
30.3
31.6
33.4
32.5
31.8
31.2
Investment
26.3
26.0
25.3
25.9
25.9
25.5
25.9
26.0
26.2
26.2
26.2
Capital Account Balance
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging Market and Developing 
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
2.4
1.2
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
0.1
0.6
0.9
1.3
1.0
0.2
Current Account Balance
2.4
1.1
–0.3
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.5
0.8
1.3
1.0
0.2
Savings
32.0
32.5
31.2
31.7
32.4
32.1
33.0
34.0
35.4
35.0
34.4
Investment
29.8
31.5
31.5
31.8
32.7
32.3
32.6
33.3
34.3
34.2
34.3
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
3.3
2.2
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.7
0.6
0.2
Current Account Balance
3.2
2.2
1.3
0.9
–0.3
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.7
0.6
0.2
Savings
42.0
42.9
39.9
40.1
40.0
39.5
40.1
40.2
41.8
41.4
40.7
Investment
39.0
40.7
38.7
39.2
40.2
39.1
38.6
39.2
41.1
40.8
40.5
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.4
–0.4
0.1
–0.2
2.2
1.8
0.7
2.2
3.3
3.2
1.1
Current Account Balance
–0.6
–0.7
–0.3
–0.5
1.7
1.3
0.0
1.7
2.9
2.8
0.7
Savings
23.2
23.3
23.5
24.1
25.5
24.2
23.8
25.8
27.0
26.4
25.4
Investment
23.6
23.8
23.7
24.6
23.6
22.9
23.7
24.2
24.1
23.7
24.7
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
–0.6
–2.1
–2.0
–1.7
–2.6
–2.0
0.0
–1.5
–1.7
–1.3
–1.3
Current Account Balance
–0.7
–2.2
–2.1
–1.7
–2.7
–2.0
–0.2
–1.6
–1.7
–1.4
–1.4
Savings
20.9
19.7
17.2
16.9
16.3
16.6
17.7
18.7
18.9
19.2
19.3
Investment
21.6
21.9
19.2
18.7
19.0
18.7
17.9
20.3
20.7
20.7
20.8
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Middle East and Central Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
9.0
6.3
–4.0
–1.3
2.3
0.4
–2.5
2.0
6.4
5.1
2.1
Current Account Balance
9.2
6.3
–4.1
–1.1
2.8
0.4
–2.5
2.3
6.5
5.2
2.2
Savings
36.1
33.9
23.6
26.2
28.8
27.8
26.3
30.2
33.9
33.0
30.5
Investment
27.2
27.4
26.9
27.1
26.2
27.8
29.1
28.4
27.8
28.3
28.5
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
1.5
–1.4
–3.2
–1.7
–1.9
–2.9
–2.4
–0.7
–1.3
–2.2
–2.0
Current Account Balance
0.2
–2.1
–3.6
–2.1
–2.3
–3.3
–2.9
–1.1
–1.7
–2.5
–2.3
Savings
20.8
19.5
17.7
18.4
19.2
19.6
19.8
23.1
18.9
17.9
17.4
Investment
20.7
21.6
21.0
20.5
21.2
22.9
22.6
24.0
20.5
20.4
19.6
Capital Account Balance
1.2
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
STATISTICAL APPENDIX
	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022	
153
Projections
Averages
Average
2004–13
2008–15
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024–27
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
12.0
8.0
–3.1
0.9
4.8
1.8
–2.4
3.3
8.3
6.5
3.1
Current Account Balance
12.2
8.0
–3.1
1.2
5.3
1.9
–2.4
3.8
8.4
6.7
3.3
Savings
38.8
35.5
25.5
28.4
31.2
30.4
28.9
34.2
36.5
34.7
31.2
Investment
27.0
27.4
27.4
26.9
26.0
28.9
31.6
31.1
28.6
28.6
28.2
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
–0.3
0.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.9
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.7
–0.1
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.3
–0.2
Current Account Balance
0.7
0.0
0.0
–0.2
–0.8
–0.2
0.8
0.5
0.3
0.2
–0.2
Savings
30.9
32.0
31.9
32.1
32.6
32.3
33.4
34.0
35.2
35.1
34.8
Investment
30.3
32.0
32.0
32.3
33.4
32.6
32.7
33.6
35.0
34.9
35.0
Capital Account Balance
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.7
–2.5
–1.9
–2.0
–2.4
–1.8
–0.5
–1.6
–2.5
–2.2
–2.0
Current Account Balance
–2.0
–2.8
–2.1
–2.2
–2.6
–2.0
–0.8
–1.9
–2.7
–2.4
–2.2
Savings
23.3
23.0
22.2
22.4
22.7
22.6
22.9
23.6
22.9
23.2
23.6
Investment
25.4
25.8
24.4
24.6
25.3
24.7
23.7
25.6
25.8
25.7
25.8
Capital Account Balance
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
Net Debtor Economies by 
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or 
Rescheduling during 2017–21
Net Lending and Borrowing
–1.4
–3.6
–5.3
–4.9
–4.0
–3.8
–2.2
–2.4
–2.6
–3.2
–2.7
Current Account Balance
–2.4
–4.4
–5.7
–5.4
–4.5
–4.3
–2.9
–2.9
–3.1
–3.6
–3.0
Savings
19.9
18.1
15.1
15.9
17.3
16.4
14.7
15.2
. . .
. . .
. . .
Investment
22.4
22.3
21.0
21.7
21.5
21.4
18.0
18.5
. . .
. . .
. . .
Capital Account Balance
1.0
0.8
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.3
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.3
0.4
0.2
Current Account Balance
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.7
0.2
0.3
0.2
Savings
25.0
25.5
26.0
26.7
27.0
27.0
27.1
28.4
28.9
28.8
28.8
Investment
24.7
25.1
25.4
25.9
26.5
26.5
26.5
27.1
28.0
27.8
28.0
Capital Account Balance
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar 
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted by 
GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’ 
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of 
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to 
the current account balance (CAB) (S − I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In 
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: COUNTERING THE COST-OF-LIVING CRISIS
154	
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
                      
Averages
2004–13
2014–23
2020
2021
2022
2023
2020–23
2024–27
World Real GDP
4.1
2.9
–3.0
6.0
3.2
2.7
2.2
3.3
Advanced Economies
1.6
1.7
–4.4
5.2
2.4
1.1
1.0
1.8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.4
3.8
–1.9
6.6
3.7
3.7
3.0
4.3
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
1.5
1.2
–1.2
2.1
1.7
1.4
1.0
1.4
World Trade, Volume1
5.4
2.8
–7.8
10.1
4.3
2.5
2.1
3.6
Imports
Advanced Economies
3.7
3.0
–8.4
9.5
6.0
2.0
2.1
2.9
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.1
2.5
–7.8
11.8
2.4
3.0
2.1
4.8
Exports
Advanced Economies
4.5
2.5
–9.0
8.7
4.2
2.5
1.4
3.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
7.4
3.2
–4.8
11.8
3.3
2.9
3.1
4.4
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
–0.4
0.3
0.9
0.6
–1.5
0.5
0.1
0.3
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
1.5
–0.6
–1.1
1.7
0.8
–1.7
–0.1
–0.6
World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
2.6
1.1
–3.2
6.8
10.2
3.9
4.3
1.7
Oil
13.6
–1.9
–31.7
65.9
41.4
–12.9
8.7
–4.5
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
8.3
1.4
6.5
26.3
7.3
–6.2
7.9
–0.2
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
2.0
2.3
0.7
3.1
7.2
4.4
3.8
2.0
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6.3
5.7
5.1
5.9
9.9
8.1
7.2
4.6
Interest Rates
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate2
1.3
–0.7
–0.3
–2.5
–5.1
–1.1
–2.2
0.8
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
–0.5
0.4
0.4
0.6
–0.6
–0.3
0.0
0.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
2.4
0.3
0.5
0.8
1.3
1.0
0.9
0.2
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
27.4
29.9
32.6
30.3
27.3
26.6
29.2
25.6
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
9.2
10.8
11.4
10.6
9.8
9.6
10.3
9.3
1Data refer to trade in goods and services.
2GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States.
Annual Percent Change
Percent
Percent of GDP
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
155
World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment,  
Commodities, and Capital Flows	
April 2011
World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks	
September 2011
World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain	
April 2012
World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth	
October 2012
World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks	
April 2013
World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions	
October 2013
World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven	
April 2014
World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties	
October 2014
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors	
April 2015
World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices	
October 2015
World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long	
April 2016
World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies	
October 2016
World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?	
April 2017
World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery,  
Long-Term Challenges	
October 2017
World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change	
April 2018
World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth	
October 2018	
World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery	
April 2019
World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers	
October 2019
World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown	
April 2020
World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent	
October 2020
World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries	
April 2021
World Economic Outlook: Uncharted Territory: Recovery during a Pandemic	
October 2021
World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery	
April 2022
World Economic Outlook: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis	
October 2022
I.  Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios	
April 2011, Box 1.2
Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement	
October 2014, Box 3.3
Tariff Scenarios	
October 2016, Scenario Box
World Growth Projections over the Medium Term	
October 2016, Box 1.1
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices	
April 2019, Box 1.2
On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices: A Model-Based Analysis	
April 2019, Box 3.3
Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and Commodity Prices	
October 2019, Box 1.3
Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19	
April 2020, Scenario Box
Alternative Scenarios	
October 2020, Scenario Box
Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights	
October 2020, Box 1.1
Scenario Box	
April 2021
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS
156
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
Downside Scenarios	
October 2021, Scenario Box
Scenario Box	
April 2022, Scenario Box
Risk Assessment around the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection	
October 2022, Box 1.3
II.  Historical Surveys
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
What Is the Effect of Recessions?	
October 2015, Box 1.1
III.  Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?	
April 2012, Box 1.2
How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?	
October 2012, Box 1.3
Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?	
October 2012, Chapter 4
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe	
April 2013, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?	
April 2013, Chapter 4
What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?	
October 2013, Box 1.2
Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages	
October 2013, Chapter 3
Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the  
Caucasus and Central Asia	
October 2013, Box 3.1
Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy	
October 2013, Box 3.2
Saving and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 3.1
On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,  
and after the Global Financial Crisis	
April 2014, Chapter 4
The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies	
April 2014, Box 4.1
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011	
October 2014, Box 1.2
Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	
October 2014, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output	
April 2015, Chapter 3
Steady as She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output	
April 2015, Box 3.1
Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries— 
The Role of External Factors	
April 2016, Box 1.2
Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market  
Reforms in Advanced Economies	
April 2016, Chapter 3
Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a Complicated  
External Environment	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data	
April 2017, Box 2.2
Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence  
over the Forecast Horizon	
October 2017, Box 1.3
Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality	
April 2018, Chapter 3
Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?	
April 2018, Chapter 4
Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth	
April 2018, Box 1.3
Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.2
Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 1.3
The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown	
October 2018, Chapter 2
SELECTED TOPICS
157
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle	
October 2019, Box 1.4
Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can  
Structural Reforms Play?	
October 2019, Chapter 3
Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an 
Era of Low Rates and High Debt	
April 2020, Chapter 2
The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects	
October 2020, Chapter 2
An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns	
October 2020, Box 2.1
Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook	
April 2021, Box 1.1
After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage	
April 2021, Chapter 2
A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector	
April 2021, Box 2.1
Research and Innovation: Fighting the Pandemic and Boosting Long-Term Growth	
October 2021, Chapter 3
IV.  Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
April 2011, Appendix 1.2
Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances	
April 2011, Chapter 3
Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production	
April 2011, Box 3.1
Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?	
April 2011, Box 3.2
Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity	
April 2011, Box 3.3
Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends	
April 2011, Appendix 3.1
The Energy and Oil Empirical Models	
April 2011, Appendix 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Prospects	
September 2011, Appendix 1.1
Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices	
September 2011, Box 1.4
Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy	
September 2011, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Review	
April 2012, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters	
April 2012, Chapter 4
Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.1
Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries	
April 2012, Box 4.2
Commodity Market Review	
October 2012, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Unconventional Energy in the United States	
October 2012, Box 1.4
Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?	
October 2012, Box 1.5
Commodity Market Review	
April 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?	
April 2013, Chapter 3
Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?	
April 2013, Box 3.1
Commodity Market Review	
October 2013, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.1
Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread	
October 2013, Box 1.SF.2
Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting	
April 2014, Box 1.3
Commodity Prices and Forecasts	
April 2014, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas	
October 2014, Chapter 1,  
in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment	
April 2015, Chapter 1,  
in an Era of Low Oil Prices	
	 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?	
April 2015, Box 1.1
158
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy	
October 2015, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift	
October 2015, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath  
of the Commodity Boom	
October 2015, Chapter 2
The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon	
October 2015, Box 2.1
Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?	
October 2015, Box 2.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the	
April 2016, Chapter 1, 
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	
	 Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Chapter 3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and	
October 2016, Chapter 1, 
Markets in the World Economy	
	 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?	
October 2016, Box 3.3
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and	
April 2017, Chapter 1, 
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market 	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2017, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?	
April 2018, Box 1.2
The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles	
April 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries	
October 2018, Box 1.4
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in Energy Demand	
October 2018, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy	
October 2018, Box 1.SF.1
Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize	
October 2018, Chapter 3
Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies	
October 2018, Box 3.1
Commodity Special Feature	
April 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2019, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature
What Is Happening with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?	
October 2020, Chapter 1, 
	
	 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
April 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
House Prices and Consumer Price Inflation	
October 2021, Box 1.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Special Feature
Inflation Scares	
October 2021, Chapter 2
Core Inflation in the COVID-19 Crisis	
October 2021, Box 2.2
Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment	
April 2022, Special Feature
Dissecting Recent WEO Inflation Forecast Errors	
October 2022, Box 1.1
Market Power and Inflation during COVID-19	
October 2022, Box 1.2
Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers	
October 2022,  
	
	 Special Feature
SELECTED TOPICS
159
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
V.  Fiscal Policy
Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances	
September 2011, Chapter 4
Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?	
October 2012, Box 1.1
The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies	
October 2012, Box 1.2
The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs	
October 2012, Chapter 3
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance	
April 2013, Box 1.2
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment	
October 2014, Chapter 3
Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies	
October 2014, Box 3.4
Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment	
October 2014, Box 3.5
Commodity Booms and Public Investment	
October 2015, Box 2.2
Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant	
October 2017, Chapter 4
The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions	
October 2017, Box 4.1
Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes	
April 2018, Box 1.5
Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries	
October 2019, Box 2.4
VI.  Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
Financial Conditions Indices	
April 2011, Appendix 1.1
House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets	
April 2011, Box 1.1
International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking	
April 2011, Box 1.3
Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications	
September 2011, Box 1.2
Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?	
September 2011, Box 1.3
Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging	
April 2012, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy	
October 2012, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
The Great Divergence of Policies	
April 2013, Box 1.1
Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening	
October 2013, Box 1.1
Credit Supply and Economic Growth	
April 2014, Box 1.1
Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	
April 2014, Chapter 2, 
	
	 Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates	
April 2014, Chapter 3
Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update	
October 2014, Box 1.1
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Box 2.2
A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy	
October 2016, Box 3.5
Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?	
October 2017, Box 1.2
The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery	
October 2018, Box 2.3
Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations	
October 2018, Box 3.2
Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy?	
April 2020, Box 2.1
Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help?	
April 2020, Chapter 3
Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings	
April 2020, Box 3.1
Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks?	
April 2020, Box 3.2
Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:  
Assessment and Policy Options	
April 2020, Box 1.3
160
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19	
April 2021, Chapter 4
Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness	
April 2021, Box 4.1
Monetary Expansions and Inflationary Risks	
October 2021, Box 1.3
Policy Responses and Expectations in Inflation Acceleration Episodes	
October 2021, Box 2.3
Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects	
April 2022, Box 1.2
Private Sector Debt and the Global Recovery	
April 2022, Chapter 2
Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich, and the Natural Interest Rate	
April 2022, Box 2.2
VII.  Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies	
September 2011, Box 1.1
The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession	
April 2012, Box 1.1
Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?	
October 2012, Box 4.1
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment	
April 2016, Box 3.2
Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares	
April 2017, Chapter 3
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects	
April 2018, Chapter 2
Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus  
Advanced Economies	
April 2018, Box 2.1
Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates	
April 2018, Box 2.4
Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil	
April 2018, Box 3.3
The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility	
October 2018, Box 2.1
The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:  
The Case of Industrial Robots	
October 2018, Box 2.2
Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies	
April 2019, Box 1.1
Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities	
April 2019, Box 1.3
Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in  
Advanced Economies	
October 2019, Chapter 2
Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities	
October 2019, Box 2.2
The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration	
April 2020, Chapter 4
Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation	
April 2020, Box 4.1
Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.2
Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the  
COVID-19 Shock 	
April 2021, Chapter 3
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples	
April 2022, Box 1.1
Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability	
April 2022, Box 2.1
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Wage Dynamics Post–COVID-19 and Wage Price Spiral Risks 	
October 2022, Chapter 2
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States 	
October 2022, Box 2.1
SELECTED TOPICS
161
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
VIII.  Exchange Rate Issues
Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets	
April 2014, Box 1.4
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?	
October 2015, Chapter 3
The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade	
October 2015, Box 3.1
Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains	
October 2015, Box 3.2
Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies	
October 2017, Box 1.1
Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications	
October 2017, Chapter 2
Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level	
October 2017, Box 2.1
Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.2
Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence	
October 2017, Box 2.3
IX.  External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery	
April 2011, Box 2.1
International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?	
April 2011, Chapter 4
External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points	
September 2011, Box 1.5
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
External Rebalancing in the Euro Area	
October 2013, Box 1.3
The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows	
October 2013, Chapter 4
Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions	
October 2013, Box 4.1
The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom	
October 2014, Box 1.SF.1
Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?	
October 2014, Chapter 4
Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment	
October 2014, Box 4.1
A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area	
October 2014, Box 4.2
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2015, Box 1.2
Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits	
October 2015, Box 1.2
Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies	
October 2015, Box 1.3
Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown	
April 2016, Box 1.1
Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets	
April 2016, Chapter 2
Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2016, Box 2.1
The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization	
April 2016, Box 3.3
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?	
October 2016, Chapter 2
The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with  
China’s Final Demand	
April 2017, Box 2.3
Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and  
Developing Economies	
April 2017, Box 2.4
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters	
October 2017, Box 1.4
Remittances and Consumption Smoothing	
October 2017, Box 1.5
A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators	
April 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Services Trade	
April 2018, Box 3.2
Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries	
April 2018, Box 4.3
Global Trade Tensions	
October 2018, Scenario Box
The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?	
April 2019, Chapter 3
Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries	
April 2019, Box 3.2
Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia	
April 2019, Box 3.4
The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs	
April 2019, Chapter 4
162
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
Gross versus Value-Added Trade	
April 2019, Box 4.1
Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances	
April 2019, Box 4.2
Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?	
April 2019, Box 4.3
The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S.–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models	
April 2019, Box 4.4
A No-Deal Brexit	
April 2019, Scenario Box
Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production	
October 2019,  
	
	 Scenario Box 1.1
Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario	
October 2019,  
	
	 Scenario Box 1.2
The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018	
October 2019, Box 1.2
Global Trade and Value Chains during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Chapter 4
Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic	
April 2022, Box 4.1
The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data	
April 2022, Box 4.2
Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France	
April 2022, Box 4.3
X.  Regional Issues
East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe	
April 2012, Box 2.1
The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area	
April 2013, Box 1.3
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions	
April 2018, Box 2.3
XI.  Country-Specific Analyses
Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?	
April 2011, Box 1.4
Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?	
April 2012, Box 1.3
The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation	
April 2012, Box 3.1
Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland	
April 2012, Box 3.2
Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?	
October 2013, Box 1.4
Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?	
April 2014, Box 1.2
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade	
October 2014, Box 3.1
Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?	
October 2015, Box 3.3
The Japanese Experience with Deflation	
October 2016, Box 3.2
Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas	
April 2018, Box 2.2
Immigration and Wages in Germany	
April 2020, Box 4.2
The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean	
April 2020, Box 4.3
Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States 	
October 2022, Box 2.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
XII.  Climate Change Issues
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?	
October 2017, Chapter 3
The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones	
October 2017, Box 3.1
The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis	
October 2017, Box 3.2
Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies	
October 2017, Box 3.3
Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets	
October 2017, Box 3.4
Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution	
October 2017, Box 3.5
Mitigating Climate Change	
October 2017, Box 3.6
SELECTED TOPICS
163
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies	
April 2019, Box 3.1
What’s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions?	
October 2019, Box 1.SF.1
Mitigating Climate Change—Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies	
October 2020, Chapter 3
Glossary	
October 2020, Box 3.1
Zooming in on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization	
October 2020, Box 3.2
Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters	
April 2021, Box 1.2
Jobs and the Green Economy	
October 2021, Box 1.2
Clean Tech and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.2
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts	
October 2021, Chapter 1 
	
	 Special Feature
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation	
April 2022, Chapter 3
The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States	
April 2022, Box 3.1
A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?	
April 2022, Box 3.2
Near-Term Macroeconomic Impact of Decarbonization Policies	
October 2022, Chapter 3
Near-Term Implications of Carbon Pricing: A Review of the Literature	
October 2022, Box 3.1
Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay	
October 2022, Box 3.2
Decarbonizing the Power Sector While Managing Renewables’ Intermittence	
October 2022, Box 3.3
XIII.  Special Topics
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up  
Human Development?	
October 2015, Box 2.3
Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms	
April 2016, Box 3.1
Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method	
April 2016, Box 3.4
A Global Rush for Land	
October 2016, Box 1.SF.1
Conflict, Growth, and Migration	
April 2017, Box 1.1
Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity	
April 2017, Box 1.2
Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Cases of Brazil, Russia, India,  
China, and South Africa	
April 2017, Box 2.1
Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview	
April 2017, Box 3.1
The Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation	
April 2017, Box 3.2
Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World	
April 2017, Box 3.3
Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income	
April 2017, Box 3.4
Smartphones and Global Trade	
April 2018, Box 1.1
Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?	
April 2018, Box 1.4
The Changing Service Content of Manufactures	
April 2018, Box 3.1
Patent Data and Concepts	
April 2018, Box 4.1
International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers	
April 2018, Box 4.2
Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation	
April 2018, Box 4.4
Increasing Market Power	
October 2018, Box 1.1
Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts	
October 2018, Box 1.5
Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task	
October 2018, Box 1.6
The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects	
April 2019, Chapter 2
The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving	
April 2019, Box 2.1
Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power	
April 2019, Box 2.2
The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments, and Implications for the Global Outlook	
October 2019, Box 1.1
Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare	
October 2019, Box 2.1
164
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures	
October 2019, Box 2.3
The Political Effects of Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.1
The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms	
October 2019, Box 3.2
The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate–Growth Differentials in 
Advanced Economies	
April 2020, Box 2.2
Social Unrest during COVID-19	
October 2020, Box 1.4
The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the  
United States	
October 2020, Box 2.2
Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure	
April 2021, Box 2.2
Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle	
April 2021, Chapter 1,  
	
	 Annex 1.SF.1
Food Insecurity and Prices during COVID-19	
October 2021, Box 2.1
mRNA Vaccines and the Role of Basic Scientific Research	
October 2021, Box 3.1
Intellectual Property, Competition, and Innovation	
October 2021, Box 3.3
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
165
IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,  
SEPTEMBER 2022
E
xecutive Directors broadly agreed with staff’s 
assessment of the global economic outlook, 
risks, and policy priorities. They broadly 
concurred that high inflation and associated 
tightening financial conditions resulting from policy 
normalization; the effects of Russia’s war in Ukraine, 
particularly on food and energy prices; and the lin-
gering COVID-19 pandemic, with its related supply 
chain disruptions, have all contributed to a weakening 
in global economic prospects. Directors recognized that 
risks to the outlook are unusually high. They agreed 
that the most prominent risks—including policy 
divergence and cross-border tensions, further energy 
and food price shocks, an entrenchment of inflation 
dynamics and a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, 
and debt vulnerabilities in some emerging markets—
tilt the distribution of likely growth outcomes to the 
downside. Moreover, Directors recognized that the 
current environment of high inflation, slowdown in 
growth, and heightened uncertainty about the eco-
nomic and policy outlook poses particularly difficult 
tradeoffs and challenges for policymakers, making the 
likelihood of a policy mistake higher than usual.
Against this backdrop, Directors agreed that the 
appropriate policy responses differ across countries, 
reflecting their local circumstances, their inflation and 
growth outlooks, and differences in trade and finan-
cial exposures. For most economies, they considered 
that tighter monetary and fiscal policies are necessary 
to durably reduce inflation. At the same time, they 
emphasized that these policies should be accompa-
nied by structural reforms that improve productivity, 
expand economic capacity, and ease supply-side con-
straints. Directors recognized that many emerging mar-
ket and developing economies (EMDEs) face tougher 
policy choices, as higher food and fuel prices, the need 
to support the recovery and vulnerable populations, 
and rising costs of market financing from tighter global 
financial conditions and US dollar appreciation can 
pull in different directions, necessitating a difficult 
balancing act.
Directors stressed that monetary authorities should 
act decisively and continue to normalize policy to pre-
vent inflationary pressures from becoming entrenched 
and avoid an unmooring of inflation expectations. 
They agreed that central banks in most advanced econ-
omies and EMDEs would need to continue tightening 
the monetary policy stance to bring inflation credibly 
back to target and to anchor inflation expectations. 
Directors stressed that maintaining central bank 
independence and policy credibility will be essential 
to secure price stability. They also emphasized the 
importance of continuing to assess the impact of the 
simultaneous monetary tightening by central banks 
and, in particular, its implications for EMDEs. Direc-
tors stressed that clear communication of both policy 
functions and the unwavering commitment to achieve 
price objectives is crucial to preserve credibility and 
avoid unwarranted market volatility. They considered 
that, should global financial conditions tighten in a 
disorderly manner, EMDEs could face capital outflows 
and should be ready to use all available tools, includ-
ing foreign exchange interventions and capital flow 
management measures, guided when appropriate by 
the Integrated Policy Framework and in line with the 
Institutional View on the Liberalization and Manage-
ment of Capital Flows and without substituting for 
exchange rate flexibility and warranted macroeconomic 
adjustments.
Directors concurred that fiscal policy is operating in 
a highly uncertain environment of elevated inflation, 
slowdown in growth, high debt, and tightening bor-
rowing conditions. They stressed that, where inflation 
is elevated, a tighter fiscal stance would send a power-
ful signal that policymakers are aligned in their fight 
against inflation. Such a signal would, in turn, reduce 
The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the  
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 29, 2022.
166
International Monetary Fund | October 2022
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis
the size of required interest rate increases to keep 
inflation expectations anchored and would help keep 
borrowing costs lower. Directors emphasized that fiscal 
support to address the surge in cost of living from 
high food and energy prices should primarily focus 
on targeted support to the most vulnerable segments, 
given the criticality of preserving price incentives to 
promote energy conservation. Some Directors consid-
ered that additional but temporary energy policies may 
be needed in countries that face exceptionally high and 
volatile energy prices owing to Russia’s war in Ukraine.
Directors broadly agreed that fiscal policy has a 
role in protecting people against loss in real incomes 
in moments of large adverse shocks, but that requires 
healthy public finances. Building on the experience 
of the pandemic, they considered that governments 
should invest in social safety nets and develop policy 
strategies and tools that can be readily deployed under 
various scenarios. Directors concurred that a sound 
and credible medium-term fiscal framework, including 
spending prioritization and efforts to raise revenues, 
can help manage urgent needs from high food and 
energy prices, rebuild fiscal buffers to cope with future 
crises, and make progress in long-term development 
needs, such as investment in renewable energy and 
health care, which can also foster economic resilience.
Directors noted that, although no material systemic 
event has materialized so far, financial stability risks 
have risen along many dimensions, which highlights 
the importance of containing a further buildup of 
financial vulnerabilities. Being mindful of country-­
specific circumstances and near-term economic chal-
lenges, they agreed that selected macroprudential tools 
may need to be adjusted to tackle pockets of elevated 
vulnerabilities. Directors noted, however, that striking 
a balance between containing the buildup of vulner-
abilities and avoiding procyclicality and a disorderly 
tightening of financial conditions is important given 
heightened economic uncertainty and the ongoing 
policy normalization process. 
Directors reiterated their urgent call for global 
cooperation and dialogue, which are essential to 
defuse geopolitical tensions, avoid further economic 
and trade fragmentation, and respond to challenges in 
an interconnected world. They agreed on the criti-
cality of multilateral actions to respond to existing 
and unfolding humanitarian crises, end Russia’s war 
in Ukraine, safeguard global liquidity, manage debt 
distress, mitigate and adapt to climate change, and 
end the pandemic. Noting that many countries are 
contending with tighter financial conditions, high 
debt levels, and pressures to protect the most vulner-
able from surging inflation, Directors called on the 
multilateral institutions to stand ready to provide 
emergency liquidity to safeguard essential spending 
and contain financing crises. They also called for 
greater debt transparency and better mechanisms to 
produce orderly debt restructurings—including a more 
effective Common Framework—in those cases where 
insolvency issues prevail. Acknowledging that recent 
energy and food price shocks may have undermined 
the green transition, Directors stressed that achieving 
energy security and addressing the climate agenda go 
hand-in-hand, including by addressing the significant 
climate financing needs of EMDEs and investing in 
renewable energy and energy efficiency. Even though 
the COVID-19 pandemic is starting to fade, Directors 
called for decisive actions to address the continued 
inequity in access to health care and vaccinations 
worldwide and reduce the threat of future pandemics.
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK	
OCTOBER 2022
IN THIS ISSUE:
CHAPTER 1
Global Prospects and Policies
CHAPTER 2
Wage Dynamics Post–COVID-19 
and Wage-Price Spiral Risks
CHAPTER 3
Near-Term Macroeconomic Impact 
of Decarbonization Policies
